# UNIVERSITY COMMITTEE ON MINORITY ISSUES SUMMARY OF FINAL REPORT
## 
### 
Note: The UCMI offers this summary of
almost eighteen months of work as an
overview and an introduction to our Final
Report. Because a summary is necessarily
abbreviated and incomplete, we strongly
urge all those interested to read the entire
UCMI Final Report.

BUILDING A MULTIRACIAL,
MULTICULTURAL UNIVERSITY
COMMUNITY—A VISION FOR
STANFORD

The galvanizing vision of twenty
years ago—a vision of racial justice,
equal opportunity, and affirmative
action—produced significant changes at
Stanford and across the nation. But that
vision has since weakened, and the
vigorous convictions that spurred
changed have dissipated. For well over
a decade, the national agenda, reflected
in pubic opinion, has largely ignored ra
cial issues; the social contract placing
racial equality high in the Amercan
value system has torn and faded. We
have seen a rise in intolerance and
racial tensions—especially on college
campuses, where nearly a hundred
race-related incidents have occurred
during the past two years alone.
Stanford, among dozens of other
universities, has determined to under
stand and respond to this troubled state
of race relations on campus. What ac
counts for the wider polarization of
relations between some White and
minority students on campus? What
compelled minority groups to form the
Rainbow Agenda coalition in spring of
1987 and to demand the investigation of
racial issues? Are we witnessing a "new
racism," or do other factors explain the
increase in racial incidents?
In October, 1987, the University
Committee on Minority Issues (UCMI)
was established by the President and
Provost in response to the Rainbow

Agenda. For over a year, the UCMI
investigated the status of minority
students, faculty, and staff at Stanford
University, compiled existing data and
collected abundant new information
about race relations on campus. In our
Interim Report, released in May 1988,
we outlined the most urgent concerns
and presented preliminary data and rec
ommendations in five major agenda
areas:
1) the undergraduate curriculum;
2) minority faculty recruitment, hiring,
and promotion;
3) undergraduate and graduate
student recruitment, admissions,
financial aid, and retention;
4) student life; and
5) staff recruitment, hiring, promotion,
and development.
The Final Report presents our
major findings, conclusions, and
recommendations for consideration by
the President, the Provost, and all
interested members of the University
community.
A profound change underway at
Stanford illustrates the dilemmas of an
educational institution trying to resolve
problems deeply, historically ingrained
in American society. Twenty years ago,
Stanford made a commitment to actively
seek out more minority students, faculty,
and staff. Today, we have achieved
unprecedented racial and ethnic
diversity, especially in the undergradu
ate student body. Now we must make a
new commitment: we must make the
transition from numerical diversity to
interactive pluralism. We must find
ways for our racial minorities and
majority to acknowledge and build
respect for their similarities as well as
their differences.
We recognize that establishing an
interactive, multiracial community on

campus—a community where all ethnic
groups can engage their differences in a
process of mutual enrichment—is a
formidable challenge. We will have to
make our new commitment both indi
vidually and institutionally. Each of us
must be willing to question our many
racial attitudes and beliefs and be willing
to educate ourselves to achieve
renewed understanding of the people
around us in our daily personal and
professional lives. The University must
be willing to provide the institutional
framework for this process and must
make the goal of preparing students for
leadership in a multicultural society an
integral part of Stanford's educational
mission.
This is no naive or uncertain
proposition. One need only look back
twenty or twenty-five years to measure
the tremendous progress we have
achieved on many fronts. But racial
problems in the United States are
deeply rooted, and we as citizens of the
nation and the University reflect both our
common history and our contemporary
society. As we confront these problems,
we should see our participation in the
Stanford community as a unique chance
to achieve a degree of interracial under
standing seldom found in our larger
society.
We have stated our goals, based
on the humanistic value of respect for
others; next we must identify the
particular problems preventing effective
ethnic and racial relations on campus.
In general, we find the problems
explainable, and we propose specific
measures to help resolve them.
What are the major problems and
prospects?
Among undergraduates, inexperi
ence with people from other races and
ethnic groups is responsible for much of
the tension between minority and White
students. Even for the most well
meaning students, this inexperience
often results in ignorance, misunder
standing, and insensitivity, leading to so
cial distance between individuals and
groups.
The University does not now
provide students an adequate base of
knowledge about racial and ethnic
minorities. We need to develop new
ethnic studies curricula, incorporate
more content promoting understanding
of U.S. ethnic and racial minorities into
existing courses, and make these
courses an essential part of a Stanford
education.
Changing the curriculum in these
substantive ways, in turn, requires
faculty members willing and able to do
so. Unlike the undergraduate student
body, the Stanford faculty is not broadly
diversified. Without more minority
faculty and wider faculty interest, a
meaningful expansion of the ethnic
studies curriculum is less likely, and so
are our prospects for increasing the
number of minority doctoral students at
Stanford.
With the perseverance of the
faculty and the students, a better work
environment for the Stanford staff also
becomes a real possibility. Staff
members experience the same kinds of
racial problems, to varying degrees, as
do students and faculty—so even as
different strategies for change are re
quired in each segment of the University
community, all are predicated on the
same values and commitments.
As one of the leading universities in
the nation embarking on a major
venture, we must share our ideals as
well as our values: we must create a
vision of how we hope to develop our
human resources in an environment
where differences become a source of
strength and vitality, not division and
conflict. What is our vision of Stanford

in the next decade and into the twenty
first century?
We envision a student body with
greater numbers of minorities, more
closely reflecting the regional and na
tional diversity of our society.
We envision a University whose
alumni can look back and say confi
dently that Stanford prepared them well,
not only academically, but as informed
citizens equipped with the multicultural
skills they need as leaders and profes
sionals in a diverse society.
We envision an undergraduate
curriculum that fully contributes to these
skills, and programs in student affairs
that more thoroughly complement this
curriculum.
We envision Stanford as a national
leader in minority faculty recruitment
and hiring, and as a model workplace
where all employees enjoy the same po
tential for career advancement.
We envision a community of
students, faculty, and staff who will
interact across ethnic and racial groups
professionally, academically, and so
cially more widely, more tolerantly, and
less superficially than today.
Just as the vision gives direction to
the plan, the plan gives substance to the
vision. Our report provides many of the
elements—the objectives, the findings,
the arguments, the recommendations—
for forging a new, comprehensive
University plan. Such a plan must ac
knowledge and address the interrelated
ness of the many dimensions of ethnic
and racial diversity that will lead to inter
active pluralism; the temporal character
of progress—the need for immediate
and continuing action to achieve durable
results; and the need to reach deeply to
the underlying causes below the hurtful
symptoms, so that the learning process
results in fundamental change.
We are about to begin Stanford
University's second century. Our
present undergraduate student body will
soon constitute a new generation of

alumni, a third of whom will be minori
ties. Stanford has, in fact, embarked on
a new era, and our report speaks to this
transition as one of new hope and new
opportunities.
UNDERGRADUATE CURRICULUM
Our undergraduates are the
products of an educational system and
a society that do not foster enough
understanding about racial and ethnic
minorities. For many students, coming
to Stanford presents their first opportu
nity to be part of a racially and ethnically
diverse population. We must provide a
foundation for multiracial and multicuttral
learning as a fundamental part of our
mission to educate future leaders and
influential citizens, and the undergradu
ate curriculum should be one of the
most obvious and important compo
nents of this foundation.
Major Findings
• Current opportunities to learn about
U.S. racial and ethnic minorities in
Stanford's undergraduate curriculum
are inadequate. We identified 23
courses dealing primarily with one or
more U.S. minority groups offered in
1984-85, 20 in 1985-86, and 22 in
1986-87; we found 14 "secondary"
courses with some substantial
minority-group content in 1984-85, 9 in
1985-86, and 22 in 1986-87. About
half of the primary-category courses
focused on Afro-Americans/Blacks, a
few focused on Mexcan Americans/
Chicanos or American Indians, and
several dealt generally with issues of
race and ethnicity. Only one course,
offered in 1986-87, focused on Asian
Americans.
• Although both the total number and the
ethnic diversity of the students in
these courses have increased in
recent years, a relatively small per
centage of all undergraduates enroll in
the few ethnic studies-related courses
available. Minority students are more
likely to enroll than Whites, and
minority students are most likely to
take courses concerning their particu
lar group. Courses with some
minority-issue content enroll higher
percentages of students from all
groups than courses primarily about
minority issues. Nearly 70% of White
students and 56% of minority students
report never having taken a course
that deals primarily with the subject of
U.S. racial minorities.
• Most minority students (from 84% to
93%) and over half (55%) of White
students interviewed believe the
existing Stanford curriculum does not
make students aware of the contribu
tions of diverse racial and cultural
groups. The large majority of students
surveyed believe too few courses are
offered about minorities, especially
courses on American Indians, Asian
Americans, and Mexican Americans.
• Faculty members voiced similar
opinions about the undergraduate
curriculum. Overwhelming majorities
of minority faculty and over half of
White faculty agree that Stanford
needs more courses dealing with
ethnic and racial minorities. Most
ethnic-focused courses are now
taught by Black or Mexican American
faculty members, although 21% of
White faculty teach courses including
some content on U.S. racial and
ethnic minorities. Many faculty mem
bers (including 26% of White faculty)
expressed some interest in ethnic
curriculum development.
Recommendations
The curriculum should be modified
and enhanced to offer all Stanford
students, by the time they graduate,
several opportunities to learn about
racial and ethnic minorities in the U.S.
While our programmatic and curricular
initiatives may be considered sepa
rately, we formulated them as part of an
interdependent and mutually reinforcing
program for change.

»Establish an ethnic studies curriculum
development fund—financed by the
Office of the Provost and the School of
Humanities and Sciences (H&S), and
administered by the Dean of Under
graduate Studies and an advisory
committee—to support at least six
new courses and the modification of
six existing courses per year over the
next three years. In doubling the pres
ent number of courses dealing with
minority issues by 1991-92, we can
provide opportunities to study these
issues for nearly half of Stanford
undergraduates. The fund should be
available to all Stanford faculty
interested in teaching undergraduates,
should give priority to course develop
ment in Asian American and American
Indian studies, should provide
assistance to departments, and should
provide minority undergraduate and
graduate student research assistant
ships.
■ Develop a postdoctoral fellows
teaching program in ethnic studies.
An interdepartmental committee
selected by the Dean of Undergradu
ate Studies and the Dean of H&S
should recruit and hire each year four
postdoctoral teaching fellows with
expertise in Afro-American studies
Mexican American studies, Asian
American studies, or American Indian
studies. The fellows, with renewable
appointments as lecturers for up to
three years, should offer two to three
courses annually and should partici
pate in the proposed ethnic studies
curriculum development task force.
• Establish an ethnic studies curriculum
development task force sponsored by
the President, Provost, Dean of
Undergraduate Studies, and Dean of
H&S and funded for three years by the
Office of the Provost. The task force
should bring together faculty and
student representatives for sustained
discussion of long-term needs in
ethnic studies-related curriculum, pro
vide pedagogical support to regular
faculty and teaching fellows involved

in ethnic studies curriculum develop
ment, and foster intellectual discourse
on the comparative study of U.S.
racial and ethnic minorities. More
specifically, the task force should
develop plans for Asian American and
American Indian studies; work with the
Afro-American, Mexican American,
and American Studies programs to
strengthen their curricula; sponsor a
faculty seminar in multicultural and
multiracial studies; and report its rec
ommendations to the Stanford com
munity annually.
♦Establish a University Distribution
Requirement for the study of U.S.
ethnic and racial minorities. Rather
than duplicating efforts, the successor
committee to the UCMI (see General
Recommendations) should work with
the Academic Council Committee on
Undergraduate Studies and its
Subcommittee on Distribution
Requirements to plan this new
requirement.
•Inyite a senior visiting professor in
ethnic studies to Stanford each
academic year. This nationally
renowned scholar, nominated by a
committee of the ethnic studies
curriculum development task force,
should teach at least three courses
and should work with students, post
doctoral teaching fellows, and other
faculty teaching ethnic-related
courses. The appointment should be
funded by the Faculty Affirmative
Action Fund.
• The H&S Curriculum Review Commit
tee and the Committee on Under
graduate Studies should review
specific curricular areas that have
been identified as problematic for
minority students (such as certain
math and chemistry courses) or that
have the potential to contribute more
to multicultural learning at Stanford
(such as the Freshman English
Program).
• The Committee on Undergraduate
Studies should also consider other
types of courses, besides those
focusing on the experiences of racial
and ethnic minorities in the United
States, for their potential contributions
to multicultural understanding. Such
courses might include those dealing
with multicultural societies of other
times and places, those that compare
different pluralistic societies or
different minorities within a single
society, those about foreign cultures
where American minorities originated,
and those examining how people and
societies phrase and deal with moral
issues. A traditional task of liberal
education that needs more emphasis
at Stanford is teaching students how
to recognize moral and ethical issues
and how to talk about them in a
rational, undivisive way.
FACULTY
The reasons we had for pursuing
affirmative action for minority faculty in
the late 1960s and 1970s are even
more compelling now: more minority
faculty members are needed as role
models and mentors for undergraduate
and graduate students; the possibility for
making minority appointments is better
now than it has ever been, because an
unprecedented number of faculty will
retire over the next ten to fifteen years;
and as other leading universities make a
deeper commitment to diversifying their
faculties, Stanford must compete more
actively for the available minority
candidates.
Major Findings
• Stanford's efforts over the past two
decades to recruit and retain minority
faculty have met with some success,
almost doubling (50 to 96) the number
of minorities in tenure-line positions
and almost tripling (20 to 56) the
tenured minority faculty. However,
these figures include a number of for
eign-born and foreign-educated
faculty, and the University areas most

heavily involved in undergraduate
instruction—the humanities, social
sciences, natural sciences, earth sci
ences, and engineering—have shown
little increase in minority faculty.
Moreover, because the faculty as a
whole has grown, these gains
represent a percentage increase from
3% to only 8% of the total faculty.
Since 1977, diversity has increased
only half as rapidly as it did in the early
19705.
• Although the number and proportion of
minorities with Ph.D.s have grown
more slowly than anticipated in the
19705, the so-called "pipeline prob
lem" is not a major impediment to
faculty affirmative action; the candi
date pool is larger now than it was at
the time Stanford experienced the
most rapid growth in minority faculty.
• The number and proportion of minority
faculty depend on retention as well as
recruitment. In a period (1978-79 to
1986-87) with 66 new minority
appointments, 50 minority faculty
members left Stanford; most of those
who left resigned (25) or were termi
nated (16). This turnover rate is dis
turbingly high.
• We find striking differences in how
different faculty groups perceive the
professional, academic, and social
environment at Stanford. Faculty
members, regardless of race, over
whelmingly agree that the University
should promote multiracial under
standing, but minority faculty are more
skeptical than White faculty about the
depth of the administration's commit
ment and more likely to feel that not
enough is being done on this front.
Minority faculty are also more likely to
feel that they do not fit in well at
Stanford, and many believe that, in
order to fit in, they have to minimize
their ethnic characteristics.
• Minority and White faculty do interact
professionally a good deal at Stanford
but they do so mostly in committees;
they work together less in research
and teaching, their main academic

roles. Because of their small overall
numbers, a large proportion of the
minority faculty work with a very small
proportion of the White faculty.
"Spreading around" minority faculty
members in this way tends to isolate
them; minority faculty interact more
with one another on committees
dealing with ethnic issues.
• Socially, many Stanford faculty
members also interact "a good deal"
or "quite a bit." But minority faculty
groups differ in how much they
socialize with their White colleagues-
Asians do the most and Blacks do the
least, with Hispanics in between.
Over half the White faculty report little
or no socializing with minority col
leagues.
• Although faculty members presumably
are aware of some social and
professional distance between groups,
most (but not all) do not think discrimi
nation is a major reason. More impor
tantly, social and professional
interactions are limited by simple lack
of opportunity resulting from the
relatively small numbers of minority
faculty at Stanford.
• Minority and White faculty differ in their
views of Stanford's affirmative action
efforts. More than half of Black faculty
and a third of Hispanic faculty said that
insufficient departmental interest is a
major obstacle to affirmative action,
compared to only 6% of White and
Asian faculty. Whites, followed by
Asians, are far more likely to believe
that scarcity of minority candidates
(the "pipeline problem") is an obstacle
to hiring.
• The contributions of minority profes
sors at Stanford are generally
acknowledged and valued throughout
the University. The faculty consis
tently rate the scholarship and
especially the teaching of their
minority colleagues as average or
above average.
• Nonetheless, minority faculty members
are generally less satisfied than White
faculty with their career development.
For example, large proportions of
Black and Asian faculty find their
department chairs' criteria for profes
sional advancement and promotion
unclear, and many Asian and Hispanic
faculty feel they receive insufficient
guidance and mentoring. Black
faculty in particular say their col
leagues do not adequately understand
or appreciate their work.
• Many minority faculty feel they have
less time available for research and
scholarship than their White col
leagues, and our findings convincingly
support this belief. For instance, be
cause they are so few and because
the growing number of minority
students at Stanford generally seek
minority advisors, minority faculty
carry a disproportionately heavy load
of formal and informal advising; 59%
of Hispanic and 46% of Black faculty
say they frequently act as unofficial
student advisors, compared with 25%
of Asian and 18% of White faculty.
• Some troubling patterns of faculty
student relations at Stanford reinforce
the need for formal and informal
advising of minority students. White
and Asian faculty are more likely than
Black and Hispanic faculty to expect
minority students to have academic
difficulty, and significant portions of all
faculty surveyed believe that Black
and Hispanic students do experience
more difficulty than White students.
Disturbingly large percentages of
minority students believe that racial
stereotyping has influenced their
interactions with Stanford faculty.
• Minority faculty also say they are
asked to undertake a higher than
average number of administrative and
University service tasks, many of
which are assigned out of well
meaning efforts to integrate minorities
into decision-making processes. As a
result, they have less time and energy
for research, undercutting their
chances for reappointment and
promotion. Many minority faculty also

attend or help organize ethnic theme
events that minority students find
important for solidarity and morale.
• Our findings point strongly to the need
for the University administration to
help bridge the chasm between the
contrasting views of the Stanford
academic and social environment held
by minority and non-minority faculty.
Many of the problems we discuss
stem directly or indirectly from the tow
numbers of minority faculty at
Stanford.
Recommendations
■ Expand and vigorously apply the
Faculty Affirmative Action Fund toward
specific goals on a timetable over the
next ten years. The President,
Provost, and Board of Trustees should
commit resources for 10 new "target of
opportunity" faculty billets for schools
and departments every three years (at
least 30 billets over the next decade).
Priority for these billets should be
given to the School of Humanities and
Sciences, because of its overwhelm
ing influence in undergraduate
instruction, and to minority candidates
likely to contribute substantially to cur
ricula in cross-cultural or ethnic
studies.
• Establish a postdoctoral fellowship
program for minority scholars to
regularize and structure the ad hoc
appointments already being made by
various departments. Fellows should
be appointed for two to three years,
should engage in research while
teaching one or two oourse per year,
and should be mentored by a senior
colleague. The program should help
identify minority candidates for regular
Stanford faculty appointments,
enhance and help fill gaps in the cur
riculum, and benefit students seeking
contact with minority faculty.
■ Begin a junior faculty development
leave program in 1989-90, offering
one quarter leaves-of-absence at full
salary for assistant professors who
make outstanding contributions to

undergraduate education and
University life. We expect such a
program to particularly benefit minority
faculty, who frequently have less time
for scholarship than their non-minority
colleagues, enhancing their chances
for promotion and tenure.
* Form a Provost's executive committee
on faculty affirmative action affairs,
composed of senior faculty members,
to help the Provost with some of the
more time-consuming aspects of
minority faculty recruitment and hiring.
The committee should facilitate
communication about affirmative
action policies between the Provost's
Office and the faculty and should meet
routinely with deans and department
chairs to discuss minority faculty
prospects and appointments. In
collaboration with this committee and
supported by the Faculty Affirmative
Action Fund, deans and department
chairs should take the initiative in
recruiting and retaining minority faculty
and take the lead in increasing
minority faculty members' chances for
professional success, especially junior
faculty. Chairs should distribute
departmental duties selectively, clearly
state professional expectations, meet
with junior minority faculty members
annually, and ensure they have at
least one mentor in the department.
* Hold faculty worhshops and seminars
on cross-cultural and race relations to
provide faculty members opportunities
to better understand the minority stu
dents they teach and advise and to
more effectively interact as profes
sional colleagues.
UNDERGRADUATE STUDENTS
RECRUITMENT, ADMISSIONS,
FINANCIAL AID, AND RETENTION
We address Stanford minority
student recruitment, admissions,
enrollment, financial aid, retention, and
performance not only because these are
major issues raised by the Rainbow
Agenda, but also because the University
has a responsibility to seek out and de
velop talent, to produce role models for
our society's youth, to prepare future
leaders, to compensate for past dis
crimination, and to serve as an example
for other public and private institutions.
I. UNDERGRADUATE
RECRUITMENT AND ADMISSIONS
Stanford's efforts to recruit and
enroll minority students span two
decades, beginning with Black students
in 1968, Mexican Americans/Chicanos
in 1969, and American Indians in 1970.
In the past twenty years, the minority
student population has increased
dramatically. The numbers and
percentages of American Indian
students have stayed relatively constant
(at about 1%), but other minority groups
have grown steadily and make up the
following proportions of the class
entering in 1988: Asian Americans
(identified as a group since 1982); 16%;
Blacks, 10%; Mexican Americans, 8.6%;
and other Hispanics 1.5%. These
figures testify to the perseverance of
and pressure from minority students at
Stanford as well as to the responsive
ness of the Undergraduate Admissions
Office. While we have made great
strides, we can still improve this record.
Major Findings
• The Admissions Office uses a variety
of strategies to inform minorities about
Stanford and encourage them to
apply, including mailings, meetings,
and programs using current minority
undergraduates. Black and Mexican
American admissions directors have
direct responsibility for recruiting these
respective groups. For Asian Ameri
cans, a dean monitors applications but
no director has specific recruiting re
sponsibility; for American Indians, a
non-American Indian has responsibil
ity for recruiting, working with two
American Indian assistant deans from
outside the Admissions Office.

• The most time consuming aspect of
recruiting is high school and commu
nity visits. Each fall, twelve admis
sions officers travel to over 600 of the
country's approximately 26,000 high
schools and make 14 to 17 regional
visits. They are more likely to visit
high schools in urban areas with large
minority populations, and less likely to
visit rural schools and schools
historically producing few successful
Stanford applicants.
• Chronic shortages of time, staff, and
money are the major problems cited
by Admissions personnel. Minority
outreach and follow-up efforts are
nearly impossible during the applica
tion reading period from mid-January
to early April of each year. Some
directors feel that their recruitment
efforts are undermined because, while
they may recommend admission of
candidates, final decisions are made
by the deans.
• The undergraduate admissions
process involves repeated readings of
thousands of files according to
academic ("demonstrated intellectual
capacity") and non-academic (extra
curricular personal achievement)
criteria approved by the Academic
Council Committee on Undergraduate
Admissions and Financial Aid
(CUAFA) and the Faculty Senate.
Blacks, Mexican Americans, and
American Indians receive special con
sideration for admission, provided they
meet the requirements of academic
excellence and personal achievement,
as do legacies, children of Stanford
faculty and staff, and athletes desig
nated by the Department of Athletics.
Federal guidelines must be used to
define American Indians, complicating
recruitment and admission of this
group. The Admissions Office em
phatically says that it uses no racial
quotas in this process.
• Asian Americans are considered
minorities, but they do not receive
special consideration as "targeted,"
under-represented minorities.

Charges of discrimination against
Asian Americans have led CUAFA to
review applications and admissions
each year and to change certain
procedures; all applicants are now
asked to identify their ethnicity, and
the Admissions Office now holds a
bias workshop for all readers of appli
cations.
• Because the administration maintains
strict confidentiality of applicant files,
we cannot specifically compare the
numbers and percentages of applica
tions, admission rates, enrollment
rates, or even general trends &
minority group. We can only say that
we have reviewed the data, the data
help argue against using quotas or
population percentages in determining
admissions, and we are generally
satisfied with the trends we observed.
• Recruiting for "yield"—the percentage
of admitted students who actually
enrol Makes place through telephone
calls, letters, local parties, and special
weekends on the Stanford campus.
The Jordan Scholars Program,
designed to increase the yield among
the academically most qualified
applicants, was modified in its second
year and no longer offers special
privileges after matriculation. Over the
years, the yield rates for Blacks and
Asian Americans have been slightly
lower than the overall rate (itself
considered high relative to other
schools), while the yield rate for
Mexican Americans has usually been
higher than the overall rate. Stanford
compares favorably with some of its
selective competitors in enrolling
minorities.
• Only in the last few years have any
special recruiting efforts been made
for minority transfer students. Limita
tions of time and money restrict
transfer recruiting even more than
freshman recruiting. In any one year
during the 1980s, no more than 13
minority transfer students have been
admitted and no more than 11 have
enrolled.
Recommendations
* Increase staffing and funding. The
Admissions Office must add profes
sional staff and receive increased
funding for year-round travel, early
outreach, and improved programs for
minority recruitment and yield. In ad
dition, hiring a recruiter of American
Indian background is imperative.
•Improve early outreach. We should try
to reach all minorities, including Asian
Americans, early in high school.
Along with more traditional programs,
the Admissions Office should try some
less conventional methods such as
using the popular media and co
sponsoring a college-preparatory
mailing to 9th and 10th graders.
* Reconsider recruiting strategies,
paying more attention to inner-city
high schools and rural areas.
•Target subgroups of Asian Americans.
CUAFA and the Faculty Senate
should change the status of such
under-represented subgroups as
Filipinos, Southeast Asians, and
Native Hawaiians to targeted minori
ties for purposes of admissions and
financial aid. CUAFA should evaluate
Asian American representation, by
subgroups, in both the undergraduate
population and particular academic
areas, and the Admissions Office
should make greater efforts to improve
the lower yield rate for Asian Ameri
cans.
»use students, alumni, and faculty mpre
actively in minority outreach and
recruitment through such activities and
programs as the Ambassador Pro
gram, Bay Area Outreach, Public
Service Center internships, and
formalized alumni networking.
* Expand specialized yield programs
such as the weekend program
sponsored by the Black Recruitment
and Orientation Committee. Travel
grants for on-campus recruiting
programs should be continued and
should be made available to Asian
American students.

• Produce a slideshow or videotape to
update the current recruiting film,
which is outdated and does not
address minority concerns.
• Review the Jordan Scholars Program.
We caution against reversion to the
program's initial concept; an honorary
program with no special privileges
after matriculation is more consistent
with Stanford values and tradition.
• Improve transfer recruiting strategies
by expanding visits to community
colleges and establishing stronger
relationships with their faculties, staffs,
and students.
• Establish a cooperative consortium
with other universities for joint
recruiting activities.
11. UNDERGRADUATE
FINANCIAL AID
As Stanford has grown more and
more expensive over the past thirty
years, the number and percentage of
students receiving financial aid have
grown as well. Although the President
and the Provost have already ad
dressed some serious concerns about
financial aid expressed by the Rainbow
Agenda, we review aid policies for
undergraduates and offer several
suggestions for improving the current
system.
Major Findings
• The Board of Trustees has established
two principles for admissions and
financial aid: "need blind admissions,"
meaning that students are admitted
without respect to financial need, and
"need based aid," meaning that
Stanford is committed to meet the
demonstrated financial need of its
students.
• Financial need is computed according
to the federal formula called Congres
sional Methodology. Stanford funds
the balance remaining in the total
annual student budget—after subtract
ing the parents' contribution, the
student's contribution, and outside

awards—with a combination of long
term loans and term-time jobs
(together known as "self help") and
scholarships and grants. Awards may
fluctuate after the freshman year as
family situations change and need is
recomputed; recently a change in
Congressional Methodology lowered
some students' awards.
• As the cost of attending Stanford has
doubled in the 1980s, the proportion of
undergraduates receiving scholarships
and grants has risen from 46% to
58%. Nearly half of 1988 graduates
also borrowed money, averaging a
total debt of $8607. The undergradu
ate financial aid packaging formula
distinguishes between targeted
minorities and non-minorities in four of
the eight categories of need, offering
higher cash grants and lower loan or
job amounts to targeted groups.
• A new policy that affects many minority
students addresses excessive student
borrowing by reviewing applications
showing accumulated debts above
certain amounts. Other new policies,
partially addressing demands by the
Rainbow Agenda, apply some outside
awards to reduce the self-help
component of aid packages and also
limit increases in the self-help expec
tation.
• A much lower proportion of Asian
Americans than other groups sur
veyed find their financial aid packages
adequate, a result that may reflect the
lower scholarship awards these stu
dents receive as a result of their non
targeted status.
• A few students each year have
computed needs that remain unmet,
showing that insufficient scholarship
and grant funds are budgeted to meet
all students' needs. Many of these
students apply late; financial aid infor
mation sent to students does refer to
"timely" applications, but this informa
tion is not easily readable or under
standable.
• We heard some complaints about lack
of sensitivity on the part of Financial
Aids staff. We also heard conflicting
reports about Financial Aids Office
procedures and the amount of profes
sional responsibility given to the four
financial aids advisors who have the
most contact with students. Some
delays in making awards may result
from inefficiency.
Recommendations
■ Continue the policies of need-blind
admissions and need-based aid.
which contribute to the diversity of the
University and provide otherwise
unavailable opportunities for low
income students.
• Budget additional funds for scholar
ships and grants. It should not be
difficult to estimate and include in the
budget the additional funds needed by
students who file late applications,
face emergencies, and request
legitimate changes in their award
packages.
• Consider a loan forgiveness program,
to encourage careers in academia anc
teaching, that gives first priority to
Stanford minority graduates (including
Asian Americans) who complete a
Ph.D. program at Stanford.
• Continue reducing self help portions of
financial aid packages to help offset
recent changes in Congressional
Methodology.
• Target subgroups of Asian Americans.
As we recommend in Undergraduate
Recruitment and Admissions, Filipi
nos, Southeast Asians, and Native
Hawaiians appear to be under
represented groups that should be
targeted for financial aid purposes as
well as for admissions. The Financial
Aids Office should reevaluate aid
packaging formulas for all Asian
Americans.
• Evaluate staff organization in the
Financial Aids Office. Financial aids
officers perform a difficult job very

well, but they require more support
and encouragement. The Financial
Aids Office should institute a staff
training program including a compo
nent on multiracial and multicultural
sensitivity. Also, the Financial Aids
Office should hire a consultant to
analyze the efficiency of current
decision-making procedures and to
examine how well the office responds
to needs for guidance and information.
111. UNDERGRADUATE
RETENTION AND PERFORMANCE
Stanford has a high student
retention and graduation rate—a record
that, as a very selective school, we want
strongly to maintain. Behind the
statistics, however, the heart of the
retention issue is the overall educational
and social climate of the University,
which we address here and in the
Student Life section.
Major Findings
• We found no significant differences in
graduation rates between minority and
White students for freshmen entering
from 1973 to 1983. Retention rates
among minority students, especially
American Indians, have risen.
Stanford compares well with other
selective universities in this regard.
• Surveys indicate that about 25% of
students "stop out," or interrupt their
studies for various reasons, at some
point in their academic careers. At
present, the University has no
systematic way to keep track of
students who have stopped out or
their reasons for doing so.
• The only academic honors and awards
tracked by the Statistical Study of the
Curriculum are University Distinction,
Phi Beta Kappa, and Departmental
Honors; Mexican American, Black,
and American Indian students receive
these awards at lower rates than
White students. Many other Univer
sity, national, and departmental

awards not officially tracked could pro
vide a richer and broader measure of
student accomplishment at Stanford.
• Academic performance may be
hampered by the erosion of self
confidence and other pressures
outside the classroom. Minority
students, especially American Indians,
report more trouble balancing
academic and non-academic activities
and tend to feel less well prepared
academically for Stanford. More
Black, Mexican American, and
American Indian students (25% to
28%) feel pressure to study hard to
avoid academic probation than do
Asian (10%) or White (7%) students.
We discuss various other pressures
felt by minority students more fully in
Student Life.
• Many new opportunities for Stanford
students with direct relevance for
minority retention and performance
have been created by the James
Irvine Foundation grant. Stanford is
creating model programs in pre
college teacher credentialling, faculty
mentoring of undergraduates, and
faculty development for graduate stu
dents, all designed to increase the
participation of under-represented
minorities in teaching.
Recommendations
• Monitor students who stop out to
determine appropriate strategies for
lowering the attrition rate of students in
general and minority students in
particular. Exit interviews should be
conducted when students depart,
reasons for stopping out should be
reviewed for trends, and letters should
be sent to students who do not return
within two quarters.
• Record and publicize more student
awards. Demonstrated leadership
and service, along with a wide range
of University, national, and depart
mental awards not currently tracked
by the Statistical Study of the Curricu
lum, should be considered measures
of undergraduate achievement and
should be recorded on students'
official transcripts. The Dean of
Undergraduate Studies should more
vigorously publicize these awards as
well as other opportunities for minority
students such as the programs funded
by the Irvine Foundation.
GRADUATE STUDENTS
RECRUITMENT, ADMISSIONS,
RETENTION, AND GRADUATION
At Stanford the primary responsibil
ity for graduate programs belongs to the
faculties of the seven separate schools
and the departments within the schools.
These programs vary considerably in
purpose, length, cost, and affirmative
acton records, but they all train students
who will significantly influence our na
tion's future. Beyond the intellectual
vigor and the important role models a
diverse graduate student body can bring
to the University, then, the University
has an obligation to our larger society.
The need for minority leaders in
business, law, education, medicine, the
sciences, and the humanities is acute;
to remain a great institution, Stanford
must help answer this need. Our
obligation to prepare future minority pro
fessors is especially urgent if Stanford
and other universities are to attract more
minority students to graduate schools.
Major Findings
• The overall percentage of targeted
minorities enrolled in Stanford
graduate programs peaked in 1973 at
9.4%, declined sharply in the late
1970s, rose until 1981, and declined
again until 1985. We have seen
steady increases the last three years,
but the percentage of targeted
minorities in 1988 (6.7%) is still far
below the figure for 1973 and only
slightly above that for 1981 (6.6%);
moreover, these figures include
Puerto Ricansfor 1981 and 1988 but
not for 1973. The overall trends mask
considerable differences by group and
by program.

• Stanford now enrolls nearly 30% fewer
Black and Mexican American/Chicano
graduate students than in 1973; only
in the last few years can we see signs
of improvement. Today, in absolute
numbers, we have 77 fewer Black and
68 fewer Chicano graduate students
than in 1973. Native American enroll
ment has remained mostly level; since
1984 it has increased by 33% but still
remains below 1% of total enrollment.
Puerto Rican enrollment has in
creased over three-fold since 1981,
when statistics were first recorded, but
also still remains below 1%.
• The non-Ph.D. programs enroll much
higher percentages of targeted
minorities (about 20% in the J.D. and
M.D. programs) than do the Ph.D.
programs—which enroll only 4.1%, a
bleak statistic. The situation is even
worse for Ph.D. programs with under
graduate majors: for the schools of
Humanities and Sciences (H&S) and
Engineering together, targeted minori
ties make up only 3.3% of Ph.D. can
didates. Statistically, an undergradu
ate would have to take over twenty
classes with a teaching assistant for
an even chance of having a targeted
minority as an instructor.
%
• For all newly-enrolled, non-Asian
minority graduate students in H&S and
Engineering in 1987, Stanford's record
is mediocre in comparison with other
major research universities. For all
minority groups, the percentages
enrolled in Stanford graduate schools
are considerably below corresponding
percentages graduating from colleges
of all types nationwide, from selected
elite colleges, and from Stanford in
particular. Clearly, significantly more
minority graduates are available than
are currently being recruited.
• For Asian American graduate students
(non-targeted), enrollment percent
ages have steadily increased since
1975, when records were first kept.
Their proportion has nearly tripled
during this time and continues to grow.
Stanford's enrollment of Asian Ameri

cans (currently 6.4% of doctoral stu
dents and 9.0% of master's students)
slightly exceeds the average of other
major research universities. Among
doctoral programs, Asian Americans
are relatively well-represented in the
M.D. program (17.1%) and the
Engineering School (8.3%) and more
poorly represented in the Business
School (1.2%) and Medcal School
(1.5%) Ph.D. programs. In master's
programs, Asian American represen
tation ranges from 12% in Engineering
to 0% in Earth Sciences.
• Stanford enrolls lower proportions of
targeted minorities in master's
programs (5.1% overall) than in
doctoral programs, ranging from high*
of 9.8% in Education and 7.9% in H&:
to lows of 1.9% in Earth Sciences anc
0% in Medical School master's
programs. The high targeted minority
enrollment in the J.D. and M.D. pro
grams chiefly accounts for this
difference, but lack of student financia
assistance may also be an important
factor.
• Retention of minority master's student:
and non-Ph.D. doctoral students is no
a problem at Stanford. Almost all
master's candidates obtain their
degree within the regular time limits.
The J.D. and M.D. programs graduate
nearly all of their minority students,
and most J.D. students finish in the
normal three-year period.
• Retention rates for minority Ph.D.
candidates generally mirror those for
Whites, varying considerably by
school and department. We are
concerned, however, about the
retention of Native Americans, Puerto
Ricans, and "other Hispanics."
Moreover, targeted minorities may
take slightly longer than Whites to
obtain their degree.
• The Graduate Studies Office admini
sters the University's policies and
procedures for recruitment, admis
sions, financial aid, and retention of
graduate students and works actively
with H&S and other schools and
departments, particularly on their
Ph.D. programs. The Dean's Incen
tive Fund, to which Graduate Studies
expects to commit about $500,000 by
1990-91, provides matching funds to
increase the enrollment ot targeted
minorities. Graduate Studies' travel
and support budgets for recruitment
and retention have not risen substan
tially over the past five years despite
increased activities.
• Besides making special recruiting
efforts for the four targeted groups
(Blacks, American Indians, Mexican
Americans, and Puerto Ricans), the
Graduate Studies Office monitors the
admissions of Asian Americans and
non-targeted "other Hispanics." Staff
members now routinely screen all
rejections of minority applications for
the H&S, Earth Sciences, Education,
and Engineering schools, asking the
school or department to reconsider
promising folders.
• Stanford's seven graduate schools
vary considerably in their funding
policies. In the large non-Ph.D.
programs (J.D., M.D., and MBA),
support is need-based on federal crite
ria. In Education and H&S, doctoral
students are admitted with University
support or with proof of four years of
full outside funding; in both of these
schools, master's candidates are
typically not funded. Most doctoral
candidates, except in the humanities,
are supported by research assistant
ships.
• Graduate student support services and
organizations also vary widely, in
quantity and quality, from school to
school; the Graduate Studies Office
has recently been able to increase
some activities that affect retention of
minority students, such as student
research and teaching fellows
programs.
• The key to increasing the admission,
enrollment, retention, and quality of life
for minority students at Stanford—
especially graduate students—is the

faculty at the departmental level. The
presence of minority faculty members
is a critical component of the Univer
sity's ability to attract and retain
minority students. Faculty attitudes
during recruitment and admissions
have a big impact on how many
minority students enroll in our pro
grams. Their behavior in the class
room, outside of class, and in advising
situations largely determines how well
accepted into Stanford scholarly life
their graduate students feel. Faculty
support and counseling strongly affect
how many students stay at Stanford
and complete their degrees. The Uni
versity and its schools must continu
ally work with the faculty on affirmative
action and on increasing sensitivity to
the needs of minority students.
• In our detailed reviews of the records
of each Stanford graduate school, we
find not only weak and mediocre
records but also remarkable success
stories. Targeted minorities are par
ticularly under-represented in Ph.D.
programs in Business, Earth Sci
ences, Engineering, H&S, and
Medicine. On the other hand, the
Medical School's M.D. and the Law
School's J.D. programs and the H&S
departments of Physics, History,
English, and Anthropology have suc
cessfully recruited and retained high
proportions of targeted minorities. We
find no magic in these successes: we
know the methods used to effectively
recruit, enroll, and retain minority
graduate students at Stanford and at
other universities, and we enumerate
these methods in our recommenda
tions.
Recommendations
We make in our Final Report
detailed recommendations for each of
the Stanford graduate schools and for
departments and programs within the
schools. We also make specific
suggestions for the Office of Graduate
Studies in administering University-wide
policies. Here we summarize our rec

ommendations for Graduate Studies
and our final, general recommendations
that apply to every University school.
»We need more minority faculty
members in order to successfully
recruit and retain minority graduate
students; the UCMI recommendations
in the Faculty section, then, are doubly
important.
• The Office of Graduate Studies should
bolster its efforts and consider some
new strategies for recruitment and
retention, such as holding meetings
with each school's recruitment offi
cers, working closely with particular
departments, and examining funding
arrangements for master's students.
Further, Graduate Studies should:
—review the University's data
gathering and reporting
procedures for minority
graduate students;
—examine how effectively the
minority matching program
is used;
—estimate and request
additional funds from the
Provost to provide further
assistance to schools and
departments;
—ask each school and de
partment to submit a yearly
report on minority admis
sions;
—coordinate efforts, espe
cially by H&S departments
and small schools, to follow
up on minority admissions;
—sponsor Campus Weekend
Visits for prospective
students;
—explore new ways for
schools and departments to
work jointly on minority re
cruitment;
—encourage the efforts of
school deans and depart
ment chairs;
—together with the Office of the
Dean of Student Affairs,
monitor student services
and offer advice for creating
new ones, especially in H&S
departments.
The University programs that success
fully recruit and retain minority
graduate students (especially targeted
minorities) are well organized and ag
gressive and reflect an obvious institu
tional commitment, in particular,
these programs demonstrate the
strong involvement of faculty mem
bers. Staff, no matter how competent
or committed, cannot sustain an effec
tive minority recruitment and retention
effort without the active support of the
dean and the faculty.
Each school needs a person in the
dean's office directly responsible for
planning and implementing minority
recruitment and retention, Coordina
tion with the Office of Graduate
Studies and cooperation with other
University programs should be part of
this effort.
Recruitment must be an aggressive.
sustained, year-round activity- This
includes letters, phone calls, and
personal visits to potential applicants;
active participation of minority and
majority faculty, students, and alumni
in identifying and contacting potential
applicants; and visits to key institu
tions, including predominantly minority
colleges and universities.
Admissions committees must pay
special attention to all minority folders,
While adhering to academic excel
lence in admissions decisions, we
need to be sensitive to the fact that
some minority students have not had
educational opportunities equivalent to
those of White students, so that
conventional predictors of academic
success may be less appropriate. Ad
missions committees should also
appreciate the desirability for the
University and the nation of a racially
and ethnically diverse graduate
student body. Whenever possible,

committees should have minority
members. In addition, the dean or
associate dean—or a school-wide
minority admissions advisory commit
tee—should review all admissions
folders of rejected minority applicants
for possible reconsideration.
• Schools and departments should make
a concerted effort to attract admitted
candidates to Stanford. As with
recruitment, phone calls and letters
from minority and majority faculty and
staff are effective, and paid or partially
paid visits to campus can concretely
demonstrate Stanford's interest (some
Graduate Studies' matching funds, up
to $150 per visit, go unspent each
year). Various schools have experi
mented with special weekend events
for accepted applicants. The key to all
these efforts is making personal
contact with potential students.
• After minority students enroll at
Stanford, we are obligated to ensure
thev stay and graduate. Short
summer programs offering special
academic preparation before the first
year have proven useful; the Irvine
Foundation funds administered by
Graduate Studies can assist in setting
up such programs. We cannot
overstate the importance of mentoring
by faculty and advanced graduate
students. Schools with good retention
and graduation records typically have
strong student services, including peer
support groups.
• To address the disturbingly poor
representation of targeted minority
students in Ph.D. programs, the UCMI
poses a challenge to the University:
To demonstrate the commitment of
Stanford University and to provide
national leadership, the President, the
Provost, and the deans of the schools
should establish a minimum goal of
doubling targeted minority enrollment
in Ph.D. programs within the next five
years. Furthermore, the University
should aim to double the yearly total of
targeted minority Ph.D. graduates
within the next eight years. The

President should publicly commit the
University to these mining goals,
Ph.D. students teach and serve as
role models for undergraduates,
conduct research independently and
with the faculty, and ultimately be
come the new faculty of our universi
ties. Stanford will find few more
powerful ways to help create a vibranl
racially diverse, and tolerant cam
pus—and to contribute to the diversity
and tolerance of a nation—than to
prepare substantial numbers of well
trained minority Ph.D.s.
STUDENT LIFE
In the 1980s the combined
enrollment of minority undergraduates i
Stanford has increased by over half
reflecting demographic changes in Cali
fornia, the West, and the United States
as a whole, and also demonstrating the
University's determination to achieve*
both academic excellence and ethnic
diversity. Minorities make up over one
third (37%) of the freshman class
entering in 1988-89. The transition frorr
a predominantly White to an ethnically
diverse university over the past twenty
years has had profound consequences
for all Stanford students, creating rich
opportunities for multicultural and
multiracial learning and also generating
complex new problems and challenges
that reach across the full spectrum of
student life.
Minority students did not simply
adapt and assimilate into campus life,
as many assumed they would. They
began forming organizations in the late
1960s and, with the support of many
White students, faculty, and staff,
pressed for an increased minority
presence and improvements in minority
student life. Throughout the 1970s and
1980s, minority students and organiza
tions have continued to point out
problems, make appeals, and present
demands; the most recent call for
change by the Rainbow Agenda should
be seen in this larger historical context.
Today, testifying to these two
decades of minority advocacy, many
minority programs and support services
are offered at Stanford, including
courses in Afro-American and Mexican
American studies, four ethnic student
community centers, four ethnic theme
student residences, and a variety of
other programs. Skepticism about
these programs persists, however;
funding and resources for some remain
inadequate; recognition of the value of
minority programs in general has not
kept pace with Stanford's unprece
dented racial and ethnic diversity. In the
1990s and beyond, we must meet the
new challenges posed by this diversity
as we try to create a truly pluralistic
campus environment.
Major Findings
• Paradoxes abound in race relations at
Stanford. Whites and minorities
commonly socialize together and form
interracial friendships, yet they also
demonstrate considerable lack of
understanding and feel strong racial
tensions. Tensions exist within
minority groups as well, for they are
not homogenous.
• Students of all ethnic groups express
dismay and disappointment at the
level of racial understanding on
campus. Most White students bring to
Stanford scant experience with minori
ties, a major reason for this lack of
understanding. Most minority
students have had a great deal of
contact with Whites, of course, but
prior exposure does not necessarily
translate into positive race relations.
Moreover, most minority students
have had little previous experience
with other minority groups.
• Not only do Stanford students have
little opportunity to learn about
different minority groups in regular
courses, but the majority of students
are not learning much about minority
history, culture, or social issues
outside the classroom—not enough to
offset the general lack of understand

ing and experience that most bring to
campus.
• The few overt acts of racism that have
recently drawn great attention are the
exception rather than the rule at
Stanford. However, minority students
report that more subtle forms of
prejudice and devaluation are
common, including negative stere
otyping that questions their academic
qualifications and the telling of ethnic
jokes. Though over half of minority
students surveyed do not believe most
White students are racially prejudiced,
nearly half of Blacks, Mexican
Americans, and American Indians dQ
believe so (as opposed to only 27% of
Asians and 17% of Whites). Similarly,
almost half of Blacks, Mexican
Americans, and American Indians say
most minority students are resentful of
White students. White students also
express resentment toward minorities,
with significant numbers complaining
of "reverse discrimination."
• Despite substantial interracial contact
in acquaintanceships, close friend
ships, and dating, many minority
students feel social distance, tension,
and a sense of not fitting in at Stan
ford. One source of tension arises
when minorities are pressured to act
as spokespeople for their ethnic
group. The overwhelming majority of
minority students feel a strong sense
of ethnic and racial identity; most do
not feel they must minimize various
racial or ethnic characteristics in order
to fit in, but many do feel this way.
• Some data suggest that minority
students may feel a lower sense of
overall well-being in their lives at
Stanford than their White peers,
according to such emotional meas
ures as feeling happy, energetic, de
pressed, or lonely.
• All Stanford undergraduates tend to be
ambitious and hold high expectations
for themselves, and most plan to
pursue advanced degrees; the vast
majority of all ethnic groups rate their
overall experience at Stanford highly.

Substantial proportions of students fall
short of their own academic expecta
tions, however, with Whites signifi
cantly more satisfied with their
performance than minorities. Minority
students also tend to feel Stanford's
academic demands more strongly
than White students, possibly because
they must contend with additional
cultural and racial pressures; for
example, many feel pressure to
succeed as representatives of their
ethnic group.
• The Office of the Dean of Student
Affairs (DOSA) is the University
branch most responsible for student
life outside the classroom, providing
services through Student Health,
Career Planning and Placement, Tre
sidder Union, Residential Affairs, and
Campus Affairs. DOSA leaders have
responded to Stanford's increased
diversity and recent minority concerns
with a special report and a reorganiza
tion of staff. Despite this recent
responsiveness and past successes in
addressing minority issues, however,
many minority students, faculty, and
staff mistrust and remain critical of
DOSA.
• The student affairs philosophy
expressed in DOSA's report clearly
values pluralism and diversity, but it
falls short by focusing too exclusively
on students as individuals and missing
the importance of ethnic group or
community identity for minority
students. Also, DOSA eschews
providing visible, assertive leadership
on racial and ethnic issues.
• The assistant deans who direct the
ethnic student community centers, and
other minority staff, complain of poor
communication and lack of participa
tion in DOSA policy-making and
decision-making. Painful instances of
personal devaluation have occurred
and seriously affected the morale of
key minority staff members.
• DOSA has taken a positive step by
forming a standing subcommittee on
services to minority students, but
whether this is a suitable means for
candid, critical examination of prob
lems is questioned by some minority
students and staff members.
• Despite their strong records of
accomplishment, all four of the ethnic
student community centers admini
stered by DOSA have experienced
vexing problems trying to become fully
institutionalized. They have faced
recurrent shortages of resources,
serious communication problems with
DOSA administrators, and chronic
feelings of being undervalued.
• Despite DOSA's impressive statistical
record of minority hiring—possibly
unmatched across the University
many present and former employees
report great frustration. Minorities
have found promotion to senior levels
difficult. DOSA has historically
refused to create positions with full
time ethnic duties, a policy with many
negative consequences. Currently,
DOSA leaders are rethinking this
policy; in a major shift last summer,
the directorship of the Black Commu
nity Services Center has been rede
fined as full-time.
• The Residential Affairs division of
DOSA sponsors educational program
ming in student dorms and pays
special attention to racial and ethnic
issues. The great majority of all
students report being very satisfied
with their residences. The four ethnic
theme houses (Casa Zapata, Okada,
Lathrop, and Ujamaa), however, have
been the targets of much criticism and
difference of opinion at Stanford.
Although only 50% of the spaces in
theme houses (except Lathrop, the
American Indian theme house) are
reserved for the relevant minority
group, White residents consistently
feel less at home there. Whites and
Asians are far more likely to feel that
the theme houses discourage rather
than promote interaction between
races, while large majorities of
American Indians, Blacks, and
Mexican Americans feel that these

dorms encourage such interaction.
• Almost all minority undergraduates
participate in some extracurricular
activities at Stanford. No groups have
been more successful in developing
minority student leadership than the
70-some ethnic student organizations
on campus; inconsistent support for
their activities, however, reflects some
institutional ambivalence. Along with
large proportions of each minority
group, 13% of Whites report being
active in ethnic organizations. Though
sometimes perceived as being sepa
ratist, ethnic student organizations
have broad aspirations for the Univer
sity and the larger society as well as
for their particular group.
• The four ethnic student community
centers—the Asian American Activi
ties Center, the Black Community
Services Center, El Centra Chicano,
and the Native American Cultural
Center—present unique opportunities
not yet fully realized by the University.
They offer individual counseling,
provide support for ethnic student
organizations, and present a variety of
multicultural programs. While most
minority students, and nearly a third of
White students, say they have visited
the centers, we also found that
majorities of all student groups still find
Stanford's current programs for
promoting multicultural understanding
inadequate.
• Personal and academic support
services for Stanford students get
mixed reviews. Proportionally more
minorities than Whites find personal
counseling services less than ade
quate. Among twenty-one service ar
eas, University library and residential
staffs were rated as the most helpful
by students, and freshman advisors
were rated as the least helpful.
Recommendations
• DOSA must provide more visible and
active leadership in advancing
pluralism by articulating new values
and generating new expectations for

student life at Stanford. DOSA should
expand its philosophy of student
affairs to place more value on ethnic
group or community identity.
■ Give operational meaning to pluralism
in the work of DOSA professional staff
by including specific references to
multicultural learning and race rela
tions in their official duties.
• Provide effective channels of commu
nication for each of the minority
student communities. DOSA should
include the four directors of the ethnic
student community centers, other mi
nority staff, and students on key
policy-making committees.
• Continue giving more attention to
minority staff development at dosa
and cease limiting ethnic-related
professional positions to less than full
time.
• Establish a Graduate Center to serve
as a focal point for graduate student
life at Stanford. Though we have
concentrated on undergraduate
student life, we endorse this proposal
made by the United Graduate Student
Alliance.
■ Initiate a student residence-based
multicultural education program
headed by a full-time director and with
a dedicated program budget. Current
efforts are admirable but sporadic. To
establish more dormitories that
specifically promote pluralism,
Residential Affairs should begin a five
year "experiment in multicultural
understanding"; concurrently, Resi
dential Affairs should develop a
comprehensive, long-term plan to
provide multicultural education for all
Stanford students.
• Recruit more minorities as resident
fellows (RFs) and resident assistants
(RAsl Because of the few minority
faculty available, Residential Affairs
should allow more staff members to
serve as RFs. New RAs should begin
training in the spring quarter of the
year they are selected, and training for
all residential staff should include
more emphasis on multicultural
education.
• Give the ethnic theme houses more
recognition and resources. So that
they can achieve more mutual
agreement in carrying out their
educational programs, the theme
houses should be allowed to develop
criteria for selecting their residents.
- Provide reliable funding and staff for
the four ethnic orientation programs
for freshmen and transfer students.
DOSA should also establish more
comprehensive graduate minority
student orientation programs in con
junction with the Office of Graduate
Studies and the ethnic student
community centers.
- Develop dorm-based courses focusing
on racial and ethnic relations through
the Office of Residential Education
and the Dean of Undergraduate
Studies.
• Strengthen the budgets of the four
ethnic student community centers and
adequately staff each center as soon
as possible. The Provost should
provide DOSA with funding to improve
the centers' facilities and additional
resources to allow them to support
graduate student activities. To
support multicultural educational
activities in particular, DOSA should
increase the programming line-item in
each center's budget by $7,500.
• Make the assistant deans in charge of
the centers full-time directors or add
other full-time staff. DOSA should
provide each center with two full-time
equivalent (FTE) positions by Septem
ber 1,1989 and three FTE positions
(including the director) by September
1,1990. Further, DOSA should
upgrade the job classifications of the
assistant deans/directors and should
reconsider or curtail the practice of
asking them to provide "augmentive
service" to other DOSA units.
• Periodically collect data permitting
systematic analysis of racial and
ethnic relations amono Stanford

students. The Registrar can use the
UCMI's research as a point of
departure for developing this informa
tion base.
• Reconsider current confidentiality
policy to facilitate the collection of this
data. The Registrar should ask
students to return only forms checked
"no" to withhold information on race
and ethnicity, rather than forms
marked "yes" to release this informa
tion.
STAFF
As a fact of life for the world, the
nation, California, and Stanford Univer
sity, diversity is our starting point, not
our goal. Staff members are entitled to
a work environment free from ethnic or
racial barriers; as their employer, Stan
ford makes a statement—especially to
students—about its values and goals by
how it treats minority staff. Four general
needs have guided our research and
recommendations for the Stanford
workplace: to increase sensitivity to
ethnic differences, to deepen under
standing of the concept of pluralism, to
develop comprehensive strategies for
making pluralism a reality, and to secure
institutional commitment to these
strategies.
We found widespread staff support
for Stanford's human resources
philosophy and affirmative acton goals,
but we also heard repeatedly that these
worthy goals have not been translated
into action in the workplace. We found,
for example, significant under-represen
tation of minorities in senior-level
management positions, widespread
awkwardness in cross-cultural relation
ships, little value placed on the contribu
tions of minority staff, little effort to
educate staff about Stanford's pluralistic
objectives, and no repercussions for de
partments or individuals choosing not to
practice these philosophies.
The principles of diversity, inclu
sion, education and training, and
accountability all influence and are

influenced by good management. The
dynamic interplay of these five principles
summarizes the ideas expressed in our
discussions, readings, and other
research and illuminates the ways we
can overcome the problems our re
search uncovered.
Because of collective bargaining
that concluded only as we neared the
end of our deliberations, we were
unable to conduct a comprehensive
survey on all these issues (this survey is
now under way). Although we rely here
on a narrower data base than in other
sections of our report, our findings and
recommendations still result from
several hundred hours of study,
analysis, and interviews.
Major Findings
• A large numerical growth in Stanford
minority staff over the past five years,
because of the overall growth of the
non-teaching staff, translates into in
significant percentage gains for all
minority groups at all employment
levels. The proportion of minority
exempt staff (those in pay curve
ranges C-4 through C-10 and N-11)
has risen from 16.9% to 17.2%.
• In some Stanford workplaces, diversity
in personal style, expressiveness,
critical thinking, and cultural perspec
tive is incorporated into working rela
tionships—job design, team formation,
career planning. In such environ
ments, diversity has become a vital,
positive force.
• In too many work environments,
however, majority mores dominate,
stereotypes abound, and staff
interaction is frequently awkward. As
a result, minority staff face limited
access to better jobs and significant
career uncertainty.
• Minority staff perceptions of a "glass
ceiling" preventing professional
advancement are supported by the
data. At lower exempt employment
levels, minority women have higher
rates of promotion than White women
or men, but proportionally fewer
minorities than Whites progress above
the C-7 employment level. At this
level, promotion rates are less than
5% tor minorities, compared to about
20% (women) and 29% (men) for
Whites, and White men are promoted
at a rate seven times greater than mi
nority men.
• At slightly higher staff levels, no
minority women were promoted in the
five years we studied. Minority men at
these levels were promoted, but their
numbers are very small. No minority
women held senior management level
positions.
• "Institutional racism" may be an
unfortunate term, but it accurately
describes a real pattern of unintention
ally prejudicial behaviors and habits,
evident at Stanford in standard Univer
sity language, pressures on minority
staff to conform, and the prevalence of
stereotypes in the workplace. We of
ten hear that Stanford seeks "qualified
minorities," a term that inserts a grain
of doubt about competence, while we
never hear the phrase "qualified
Whites." Majority norms operate in
the workplace as unstated require
ments for career advancement, such
as styles of communication (accents
are seen as impediments to promo
tion, and indirectness is valued over
directness) and methods of problem
solving (avoidance of controversy is
favored).
• One of the most pernicious stere
otypes we identified holds that
minorities want something different
from their careers than their White
colleagues, that they are not as
devoted to Stanford. We found no
truth to this generalization; we found,
not surprisingly, that the more
included minorities feel, the more
committed they become. In any case,
being critical is a sign of commitment,
not apathy.
• Marginalizaton, the opposite of
inclusion, often results from institu
tional racism. Stanford does not yet

widely, consistently include minority
staff members as full partners in
professional development. Minority
issues are repeatedly not viewed as
Stanford issues; for example, ethnic
committee work may be seen as time
away from the job rather than a
contribution to it. Minorities dispropor
tionately hold "soft" jobs, performing
services rather than diagnosing
problems, implementing rather than
developing policy. So-called "ethnic
positions" can limit career opportuni
ties to the extent they are perceived
as "merely" advocacy roles.
• Many minority staff members feel that
White managers and supervisors
generally lack sensitivity to minority
concerns, often perpetuate stere
otypes, and fail to coach them in
career development. Having a large
number of faculty members in
supervisory positions at Stanford
creates a particular challenge,
because most faculty are not highly
skilled in human resources manage
ment. We were told that many faculty
managers lack interest in staff, have
little patience for training, and mainly
want staff to run things with minimal
supervision; in such cases, informed
evaluation of staff performance is rare.
• Good management of a diverse work
force should include fairness in style
and substance (permitting release
time for ethnic-related activities), sen
sitivity to individual qualities and group
values (including the respectful use of
language), attention to training and
career development (designing jobs to
take advantage of, not blunt, differ
ences), and commitment to employee
well-being (including thoughtful
performance evaluations).
• Good intentions are not enough. At
the departmental level, some manag
ers enthusiastically apply the Univer
sity's pluralistic goals to their particular
office, but when others make half
hearted efforts or no efforts at all to
recruit, develop, and retain minority
staff, they face no repercussions. For

senior administrators, performance
evaluations are not systematic. An
effective system of accountability for
implementing Stanford's human
resources philosophy will include all
levels of management.
Recommendations
• Establish a University Review Board to
evaluate progress in recruiting,
retaining, and promoting minority staff
and in successfully managing cultural
diversity in the workplace. The
University Review Board should report
to the Human Resources Council and
should include members of the
Administrative Council, the Affirmative
Action Officer, and minority faculty and
staff members. The Board should
evaluate the vice-presidential areas
every year, survey the Stanford staff,
and publicize its findings and recom
mendations.
»Plan comprehensively to achieve
pluralism. Each vice president should
develop a plan, in conjunction with the
Department of Human Resources,
that applies sound management prac
tices for a diverse work force; that
includes training programs, perform
ance reviews linked to successful
recruitment and development of
minority staff, and procedures for
staying informed about staff attitudes;
and that is reviewed annually with the
University Review Board.
• Recruit and develop minority staff
aggressively. Human Resources
should develop a program, linked with
one-year 'target of opportunity" ap
pointments, to recruit more senior
level minority staff from both within
and outside the University.
• Establish a minority management
fellowship program to provide staff
members full-time, year-long work ex
perience at higher levels of responsi
bility, teaming fellows who confront
"glass ceilings" with senior managers.
■ Perform annual assessments of
pertinent data on employment,
retention, and promotion of minority
staff. The Affirmative Action Office
and the Department of Human
Resources should evaluate the
information available now and should
assign the responsibility to a cognizant
University office for collecting and
analyzing data each year. These
findings should be presented to the
University Review Board.
GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS
Because the following general
recommendations do not apply specifi
cally to the individual sections of the
UCMI report, we list them separately
here.
Affirmative action policy for
faculty and students
• Continue to apply current affirmative
action guidelines for targeted minority
groups—American Indians, Blacks,
and Hispanics (Mexican Americans
are targeted for faculty and under
graduate affirmative action, and
Mexican Americans and Puerto
Ricans are targeted for graduate
student affirmative action)—but also
consider modifying these guidelines to
include certain other under-repre
sented minority subgroups, taking into
account the effects of changing demo
graphics.

* Target Asian Americans for faculty and
graduate student affirmative action in
disciplines where this group is under
represented (such as the humanities
and social sciences), especially in
schools and departments that enroll
large numbers of undergraduates.
»Target under-represented subgroups
of Asian Americans for faculty and
student affirmative action: begin
compiling data by subgroups for
students, faculty, and staff to more
precisely define "Asian American/
Pacific Islanders." The Provost should
also modify current policy by designat
ing "Mexican Americans" and "other
Hispanics" as subgroups of "Hispan
ics" for faculty affirmative action data.
This new data by subgroup for Asian
Americans and Hispanics should
include information on place of birth
and should be published in the annual
Faculty Affirmative Action Report.
Campus reporting of minority
issues
»Develop new and innovative ap
proaches to presenting ethnic and
racial affairs in the campus media.
The University should provide
resources to support this develop
ment. The UCMI commends Campus
Report and Stanford News and
Publications for outstanding coverage
of minority issues.

University committee on the
status of multiracial affairs
. Fstablish. in spring of 1989. a standing
University committee on the status of
multiracial affairs. The President and
the Provost should charge this com
mittee with evaluating the outcome of
the UCMI's reoommendations, making
periodic assessments of the state of
multiracial and multicultural affairs at
Stanford, reporting on these affairs
annually, and working with other
standing committees in carrying out
these duties. The UCMI will deliver all
relevant materials to the new commit
tee to facilitate a smooth transition.
CHARGE TO THE UNIVERSITY
COMMITTEE ON MINORITY
ISSUES
A. General Charge
The University Committee on Mi
nority Issues shall assess the institu
tional environment of people of color at
Stanford and shall collaborate with leg
islative bodies and executive officers to
move the University with wisdom, con
viction and speed further toward poli
cies and practices that implement the
University's commitment to a genuinely
pluralistic community. The goal of this
committee is to promote a University
environment in which all members
have equal opportunity to develop full
human potential — an environment in
which respect, mutual regard for cul
tural differences and full participation
and partnership are the norm.
B. Duties
1. The Committee is charged to
consider each of the issues raised in:
• Correspondence to the President
from the Asian American Community
dated Feb. 17,1987;
• The Rainbow Agenda of May 5 and
May 8,1987, and the Charge of the
Rainbow Agenda of June 3,1987, all
of which were submitted by the Black
Student Union, MEChA, the Asian
American Students' Association and
the Stanford American Indian Organi
zation.
The Committee is charged either
to address these issues promptly in the
manner described in (a) through (e)
below, or to do one of the following: 1)
to refer them to other appropriate bod
ies, or 2) to defer them for subsequent
consideration.

In addressing these issues, the
Committee is charged with the follow
ing specific duties:
a) To set priorities among the is
sues of concern for study and ac
tion, and to request from internal
and, as applicable, external
sources information and / or stud
ies pertinent to those issues;
b) To make findings;
c) To identify current University
policies and practices which
should be considered for change
d) To consult with appropriate
legislative and administrative
bodies on such matters; and
e) To recommend appropriate ac
tion by those bodies.
2. To receive reports of matters
within the Committee's purview from
throughout the University community,
and to consider such matters in the
manner described in B (1), above.
3. To submit to the President a
preliminary report no later than April 1,
1988, and a complete report no later
than Oct. 1,1988. These reports shall
be published.
4. To submit as part of its Oct. 1,
1988, report to the President recom
mendations on its own future and com
position.
C. Responsibilities of the Chair
The Chair of the Committee is
charged specifically with the following
duties:
1. With the assistance of a Vice
Chair: managing the Committee
agenda, managing staff support for the
Committee and leading the Committee
in the execution of its responsibilities;
and

2. Keeping the President and Pro
vost apprised of the issues under con
sideration, the recommendations for
mulated by the Committee and the
status of these recommendations.
D. Membership
The committee shall consist of 18
voting members, including six faculty
members from the Academic Council,
four student members, four staff mem
bers and four members from the out
side community. The Provost and the
University's Affirmative Action Officer
(or their designees) shall be ex officio
members of the Committee without
vote.
E. Subcommittees
The Committee shall establish
subcommittees as necessary to ac
complish its responsibilities.
F. Meetings
The Committee shall meet
monthly (or more frequently if neces
sary) in the completion of its duties.
G. Staff Support
The Provost's Office shall make
arrangements for staff support, neces
sary research funding and secretarial
assistance to the Committee.
July 27,1987
