# Commencement Exercises.
## THE 						PIONEER CLASS IS NOW A MEMORY. One Hundred and Sixty-Seven Diplomas Granted. The Addresses in Full. 
### 
The great class of '95 has passed
into history. With the impressive
ceremonies held this morning in
Kncina gymnasium the Pioneers
bade farewell to all the old ties
which have bound them so closely
to this University for the past four
years. The graduating exercises
were a fitting wind up of the series
of celebrations which have charac
terized this, by far the most event
ful week in the University's his
tory.
After opening music and the in
vocation, Professor John M. Still
man delivered the annual com
mencement address on "Specializa
tion in Jiducation." PI is remarks
were as follows:
Education in the somewhat re
stricted sense in which we com
monly nse the term, is the syste
matic effort to economize and to
augment the mental and moral de
velopment of the individual. It
attempts to equip him at the least
possible cost of time and waste of
energy; with the most important
results of the accumulated thought
and experience of mankind. Its
highest aim is the fitting of the in
dividual to be of the greastest pos
sible service to the race. In gen
eral it is also true that the man fit
ted to be of the greatest service to
the race, is also best fitted to im
prove his own condition, and to
increase his own comfort and hap
piness. A system of education
which should ignore the first and
greater object -would contain the
seed of its own dessolution, for in
the long run society is banded to
gether against organized selfish
ness.
In former ages, systematic edu
cation was designed only for the
priesthood. Later it became also
a preparation for the other so-call
ed learned professions—law and
medicine, and a distinguishing
badge, an accomplishment, a lux
ury for the sons of gentlemen.
The " educated classes " formed a
"caste", and often a narrow and
a jealous caste. The increasd and
wider distribution of wealth and
the increasing demands of a pro
gressive civilization have tended to
break down the barriers hedging
an educated caste. Step by step
the conviction has gained ground
that education is the right of the
many rather than the privilege of
the few. Gradually society is be
coming convinced that universal
education, and a generous educa
tion is one of the few good things
of which there cannot be too much,
and the best paying investment for
her security and prosperity. The
immense sum expended from the
public treasury, or through private

munificence, for educational pur
pose: are capital which society has
invested not for individual benefit
at the expense of others, but for
her own best interests, and we may
depend upon it that in the end she ;
will see to it that she receives the !
full interest due, in terms of honest j
and efficient service rendered to'
the material development or the
social welfare of humanity.
It is evident that the methods
and materials of education must
| vary with the needs of the time and
the ever-changing conditions of
[civilization. The best education
j that could be devised in the seven
i teenth century differs from the best
that the nineteenth has developed,
and the twentieth century will
bring new requirements. To a
certain extent the education of to
day is the outgrowth from the past
conditions and past needs. On
the other hand, the best education
of today is the result of a more or
less successful effort to forecast the
conditions and requirements of the
future. It cannot be otherwise.
The youth now receiving instruc
tion in thousands of class rooms in
the T nited States are preparing for
: a life-work in the future, and, in so
far as maybe, their training has
been shaped to meet the probably
conditions of their social enviro
ments. From a study of the history
of the past and the conditions of the
present we endeavor to discover
tendencies of human thought and
action which will be influential in
determining the conditions of the
future. The more clearly these
tendencies can be discerned the
more successfully may be laid the
foundation of future usefulness.
The earnest teacher has faith in a
progressive development of human
society, however slow it may be,
and also in the possibility through
education of influencing this de
velopment. If lie has not the faith,
there is lacking an important
source of inspiration.
The problems then that face ad
vanced educators today are com
mensurate in their importance with
the problems which already con
front our civilization, or which
more or less distinctly are discern
ed through the mists which veil the
future.
The century now nearing its
close has been a period of unex
ampled material and industrial pro
gress, and I believe also of social
and political improvement as well.
Though we are confronted with
wholesale corruption, rascality, and
crime, it is yet reassuring to re
member that they are generally and
clearly recognized tobe corruption,
rascality, and crime, and not called
honesty, rectitude, and benefi
cence, even by the most corrupt
exponents of public opinion.
Many causes have conspired to
make the past century thus re
markable in its development; rapid
and cheap intercommunication of
ideas, railroads, steamships, tele
graph; but more than all the in
crease of education and the conse
quent emancipation of thought
from the thraldom of old philoso- 1
phies and dead dogmas.
The arising from the study of
natural and physical science has 1
played no small part in this stimu
lation of latent human possibilities.

Naturally there have arisen from
the changingconditionsof life, new
social, political, and industrial
pioblems, making necessary a more
varied and different educational
preparation. The great varity of
1 schools for general and special
I training, and the diversity of ideas
as to function and methods of educa
tion are evidence of the attempt to
j suit educational methods to the
i various needs of the* time.
The century soon to be ushered
| in will doubtless carry forward,
! perhaps still more rapidly, the in
! dustrial and material development
j of civilization. Its achievments
may be greater than those of the
; 19th; but it would be strange if the
the future century were not beset
with difficulties and dangers com
mensurate with the magnificence
of its promise in other directions.
I am no pessimist. I do not be-
I lieve the golden age of humanity
is past, that society is going from
bad to worse, and social anarchy
hovers over us—sometime to en
gulph the dissipated remains of
civilization. Nor, on the other
hand, am I ready to accept that
now at last we stand on the shores
; of Utopia, and that the ages of war,
social tyranny, and enthroned sel
| fishness are about to give place to
that era longed for by poets and
all ages—
" When the war-drum throbs no longer
And the hattlc llags arn fu'led
j In the parliament of man, the federa
tion of the world. "
Vet, slowly or rapidly, with per
haps many a pendulum swing of
progression and retrogression, we
must and do look forward to a
gradual improvement in social con
ditions, in political wisdom, in
honesty and in love for one's fel
low men. And it is to education
that we must look to make the
world of a hundred years hence a
little better on the average than as
we know it today. The problems
which are to confront the future
generations, more numerous and
more difficult, as the conditions of
life become more complex, must be
met by a more general education
of the people, and by education
better adapted to the needs of the
social organism. Problems already
face us which tax to the utmost
the knowledge and ability of the
best trained experts —problems af
fecting the mutual relations be
tween nations, international law,
international commerce or finance,
equally difficult questions of inter
nal administration—currency, ta
riff, taxation; the relation of the
government to the individual,
charities and correction — they
need not be further enumerated,
we all recognize them. Many
social questions once simply and
and easily regulated become more
difficult and of greater import
through the growing complexity
of the social machinery. Thus the
centralization of capital into mam
moth corporations or trusts, with
the power that springs from a more
than kingly wealth, has given rise
to questions of great public import
ance, questions which troubled but
little when competition was freer
and the relations of supply and de
mand less restricted. The state
has found itself compelled to in
terfere to protect the public from

the abuse of power by wealthy
, corporations, and perhaps no task
i before us is of greater importance
than that of protecting the public
from such organizations, and at the
same time protecting great busi
ness enterprises from an equally
unjust and tyrannous abuse of the
power of legislation. Concentra
tion of capital has made possible
| organization of labor for its own
protection, and here again a
I giant strength is aroused which
public policy must control, that it
I be not used against the rights of
! others, nor the welfare of the state.
The problems of civilization are
becoming more intricate with the
discovery of new fields of activity,
with the increasing development
of older professions and industries,
i and with more intimate interna
tional relations, commercial, finan
; cial and political. Every depart
ment of human thought and activ
| ity feels the impulse of this increas
ing complexity, and demands irr
consequence more thorough know
ledge and greater skill to deal with
the changing conditions.
How are we to acquire the wis
dom and ability to deal with such
questions on the basis of equity
and honesty and with intelligent
understanding of the factors in
volved in their settlement ? Only r
I am convinced, by the gradual
elevation of tlie people to a higher
average of honesty and intelli
gence, and further than that by
the thorough special training of a
larger number of men to act as
leaders of public opinion in their
respective branches of knowledge.
The greater the number of such
leaders, the more thorough their
training, and the more varied the
lines of thought in which such
leaders exists, the more rapid and
free from danger will be the march
of progress. When knowledge,
skill and integrity take the lead,
and public opinion is intelligent
enough to discriminate between
the voice of wisdom and the flat
tery and sophistry of the dema
gogue, then only may we look for
the realization of a reasonable
Utopia. Far from that goal as we
now are, it is nevertheless the part
of practical patriotism and human
ity to strive ever toward it, that we
may avoid to the greatest extent
possible the wrong solutions of
those ever-recurring problems of
society — ever-recurring because,
as has been well said —if a question
be not rightly settled it always
comes up again for settlement.
Two hundred years ago any
man of ability and of good school
ing for the time might readily have
mastered all that was then known
about steam engineering. Any
statesman of the time of Queen
Elizabeth might easily have learn
ed all that existed of international
law. How much greater the pre
paration now required to master
those branches? A similar in
crease in subject matter and in
complexity of relations, and a cor
responding need of more special
and more thorough training may
be found in all the sciences and
their applications, in mercantile
and manufacturing business, law,
medicine, statecraft", literature or
philosophy. Where a hundred?
years ago a fairly good preparatory
education and some natural adapta
bility to the subject formed suffic
ient foundation to enable a man
to earn a front rank in his pro
fession, today the man without a
thorough special training finds
himself forced to take a subordi
nate rank. There is an increasing
tendency to subdivide the pro
fessions and occupations, once
practised as a whole, or, as we soy,
to specialize. The lawyer takes
up the practise of corporation law,
patent law, commercial law, and
so on; the physician chooses some
subdivision of medicine or surgery;
the engineering profession shows
the same tendency.
This tendency toward special
ization is a practical recognition of
the importance of more thorough
knowledge and of the increasing
labor or difficulty of obtaining suf
ficient preparation for satisfactory
work in all branches of a given
profession.
Modern education must take cog
nizance of this great diversity of
work in life, and of the greater
need of training adapted to these
diverse objects. In all departments
human activity where brain in
is more essential to success than
muscle (and where it is not?) the
increasing differentiation of civil
ization is making more and more
exacting, and more difficult the de
terming of what kind of education
is adapted to produce the most ef
fective preparation. It becomes
evident that we must devote more
years to this preparation, or there
must be found some way to employ
the present average student period
to better advantage.
On the other hand, we must face
the fact that the average length of
human life is not increasing, nor
does the inherited capacity for edu
cation in the human race increase
in porportion to the growth of civ
ilization. As another has said,
" The evolution of civilization is
more rapid than that of the race."
It does not seem probable that the
time devoted to schooling in lower
and higher institutions can be on
the average lengthened much be
yond the present limits. Event
ually a standing army of students
is cheaper to maintain than a
standing army of soldiers, as the
world will sooner or later realize.
But any standing army of non
producers operates as a heavy tax
on the community, and this fact
will militate against any material
extension of that part of life de
voted to study by the ever increas
ing army of students attending the
higher schools of all kinds, profes
sional, technical, or general.
It is then necessary, if education
is to keep pace with the march of
civilization, that, by constantly im
proving methods and plans of in
struction, we shall learn better to
economize the student's time, more
thoroughly to marshal his capabil
ities toward some worthy aim,
more effectively to render active
his potential energy. For when
ever society has invested the time
and the productive energy of the
student she will demand her re
ward in the assurance that the
recipient of her bounty shall ul
timately render a service adequate
to the time and cest of education.
In no other way can such service
be rendered than for the student
to so utilize his years of prepara
tion that he shall be able and will
ing to use his powers and faculties
for the greatest possible good of
society. To faithfully discharge
this obligation, lie must prepare
himself to take as high a place of
usefulness as his native ability and
his opportunties render possible.

That man or woman who accom
plishes less of good or useful work
than is possible to his or her abil
ity and opportunities is to that ex
tent committing a sin against so
ciety.
To further such an aim, the stu
dent must bend his energies to
ward preparing himself to do in
some useful line of activity the best
that in him lies. To meet the in
creasing differentiations of life,
specialization in education is ne
cessary, and to achieve a maxium
of efficiency for the individual
there must be an early adaptation
of plan and of method to the end to
be attained, The greatest possible
service to the best interests of hu
manity is the ultimate goal of all
education, and to him who brings
to the cause of human progress
full-hearted and efficient service,
will be made liberal return in gifts
of wealth; of fees, of respect, or of
love, according to the degree or
the aim of such-service.
I should perhaps speak more ex
plicit}' what I mean by specializa
tion in education. I undestand
by that phrase, devoting the neces
sary portion of the student's alot
ted time in the University in such
a way as will enable him to become
to some extent identified with
some branch of knowledge or some
field of human thought. This ob
ject implies the laying of a thor
ough foundation in all branches ov
knowledge clearly related to the
choosen specialty, and the cultiva
tion of all those faculties and pow
ers necessary to its successful
prosecution. It also implies the
study of the specialty itself to the
extent of acquiring a certain meas
ure of familiarity with its methods,
and some degree of mastership.
By mastership I do not mean the
complete familiarity which can
only result from a life-time of labor
in the chosen fields. A specialty
pursued to the extent possible dur
ing the time available to most stu
dents must indeed leave the earnest
student with a keen sense of the
narrow limits of his knowledge.
Nevertheless, rightly pursued, it
should at least impart to him a
feeling of confidence as to his
power to carry forward in a
worthy and intelligent manner the
work thus well begun.
After all,it is this sense of power
this confidence in one's ability to
keep growing in power, this con
sciousness that in some line of
thought the mind is out of leading
strings, that is one of the greatest
incentive to a high range of life
work; and it is the lack of this con
fidence that often bars the way to
the greatest usefulness, and that
causes so many men to fail in
utilizing the advantages of educa
tion, falling back into stations
which require little or no special
preparation.
Knowledge is indeed power—
not, however, the superficial
knowledge of a multitude of things
—but the thorough knowledge of
some useful thing. A general
knowledge of many things adds to
the pleasure of living; it is a source
of profit and enjoyment to our
selves and our friends; it enables us
better to understand the interests
and to sympathize with the aspira
tions ef our neighbors. It assists
us to judge wisely concerning
many things conducive to the
right conduct of life; it helps to
make the good citizen and the
good man, Hut it will not replace
the ability todosomething or other
better than most of our neighbors,
something for which we have
been more thoroughly educated
than they. Not every man can

achieve greatness in his special line
of work —not every man can he a
j Darwin, or Aagassiz, a Helmholtz
or an Emerson, but every man of
! fair ability and industry may so
utilize his opportunities that he
| may do serviceable work in the
line he chooses for his own.
It is no longer practicable to
leave specialization till the student
days are over. The differentia
; tiations of occupation and the ac
cumulated mass of special know
ledge necessary is too great. The
beginning of specialization must be
made under the direction of those
I competent to instruct and whose
occupation it is to impart their
j knowledge. Nor should the bene-
I lit arising from specialization be
confined to the fortunate few who
can afford to prolong their Univer
sity work beyond the average four
years, though these will indeed
i usually reap more than proportion-
I ate the advantage. It is better to
j make some sacrifice of general
j studies rather than to derive the
many of the benefits that arise
from thus focussing their energies
on some congenial subject to the
end that they may acquire there
in some confidence in their
knowledge and their power.
The danger that lies near spec
ialization in the University is that
which arises from an education too
narrow and one-sided. We fre
quently hear of the evils of over
specification, and of a class of nar
row and unpractical specialists.
It is beyond question true that a
narrow specialization, begun pre
maturely and resting on too inade
quate foundation will to a great
extent defeat its own objects. Even
if the student should under some
! circumstances achieve a fair suc
cess in his specialty, he may be too
narrow in his views and out of
touch with the progress of society,--
particularly if he be by nature a
man of narrow mind. But, even so,
which of the extreme types is the
worst ? The man of narrow train
ing, lacking in the usual character
istics of the guild of scholars, out of
touch perhaps with the common
thought of the leaders of humanity,
but capable of doing useful work
in his special field of labor? Or
the highly cultured and accom
plished college graduate with a
smattering of twenty ologies and
isms, but with not enough useful
| knowledge of any thing to enable
him to find a place in the World's
work, —a drone in the social hive?
I question if there exists a more
essentially narrow man than this
latter type of educated man —for
he can never see beyond the hori
zon of his own shallow experience,
and from his self-constructed throne
he judges the seat of mankind with
the complacent assurance born of
a fancied superiority. We must
discriminate with care between the
ideas of over-specialization and of
premature or unwise specializa
tion. I do not know that over
specialization is possible if the sub
ject be a useful one and the pre
paration for it sufficiently broad
and through. The higher we build
the pinnacles of special knowledge
the broader and deeper must be the
foundation that supports them, and
the more carefully must it be
adapted to its purpose. Too limited
a differentiation is unwise, also, if
the subject matter is not of impor
tance commensurate with the time
and labor bestowed upon it. The
University must not admit to the
dignity of specialties subjects of
trivial importance, or which do not
demand for their preparation work
of University grade. It must also
insist that the preparation for

special studies be sufficiently broad
and fundamental. If these condi
tions be observed, there need be
no fear of the danger of specializa
tion. Nor, on the other hand, does
specialization rightly considered
tend to exclude from education
all those influences which go to
make the gentleman and the
scholar. It merely provides
throughout the college course of
the student that, "an increasing
purpose runs."
The study of any worthy sub
ject as a specialty, be it history,
physics, law, biology, engineering,
or philology, if it be prosecuted
with the proper spirit, and with
due reference to all that is de
manded fora thorough mastery of
the science, may contain within
it the germs of all that is essential
to the world's best citizen, and as
to the efficiency of such an edu
cation neither the rostrum, the
salon, nor the club furnishes the
criterion. It is not the curriculum
ot the University that determines
the value of the education as much
as it is the adaptability of the work
to the individual, the spirit of the
student, his zeal, his application,
and the thoroughness of his accom
plishment. There are many stud
ies that are useful in cultivating
that breadth of sympathy and of
understanding which we call cul
ture, but no one study is essential.
Even the correct use of one s na
tive language is no absolute essen
tial, valuable and important though
it be. Particular studies have no
abstract educatioual value; they
are only useful as they find some
thing respon: ive in the mind of the
student. One man finds through
the study of history the great les
sons of humanity, and bends his
lite to fulfill the laws of social evo
lution as they reveal themselves to
his mind. Another learns the love
of truth and the reverence for law
through the study of the forces of
nature.
I doubt if there is any one thing
in the consideration of higher ed
ucation more important for its
future development, than that a
man's education must be more care
fully adapted to the structure of
his mind, than is his clothes to his
body. Specialization in education
with a variation corresponding to
the differentiation of modern civili
zation necessary implies an elas
ticity suited to the mental capabili
ties and inclination of the student.
It is more difficult to change the
inherited and acquired mental con
stitution than it is to change the
inherited and acquired physical
characteristics. As we have not
yet the means of measuring the
mind of a man as the tailor meas
ures his body, we must be guided
largely by his own tastes or the
evidence he gives of ability in one
line or another. Education can
but develop existent faculties and
furnish the tools for their exercise.
It cannot create mental faculties,
it can only enable the man, by the
wise direction of his energies, to
make the best use of those powers
he possesses.
In presenting this plea for more
specialization than is recognized
in the curricula of most American
Universities, I desire not to be
misunderstood. I believe that
every man and woman should re
ceive the most complete education
that circumstances will permit.
No one can know too much nor
know too thoroughly whatever of
good and useful there is to know.
No capital of money or of time is
better invested for one's own wel
fare or for the good of one's fel
lows than that invested in educa
tic n. The broader the foundation
and the more varied the mental
training the greater are the poten
tialities for future usefulness. Nor
can any man foresee what destiny
has in store, nor be sure that the
vocation he aspires in youth will
be the occupation of his manhood's
years. He is wise who plants
many kinds of seed to provide liar- :
vests of satisfaction for future
years. In the variety of know
ledge and of interests are the germs
of nobler pleasure and greater use
fulness. Only when a large num
ber of men and women are educat
ed to a position of intelligent appre
ciation of the needs of society, and
to an unselfish aspiration for the
common welfare, can the wisest
leaders of thought and action exert
their due influence. For aseducat
ed men and women,
"We are pledged
To understand, tj live the truth we
know,
To help men so to live and understand."
Recognizing clearly these great
aims and responsibilities of higher
education, and desiring to see them
fulfilled to the utmost, I yet be
lieve that as there is no particular
curriculum essential to these aims,
it is possible for the student to se
lect a course of study which, while
it shall furnish all the essentials of
a liberal education may neverthe
less bear a close relation to his
special line of work; and also that
this ideal course must be as varied
in detail as are the minds of men,
and the avocatiors of educated
.men. To the end tint the general
training be not sacrificed tothe need
of specialization, and that time may
be found for more effective work
in the specialty without prolong
ing the average period of study,
the work of the lower or prepara
tory schoo's must be made more
thorough and effective. There
should be fewer mechanical meth
ods, and more attention to individ
ual capacity and adaptability. The
subjects taught need not be many
but they should be fundamental in
their languages, lit
erature, history, mathematics, nat
ural or physical science. They
should be taught in such a way as
to hold the attention and to de
velop to the greatest possible de
gree the powers of observation,
reasoning and reflection. For this
more teachers and better teachers
will be needed. This applies to
scho >ls of grammar and primary
grades to an even greater degree
than to high schools. These im
provements are certain to come,
for we are just beginning to re
alize that money spent in educa
tion is even from a pecuniary
stand-point a paying investment
for society. More money is
wasted in every civilized country
from lack of knowledge than
would many times pay for the
cost of education—could we but
discover the proper education.
Every improvement in edu
cational matters necessitates im
provement in all departments of
education. Each new higher
school or university is born to new
responsibilities, every succeeding
generation of students to a richer
educational birthright, and that in
stitution which fails to meet its
responsibilities or misinterprets
the direction in which lies true de
velopment vvilL sooner or later
experience the inexorabeness of
the law of human progress.
"It seeth everywhere and marketh all:
Do right —it recompenseth! do no
wrong—
The equal retribution must be made,
Though DHARMA tarry long.
It knows not wrath nor pardon; utter
true

Its measures mete, its faultless 1 alance
weighs;
Times are as nought, tomorrow it will
judge,
Or after many days."
Finally, let us keep in view that
whatever be the extent or kind of
training which in any given case
or under any given circumstances
it is practicable to impart, it is
above all important to inculcate
the spirit of earnest endeavor, the
love of truth, and reverence for
the laws which underlie alike the
forces of nature and of human iife.
Let us realize also the value of op
portunities and leisure for quiet
reflection, for unhurried thinking,
times of respite from the rush and
whirl of that mighty torrent of
modern activity which threatens
to sweep us away like bubbles on
its surface. We cannot attempt to
know all things; it becomes us
therefore to confine our attention
and to concentrate our energies
upon fewer things, that opportun
ity may yet remain for such mental
leisure, with its blessed train of
elevating influences, to steal upon
the mind—sweetening it with the
promise of a golden age to come,
when intelligence, integrity and
morality shall rule the earth.
As was written thirty years ago
by our California poet, Sill:
"Haste, Haste, 0 laggard, leave thy
drowsy dreams.
Cram all thy brain with knowledge;
clutch and cram.
The earth is wide, the universe is vast —
Thou hast infinity to learn, O haste!
Haste not, haste not, mv soul. Infinity?
Thou hast eternity to learn it in.
Thy boundless lesson through the end
less years
Hath boundless leisure. Run not like a
slave—
Sit like a king, and see the ranks of
worlds
Wheel in their cycles onward to thy feet.
President Jordan then spoke to
the members of the graduating
class after which followed the con
ferring of diplomas. He said:
To THE CI.ASS OK '95.
Today we give you the last of your
childhoods toys', the college degree.
The degree with all its titles and privi
leges is yours henceforth. I»ut it will
not help you much in life. It belongs
to the babyhood of culture. It repre
sents hopes and ideals, the promise of
youth, but men and women are judged
by achievments, not by dreams. You
will value your diploma for the growth
to which it bears witness. For warm
frendships and sweet associations you
will value it again. And still you will
prize it as a card of admission to the
noblest body of men and women in the
world, the band of collegiate alumni.
All this is now yours. Lay the diploma
away now with the best of your youth
ful treasures. Today you take your place
in the world of men. You have reached
your majority. One by one you have
passed the goals your teachers have sit
for you. The goals of the future must
be of your own choosing. It is yours
now to think, and therefore to act for
yourselves. This you can surely do. It
will be no new experience. Your train
ing in the past has been such, we trust,
•that the new freedom will be new in the
name only. It will come to you with no
shock of surprise, for in freedom you
..have been trained for freedom.
You of the class of IS9o have occupied
a unique position toward this Univer
sity. You were the first—the band of
pioneers. It has been yours to lead,
never to follow. Those who in future
years are drawn to these halls may
weigh and compare, balance privilege
with privilege, opportunity with oppor
tunity; their choice will be governed by
influences which, in part, have come
out from you. They will measure the
future by the past. For you there was
no past. You trusted the forces the
University seemed to represent. You
have given your best years of training
to this when it had no re
cord of achievement, no wealth of tradi
tion. You have been University makers.
"The highe.'t value of tradition lies in
the making of it; the noblest wealth is
the wealth of promise. It is the place
of the pioneer to make fur the future,
not to share in the past.
When nearly four years ago we came
for the first time together in this quad
rangle, you, with your teachers, were
the University. The University lives
in the changing units that pass through
its halls. The life of its beginning was
jours alone. On that first day of
October, 1891 —a day memorable to all
of us, at least —it was my fortune to say
these words to you :
"It is for us as teachers and students
in the University's first year to lay the
foundations of a school which may last
as long as human civilization. Ours is
the youngest of the Universities, but it
is beir to the wisdom of all the ages,
and with this inheritance it has the
promise of a rapid and sturdy growth.
"Our University has no history to fall
"back upon; no memories of great
teachers haunt its corridors; in none of
its rooms appear the traces which show
where a great man has ever lived or
worked. No tender associations cling,
ivy-like, to its fresh new walls. It is
hallowed by no traditions; it is ham
pered by none. Its finger post still
points forward. Traditions and associa
tions it is ours to make. From our
work the future of the University will
grow as a splendid lily from a modest
bulb.
"But the future with its glories and
its responsibilities will be in other
.hands. It is ours at the beginning to
give the University its form, its ten
do ncies, Us customs. The power of
precedent will cause to be repeated over

and over again everything that we do—
our errors as weli as our wisdom. It
becomes us then to begin the work
modestly, as under the eye of the com
ing ages. We must lay the foundations
broad and lirm. so as to give full support
to whatever edifice the future may
build."
Fo.tr years is a short time as we meas
ure history, even the histories of Uni
versities. Hut it is a long time when
we consider all that can take place in it.
These four years have been hallowed bv
the noblest courage and devotion you
and I have ever known. The self-sacri
fice which we know, though the world
does not, and by virtue of which we ate
together here today, has left its mark on
every one of you. You have learned
to know how wealth and power can be
expressed in terms of helpfulness. In
helpfulness alone can wealth or power
find consecration. Again these four years
are long when measured by the growing
thoughts of growing minds. Toev have
been long enough for the University to
place on you its ineffaceable stamp.
Men and w omen of Stanford you shall be
so long as you live, and longer—so long
as your memory shah last. The beloved
name of Leland Stanford Jr. has fallen
to you as an heritage. In the future it.
shall stand for what you make it. It has
been yours to help frame once for all its
definition. You have placed your mark
on the University and the generations
that follow cannot change this mark, they
can only deepen it. In your foot-steps
the students of the future must stand.
You are the pioneers. Wherever you
may go, in whatever situation you mav
be placed you will embody the spirit of
the Stanford University.
In these four years we have made some j
history, formed some associations, utter
ed some distinctive word. What shall
our message be? I cannot answer this
question. No one can answer it, now,
for the message must be expressed by
each one of you in his own way and to
the people whom the incidents and hap
penings of life shall bring about him as
neighbors.
Some part of this message lies in the !
word of Emerson: "The lest political
economy is the care and culture of men."
The care and culture of men does not
mean their coddling but their training—
not help from without but growth from
within. The harsh experience of cen
turies has show n that men are not made
by easy processes. Character is a hardy
plant. It thrives best where the north
wind tempers the sunshine.
The life of civilized man is no simple
art—no automatic process. To make
life easy is to bring it to failure. The
civilization to which we are born makes
heavy demands upon those who take part
in it. Its rights are all duties; its privi
leges are all responsibilities. Its penal
ties are terrible upon those who do not
make their responsibilities good. And
these responsibilities are not individual
alone. They fall upon all who are bound
together in social or industrial alliance.
If we are to bear one another's burdens,
we must see that no unnecessary burdens
are laid upon us by our indifference or
ignorance. There is no safety for the
Republic—no safety for the individual
man for whom the Republic exists, so
long as he or his fellows are untrained
or not trained aright.
So there is 110 virtue in educational
systems unless these systems meet the
needs of the individual. It is not the
ideal man or the average man w ho is to
be trained ; it is the particular man as
the forces of nature have made him.
His own qualities determine his needs.
"A child is better unborn than un
taught," A child, however, educated,
is still untaught if by his teaching we j
have rot emphasized his individual
character —if we have not strengthened j
his will and its guide and guardian, the
mind.
The essence of manhood lies in the
grow th of the power of choice. In the j

varied relations of life the power to
choose means the dutv of choosing
right. To choose the right one must
have the wit to know it and the will to
demand it. In the long run in small
things as in large, wrong choice is pun
ished by death. No republic can live,
no man can live, in a republic in which
wrong is the repeated choice either of
the people or of the state.
All education must be individual—fit
ted to individual needs. That which is
not is unworthy of the name. A misfit
education is 110 education at all. Every
man that lives has a right to some
form of higher education. For there is
no man that would not be made better
and stronger by continuous training. I
do not mean, of course, that the conven
tional college education of today could
be taken by every man to his advantage.
Stdl less could the average man use the
conventional college education of any
past era. Higher education has seemed
to be the need of the few because it has
been so narrow. It was made for the few.
Its type was fixed and pre-arranged,
and those whose minds it did not fit
were looked upon by the colleges as edu
cational outcasts. The reward of in
vestigation, tho pleasures of high think
ing. the charms ot harmony have never
yet been for the multitude. To the
multitude, they must be accesaable in
the future. Not as a gift, for nothing
worth having was ever a gift. Rather
as a right to be taken bv those who can.
To the higher education that humanity
needs the college must be broad as hu
manity, No spark of talent man may
possess should be outside its fostering
care. To tit man to schemes of eduva
cation has been the mistake of the past.
To lit education to man is the work ot
tin- future.
The traditions of higher education in
America had their origin in social con
ditions very different from ours. In the
golden age of Oreece, each free man
stood 011 the back of nine slaves. The
freedom which might have come to the
ten was the birthright of the one. To
train the tenth man was the function of
the early university. A part of this
training must be in the arts by which
the nine were kept in subjection.
The Universities of Paris and Oxford
and Cambridge rose for the purpose of
training the lord and the priest. And
to these schools and their successors as
time went on fell the duty of training
the gentleman and the clergyman.
Only in our day it has been reeogr.ized
that the common man had part or lot in
higher education. For now he has come
into his own and he demands that he
too may be noble and gentle. His own
lord and king lie is already and in the
next century we shall see the common
man installed as his own priest. And
through higher edncation he must gain
fitness for his work if he gains it at all.
And he must gain it, for the future of
civilization is in his hands. The world
cannot afford to let him fail. All the
ages have looked forward to the com
mon man as their heir apparent. The
whole part of humanity is staked 011 his
success. The old traditions are not
sufficient for him. The narrow pro
cesses by which gentlemen were trained
in mediaeval Oxford are not adequate
to the varied demands of the man of
the Twentieth Century. Heir to all the
ages he must be, and there are ages
since as there were ages before the tasks
set 111 these schools became sterotyped
as culture. The need of choice has
become a thousand-fold greater with
the extension of human knowledge and
human power. The need of choosing
right is steadily growing more and more
imperative. It' the common man is to
be his own lord and his own priest in
these strenuous days, his strength must
be as great, his consecration as intense
as it was with those who were his rulers
in ruder and less trying times. The
osmosis of classes is still going 011. Bv 1
its silent force it has "pulled down the'

mighty from their seats ami has exalted
tliem of low degree." Again, educate
our rulers; for we find that they need
it. They have not yet in the aggregate
the brains nor the conscience nor the
force of will that tits them for the task
the fates have thrown upon them.
If the civilization of the one is shared
hy the ti*n, it must increase tenfold in
amount. If it doe" not. the Golden Age
it seems to represent must pass away.
To hold the civilization we enjoy today
is the work of higher education. Every
moment we feel it slipping from our
hands. Hence every moment we must
strive fora fresh hold. "Eternal vigi
lance," it was said of old, "is the price
of liberty." And this is what was meant.
The perpetuation of free institutions
rests with free men. The masses, the
mohs of men, are never free. Hence the
need of the hour is to break up the
masses. Let them be masses no more,
but living men and women. The. work
of higher education is to draw forth from
the multitude the man. To tyranny
confusion is succeeding, and the remedy
lor confusion is in the growth of men
who cannot be confused.
This University more than anv other
in the world has recognized the need of
the individual student as the reason for
its existence. It has held that if we are
to make men and women out of boys and
girls, it will be as individuals not as
classes. The best field of corn is that in
which the individual stalks are most
strong and most fruitful. Class legisla
tion has always proved pernicious and
ineffective, whether in a University or in
a state. The strongest nation is that in
which the individual man is most help
ful and most independent. The best
school is that which exists for the indivi
dual student. Our University is not an
aggregation of colleges, departments, or
classes. It is built of young men and
women. The student is its unit. Its
basal idea of education is that each
student should devote his time and
strength to what is best for him. That
no force of tradition, no rule of restraint,
no bait of a degree should swerve anyone
from his own educational path. As
Professor Anderson has said: "The way
to educate a man is to set him at work:
the way to get him to work is to interest
him : the way to interest him is to vitalize
his task by relating it to some form of
reality ". No man was ever well trained
whose own soul was not wrought into the
process. No student was ever brought
to any worthy work except by his own
consent.
So the University must not drive but
lead. For in the long run should it ever
lead, for the training of the will is ef
fected by the exercise of self-guidence.
The problem of human development is
to bring men into the right path by their
own relization that it is good to walk
therein.
The student must feel with every
day's work that it has some place in the
formation of his character. His char
acter he must form for himself, but
higher education gives him the mater
ials. His character gathers consecra
tion as the work goes on if he can see
for himself the place of each element in
his training. Its value lis has tested
and he knows that it is good, and its re
sults he learns to treasure accordingly.
Individualism in education is no dis
covery of our times. It was by no
means invented at I'alo Alto, neither
was it born at Harvard, nor in Michi
gan. The need of it is written in the
heart of man. It has found recognition
wherever the "care and culture" of man
has been taken seriously.
A Japanese writer, Uchimura, says
this of education in Old Japan : "We
were not taught in classes then. The
grouping of soulbearing human beings
into classes, as sheep upon Australian
farms, was not known in our old
schools. Our teachers believed, I think
instinctivelv, man persona is unolassi
liable, that lie must l>e dealt vvitli per
sonally, i.e., face to face, and soul to
soul. So they schooled us one by one,
each according to bin idiosvncraeies,
physical and mental and spiritual.
They knew everyone of us by his name.
And as asses were never harnessed
with horses, there was but little danger
•of the latter being beaten down into
stupidity, or the former driven into
valedictorians' graves. In this respect,
therefore, our old-time teachers in Japan
agree with Socrates and Plato in their
theory of education.
"So naturally the relation between
teachers and students was the closest
one possible. We never called our
teachers by that unapproachable name,
professor. We called them Sensei, men
■born before, so named because of their
prior birth not only in respect of the
time of their appearance in this world,
which was not always the case, but also
■of their coming to the understanding of
the truth.
"It was this our idea of relationship
between teacher and student which
made some of us to comprehend at once
the intimate relation between the mas
ter and the disciples which we found in
the Christian Bible. When we found
written therein that the disciples is not'
above his master, nor the servant
above his lord ; or that the good shep
herd giveth his life for his sheep, and
other similar sayings, we took them al
most instinctively as things known to
us long before."
Thus it was in old Japan. Thus
should it be in new America. In such
manner do the oldest ideas forever re
new their youth when these ideas are
based not on tradition nor convention,
but in the nature of man.
The best care and culture of man is
not that which restrains his weakness
but that which gives play to his
strength. We should work for the
positive side of life. To get rid of vice
and folly is to let strength grow in their
place.
The great danger in Democracy is the
seeming predominance of the weak.
The strong and the true seem to be
never in the majority. The politician
who knowns the signs of the times
understands the ways of majorities. !
He knows fully the weakness of the j
common man, In justice, violence,
fraud and corruption are all expressions J
of this weakness. These do not spring
from competition but from futile efforts |
to stifle competition. Competition!
means fair play. Unfair play is the
confession of weakness.
The strength of the common man our
leaders do not know. Ignorant, venal
and vaciliatinir the common man is,
at his worst but he is also earnest, in
telligent and determined. To know
him at his best is the essence of states
manship. His power for good may be
used us well as his power for evil, It
was this trust of thecomman man that
made the statesmanship of Lincoln.
And under such a leader the common
man ceases to be common. To know
strength is the secret of power. To
work with the best in human nature is
to have the fates on your side. He who
strikes as they strike has the force of
infinity in his blows. He who defies
them wields a club of air.
"A flaw in thought an inch long,"
says a Chinese poet, "leaves a trace of
a thousand miles." If collective action
is to be safe, the best thought of the
best men must control it. It is the
ideal of statesmanship to bring these
best thoughts into unison. The flaw in
the thoughts of each one will be cor
rected by the clear vision of others.
And this order and freedom, clear vision
and clean acting we have the right to
expect from you. Knowledge is power,
because thought is convertible into ac
tion. Ignorance is weakness, because
without clearness of purpose action can
never be effective.
The best political economy is the care

and culture of men. The best-spent
money of the present is that which is
used for the future. Tiie force which
is used on the present is spent or wasted.
That which is used on the future is re
paid with compound interest. It is for
you to show that effort for the future of
which you are the subjects is not
wasted effort. That you will do so we
have no shadow of doubt.
If its influence on you and you only
were the whole of the life of the Uni
versity we love it would be worth all it
has cost. The money and the effort, the
faith and devotion these halls have seen
would not be wasted. It will abide in
the hearts of men, and so long as Cali
fornia shall live, the Leland Stanford
Jr. University will be justified in you.
You are her children—first-born and it
may be best-loved—and in the ever
widening circle of vour work she shall
rejoice. For your influence will be
positive and therefore effective. You
will stand for the love of man and the
love of truth. No one can love man
aright who does not love truth better.
And in the end these loves are alike in
essence.
To the care and culture of men and
women this University has been dedi
cated. As I said to you when we came
together so I say to you again :
"The Golden Age of California begins
when its gold is used for purposes like
this. From such deeds must rise the
new California of the coming century,
no longer the California of the gold
seeker and the adventurer, but the
abode of high-minded men and women,
trained in the wisdom of the ages, and
imbued with the love of nature, the
love of men, and the love of God. And
bright indeed will be the future of our
State if, in the usefulness of the Univer
sity, every hope and prayer of the
founders shall be realized."
The foundation of a Univsrsity as
Professor Howard has told us, may be
an event greater in the history of the
world than the foundation of a State.
By its life is it justified. The State at
the best exists fur the men and women
that compose it. Its needs can never
be the noblest, its aims never the high
est because it can never rise above the
present. Its limit of action is that
which now is. The University stands
for the future. It deals with the possi
bilities of men, with the strength and
virtue of men which is not yet realized.
Its foundation is the co-operation of the
strong. Its function to convert weak
ness into strength. The Universities of
Europe have shaped the civilization of
the world. The Universities of the
world will shape the growth of man so
long as civilization shall abide.
