# 1913 CLASS RECEIVES DEGREES AT COMMENCEMENT ASSEMBLY
## President Jordan Addresses New Graduates on "The Conquest of Europe by America." 
### 
Two hundred and seven students were awarded the Bachelor of
Arts Degree by President David Stu rr Jordan in the Assembly Hull tills
morning. Two were granted the Bachelor of Laws Degree, while
thirty-five were given the Master of Arts Degree. In addition to these
the Academic Council also awarded three Engineer, thirteen .luris Doc
tor of Philosophy Degrees. The Co miuencemnet address preceded the
presenting of the sheepskins, *Th e Conquest of Europe by America,"
wsis the subject of the strong address delivered by Doctor Jordan.

I wish this morning to say a serious
word to you as citizens of the great
republic and as future leaders in its
thought and action. I wish you to
think earnestly of the part American
influence must play in the world his
tory of our century. It is for us to
help cure the accumulated evils of
the older civilization. Those men in
Europe who look furthest into the
future hope for the salvation of
Europe through ideals brought back
from practical service in America.
One of these. Senator La Fontaine of
Brussels, has given me my title as the
expression of the hope of his life,
"The Conquest of Europe by America."
I hasten to say that 1 do not mean
conquest by force of arms, for 1 have
no interest in such conquests and no
belief that victories thus won result in
any permanent good to any nation.
Nor do I mean financial conquests,
the floating of imperial loans or the
permeation of any part of European
business by financiers from the New
World. Still less do I celebrate a
shoppers' contest on the Place de
I'Opera or among the dazzling bar
gains of the Hon Marche. Nor does
the trail of American tourists who
cross with gold the palms of Europe's
servitors, all the way from Piccadilly
to the Pyramids awaken in me any
pride of nation or of race. The only
permanent conquest is that of ideas.
America stands, has always stood, for
two ideals from which she cannot
escape, for they are fundamental in
her origin and in her growth. These
are internationalism and democracy,
and these ideals being invincible
must conquer America, and through
her, reconquer Europe. And as both
are incompatible with war, their final
triumph marks the end of spoliation,
of and of that relation be
tween nations which breeds suspicion
and hatred. The conquest of the
world by the ideals of International
ism and Democracy marks the coming
of universal peace.
In the address at Baltimore in 1911,
Henri La Fontaine of Brussels, the
veteran prophet of International Life,
used these striking words.
"Emigration perhaps more than
war has deprived the old, historic
countries of their most energetic and
fittest ones to build the progressive
and wealthy people you are on this side
of the Atlantic. You are for us
Europeans, the beloved Brotherland,
Do not forget that Europe is always

and will still remain for you the be
loved Motherland. Europe is now for
America what Greece was for Europe.
Europe has liberated (Ireece. Amer
ica has to liberate Europe from its
burdens, its prejudices, its hatreds.
It is your duty, it is your highest duty
to reconcile outside your borders the
people you have reconciled within
your borders. For indeed the Amer
ican people is at present the true
international people. It is the elect
people which alone can further inter
nationalism and can transform all of
the people of the Earth into a family
of nations, a brotherhood of men, an
international people." "For coloniza
tion is not mainly done by men and by
capital, but also by ideas, by example,
by experiment."
Not Always True to Ideals
We may freely admit in the begin
ning that America has not always been
true to her own ideals, and that she
has not always clearly seen her own
future. She has had her own lapses,
moral and social, some of these be
cause of associations with Europe and
through imitation of glories alien to
her history. If she had been true to
herself she would never have known
a single foreign war. She has no part in
those greeds and jealousies of money
or of race which still keep up turmoil
in Europe. Her war with Spain with
its eagerness for exploitation, its
tinsel imperialism and its pride of
participation in "world politics" rep
resents the worst of these lapses, and
its evil effects are long in passing.
But though the inception of this affair
was European in method, its contin
uance has been characteristically
American. Instead of exploitation, we
have brought to the Philippines educa
tion and sanitation. We have expend
ed on them a hundred times what we
have received, and if ever imperilism
can be respectable we have made it so.
Another false movement has been
in the building of warships and forts
in America. This lacks the motive
for similar extravagances in Europe,
because the peace of the new world is
no where threatened. But with us as
everjwhere the military spirit grows
with the money spent on it. The more
mouths fed by the State the greater
the clamor for the feeding of still
more. We have also to reckon with
the desire for giant decoration, for
big navies for sheer bigness' sake, the
feeling that this is the richest and'
most progressive nation on the globe,

and that as such she can beat old
Europe at her own game even though
that game be not worth the candle.
But with all lapses and delinquin
cies the fact of internationalism and
the ideal of democracy have been and
must always remain with the United
States, and from the United States
these ideals will react with greater
and greater force on the thoughts and
deeds of Europe.
Internationalism is the heritage of
America, not of choice at first, but cf
necessity. She has perforce grown
up with this ideal, because no other
was possible. She became the cosmo
politan nation of the world because
of her complex origin and with this
origin she could be nothing else. In
a new civilization, in the struggles of
the frontier each man is rated for
what he is worth. Under these condi
tions no one cares for the petty pre
cedences of rank or race. What a
man can do in the next twenty-four
hours outvalues any question as to
who were his ancestors.
All Hate Dies
On a railway train not long ago
some one was overheard to say: "This
is the land where all hate dies. My
father was German; my mother was
French. What do I care for all that?
I am an American. The old hatreds
and rivalries are nothing to me."
America was English, first. In lang
uage, in spirit, in conscience and in
government it is England which domi
nates. For the English race, above
all others, with its adaptation for co
operation and for compromise is the
builder of free states.
It was the chosen among the Eng
lishmen of three centuries ago who
founded the germ colonies of Virginia
and Massachusetts May. In the fol
lowing years it has been the like
minded from their own nation and
from others who have crossed the seas
to enter into their work.
The first who came were the bold,
the free, the self-ruling, the pleasure
scorning element of English life. They
came to escape from the state
church and the church-state, that they
might worship in their own fashion
and according to dictates of their indi
vidual consciences.
They detested the law of primogeni
ture which thrust the spirit of pre
cedence into the bosom of every fam
ily. They abhorred the law of entail
which burdened the land with the
curse of privilege even to unborn gen
erations.
They had caught from France the

spirit of liberty, equality, fraternity,
but as befits the calmer blood of the
north, they gave this spirit a con
structive interpretation, and the idea
of equality was to them especially rich
in practical results. Equality before
the law, equal access to land, to edu
cation, to professions and trades,
. equal access to legislat ion, each of
these conceptions broadened out into
the spirit of democracy.
And after England came to other
nations of Europe, each with its own
part and in its own degree giving its
contingent of free-born men, the ad
| mixture of blood gave strength and
! versatility to the rising nation.
But withal, the dominant note is
English still, with as many diver-
I gences from the England of today as
j from the England of the Stuarts.
In later years other immigration has
come, not alone the bold in search of
adventure, of new homes and new free
doms, but the weak and the oppressed,
"the beaten men of the beaten races,"
who llee from war taxation in search
of living wages and of daily bread.
But all these are cast into the same
melting pot and in most of them there
arises a clear response to the call of
free institutions.
In this melting pot of America, all
the old racial antipathies disappear
and all hereditary hatreds. There is
110 final distinction of British or Ger
j man, of French or Italian, of Spanish
|or Slav, of Dutch or Scandinavian,
!or of Jew or Gentile. The average
| American is as cosmopolitan in origin
j and relationship as is royalty in
Europe, though for a different set of
| reasons. But in America there is 110
[ distinction of common or noble, of
high or low, of aristocracy, bour
j geoisie or proletariat except as these
| are artificially emphasized in the in
dustrial strife we have inherited from
Eu rope.
To the international mind of Amer
ica, there seems 110 need or pertinence
to an Anglo-Saxon alliance as against
any other people. In so far as such
alliance is desirable or humanly pos
sible it exists already in a common
sympathy and a common literature, ft
would lie weakened by a stated agree
ment of the Anglo-Saxon group to
swell each others Meets with dread
naughts. The true bond of Union of
the Greater Britain involves no rup
ture with the Greater Germany, or the
Greater France or the Greater Scandi
navia to which we in America likewise
claim allegiance.
To the American, "Pan-Germanism,"
Pan-Slavism," as lie hears these ex
pounded seem a meaningless return to
ideals of tlie Middle Ages. They re
mind him of the Holy Roman Empire,
which never was, and should never be,
or still more they hark back to Pan-
Islamism the futile dream of the light
ing Turk.
There is nothing in aggrandizement
of race as such which appeals to the
American, the child of all European
races. That such races are ennobled
by conquest of lesser tribes and by
their undigested exploitation he does
not believe. To the American even
England's greatness does not exist on
her Indian Empire, but rather in spite
of it.
Within the last forty years there lias
grown up a new world in Europe and
in the range of civilization. The old
conception of the states of Europe
as opposed to one another and mutu
ally destructive must, pass away in the
broader aspects of civilization.
The growth of International life is
one of the most striking aspects of
this new relation. The extention of
travel, the spread of commerce, the
achievements of science, the exchanges
in education, all these tend to make
a great "melting pot" of the civilized
world. Neither in his business, in his
pleasures, nor in his intellectual pur
suits is the educated man anywhere
limited to any one country. All
rational human interests are con
nected by interlocking bonds of many
kinds, joining one people with another.
The hundreds of international con
gresses held every summer the world
over and covering almost every gen
eral interest of men is the strongest
possible evidence of this Interlocking,
and all this constitutes an inter
national bond not to be lightly severe.!.
A declaration of war between nations
is now little less than an attack on
civilization in all its most cherished
aspects, social, moral, as well as finan
cial. The lines of national policy
taken for granted half a century ago
are fast becoming impossible, their
very suggestion being ruinous.
I'c ideiicj toward < oix'ilintion
The influence of America tends to
wards international conciliation. It
involves the recognition of men as
men, each valued for what he is or
wlnit tie can do. Both of these deter
mined, of course, by bis blood and his
education, but not to be judged in ad
vance by any wholesale distinctions.
This is the spirit of the Interna
tionale, the common life and common
sympathy among civilized people, re
gardless of national boundaries. This
International life constitutes the final
and lasting basis of International
Peace.
As the history of America rests on
internationalism so is her social fab
ric built on democracy. Historically
her democracy has a double origin. Its
theory was French, its practice was
English. The French philosophers
furnished the one, the reaction against
British methods the other.
For inequality before the law is the
foundation of the polity of Great
Britain. Her constitution stands on
privilege. Her social customs rest on
precedence of classes, precedence of
individuals. England chooses her lords
and magnates, her patrons and tyrants
long before they are born. These be
long to her system of privilege by
which cities like Westminster, Shef
field, Davenport, Arundel, were so
long held, virtually tax-free, by men
whose ancestors received their land as
royal gifts or bought tlieni as cow
pastures. The law of favor rises above
the law of justice.

Hut men of the pioneer type, the
Roundhead, the Pilgrim, the Puritan,
the American have hated favor and
privilege and precedence of every
form. The toll of tin 1 rich and the dole
of the poor are alike offensive to them.
And this dislike of overreaching and of
coddling has passed over to their de
scendents. John Hay once said of the
people of the new state of Ohio. "They
looked to no one as their superiors,
and on none as their inferiors. They
knew 110 want they could not them
selves satisfy," and to this Senator
Bayard added the further note, "They
were too self-willed and independent
to allow any to rule over them but
t heniselves."
This in a word is the spirit of de
mocracy, of the democracy of the
pioneer if you like, but America is the
land of pioneers, and this fact still in-

11 uences all her acts unci her insti
tutions. Her people find their polit
ical ideals in an equal start with equal
opportunity, in equality before the
law, in equal access to education, in
equal access to the land, in equal ac
cess to legislation.
The nation is built on individuals
each responsible for himself. The
state is a mutual adjustment for their
collective benefit. The individual in
America does not live for the state, is
not the property of the state, the state
has no control over him except that
which the individual lias delegated. It
is no duty of the state to promote his
prosperity or the prosperity of his
group. The state is rather the umpire
which decides questions of justice, the
servant by which the needs of the
many are met by co-operation in so far
as these needs are general and conson
ant, with ideals of justice.
As the founders of our state were
frontiersmen scattered far and wide,
without cities, without corporations,
without great collective utilities, their
democracy became that of individual
ism. The demands of society, of col

leetive action, of national power were
little considered because such de
mands did not exist, and they have
never existed in the forms in which
hhirope knows them. And for this
reason, if for no other, the native
American lias not been strongly at
tracted to the various doctrines called
socialism in 13uropi. Like conditions
produce like results, and the growth
nl' industrialism with its successes and
its oppressions brings the same re
action as in Furope. But as a matter
of fact, those who take part in these
reactions are for the most part re
cent immigrants, whoso ideals of gov
ernment even in democracy are collec
tive, standing in strong contrast with
tho individualistic democracy native
to the soil.
Fifty year. - , ago, in lsC!, Fdouard
Laboulaye published bis renrirkable

hook "Paris <>n Amerique," (Paris in
America.) Its motive was to show
what a great city might become under
the conditions of freedom which pre
vailed in America. The America was
idealized of course. It, represented
the noblest ideals of free-born men,
rather than the actual America, the
forces of democracy must strive with
all the other forces extant in modern
civilization.
j The influence of this volume was
wide spread and long continued. It
was my fortune to know two men of
power, the one a Dane, the other a
Swiss who were drawn to America by
the charm of Laboulaye and who were
not disappointed. They found what
they sought, and this is a perennial
characteristic of the republic. Who
ever comes to America and with what
ever motive will find what he seeks.
If he remains long enough and has
penetration to look below the surface
I he will find America.
If one seeks religious freedom he
will find it. Our fathers provided for
that. Whatever form or type of re
ligious discipline he seeks he will find

accordingly, I>ut its discipline is vol
untary not enforced by the state. If
one would escape from all religious in
fluence he can do so in America. It is
for him to choose.
If one seeks for class distinction, for
domination of the great over the small,
hereditary or otherwise, he will find it
in personal and local only, not
wrought into the fabric of society. If
one would find privilege enthroned
even as in Europe he will find it in
America, just as powerful as in
Europe, Imi everywhere surrounded
by an equally powerful movement of
insurgency. If one would find greed,
selfishness, lust, vanity, tolerance,
anything which belongs to the dregs
of humanity, he will find it in America,
and it may be embodied in powerful
and defiant institutions. For freedom
guarantees only freedom, and the
meaning of freedom is opportunity.
In Laboulaye's work, the official
Napoleonic view, which "Paris in
America" takes as its point of depar
ture is thus expressed. "A society
without administration, without army,
without police, with the savage liberty
of praying, speaking, writing, acting
each in his fashion would not last a
quarter of an hour. It is the negation
of all these principles, of all the con
ditions of this civilization which
makes the unity of our French nation.
In constituting our administration,
hierarehal and centralized, the wis
dom of our fathers lias long since
raised France to the first rank and
shown to the French people that
Liberty is Obedience, then is our Glory
and our Force."
Ketcrse 01 Napoleon's Ideals
The distinctive character of the
American ideals reverses this. It is
the building up of a society in which
the government stands only for jus
tice. The state does not concern itself
with right, worship or wrong worship,
with right thinking or wrong think
ing, with writing truth or writing
falsehood, with right acts or words or
ceremonies, except as abuse of liberty
may infringe on the liberty of others.
"I'ne societe sans administration,
sans armee, sans gendarmes, avec
la liberie sauvage de prier. de ponser,
de parler, d'ecrire, d'agir. chacun a
sa facon ne durerait pas 1111 quart
d'heure. ("est la negation de tons ces
principcs, de toutes les conditions de
cette civilisation qui fait I'unite dp la
nation francaise. En constituant
notre administration bierarchis.ee et
centralised, la sagesse de 110s peres a
depuis longtemps eleve la France a
premier rang et appris aux Francais
<pie la liberte ("est l'obeissance. C'est
la notre glorie et notre force."
The state is not pious, benevolent,
virtuous, generous, because these per
sonal virtues, cannot be exercised by
officialism leads to their abuse.
Privilege to the poor means privilege
to the rich; privilege to the rich
means privilege to the poor, but al
ways the more powerful arm secures
the greater privilege. The essence of
democracy is that no one. rich or
poor should have a lease on privilege.
The wealth of the republic does not
rest on its great sweep of prairies,
its mines or its commerce. Its primal
source is in its free schools, and its
freedom of choice of trade or profes
sion. The results of this freedom
can be measured in money as well as
in power. Now as ever, "America
means opportunity," opportunity for
each man and woman to prepare for
the work he can do best, opportunity
for each to find his place in life, op


I'IIESIDKXT DAVID KTAitlt .lOUD \ X
portunity for the work that neeils to
be done to find the man who can do it.
It is for each man to plan his own
career, to make his rwn escape "from
status to contract." The democracy
of America can acknowledge no mas
sters save of its own creation and the
power that makes these is adequate
to set them aside.
While every conception In Europe
has its reflex in America, while every
idea of administration from absolut
ism to anarchy finds its earnest advo
cates, none of these seem likely to
displace the fundamental ideal of
democratic individualism developed by
the fathers of the republic. This ideal
was expressed by Lincoln and long be
fore him by Anstolle. It is the function
of the state to establish justice among
men and to perform those acts of com
mon necessity, contributing to the pre
servation and enjoyment of human life
which collective action can accomp
lish better than private effort. Fur
ther than that, democracy which is
simply enforced co-operation should
not go, and by this principle, that no
theory of government should be
pushed beyond the consideration of its
practical results, the republic escapes
the choice of any single one among
the hundreds of remedies for political
ills. There is 110 possibility of the
adoption of anarchism, socialism, col
lectivism or individualism or any
other system as an exclusive and ex
cluding finality. The people of Amer
ica are interested in actual results
rather than any form of logical neces
sity as a ground for political action.
The Test of Solidarity
The test of national solidarity may
be found in its freedom from the need
of force or authority in the conduct of
its affairs. Let us imagine if we can,
a catastrophe which should remove
from the United States every repre
sentative of coercive power, every offi
cial of whatever rank from the Presi
dent to the last notary public, every
representative of army or of navy, or
of church, every policeman, every
authority of whatever kind.
Such a loss might create wied
spread bewilderment or profound
sorrow. It would have no relation to
anarchy. Except among certain un
assimilated foreign populatipns in
large cities it would lead to no
violence, to no riots. The functions
of national life would go on as before.
One by one communities would come
together and provide for the election
of officers. It was said that the death
of Lincoln gave a new proof of how
"republics live, not by a single life
but the right divine of man, the mil
lion trained to be free."
I.ret us apply the same test to other
nations. 111 the France of Napoleon
111, we are assured that without force,
society would not endure "for a quar
ter of an hour." What would be the
result in Germany today? No one can
tell. The German is endlessly patient,
even under needless burdens. What
would he do, if burdens were all sud
denly thrown off, if "Strengstens Ver
boten," the motto of Prussian rule
were suddenly found to have no force
behind it?
The lesson of democracy is therefore
the lesson of the United States. It is
no new lesson. The people of the
United States are merely European
people who have had some additional
experience, have learned some things
in their travels, perhaps forgetting

Patterson Dana Nowell Tulare
Frank Herbert Richey Tipton, Ind.
Edga r Clarence Smith Azusa
Homer Roberts Spence Alameda
GRAPHIC ART
Ethel Ora Qardin Salinas
James Leo Duff Menlo Park
fErnest P»ruce Nelson San Jose
Louise Rider Watsonville
Stella Belle Sankey Clearfield, Pa.
Cordelia Madison Smith Venice
MATHEMATICS
Sydnie Aileen Gardner Orange
Dorothy Marian Hindle Del Mar
Julia R. Johnson Aberdeen, Wash.
Ralph Matthews Noble Galesburg, 111.
Margaret Marion Steele San Jose
Mary Hilda Volkmor Whittier
APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Grace Raymond Helmick Helena, Mont.
CHEMISTRY
George Henry Beurhaus Tacoma, Wash.
Hector Crandall San Francisco
fEdwin Reginald Harding San Bernardino
fPaul Mark Levy San Francisco
Hugh Harold Mosher San Jose
Robert Lindley Murray Palo Alto
+Zeno Ostenberg.. San Jose
Alfred Liles Phillips Santa Cruz
PHYSICS
Herbert Rovell Benham McKittrick
Francis Sitwell Pratt Ontario
Albert John Scholl, Jr Los Angeles
Ruth Sceley Los Gatos
Glen Miller Smyth Salt Lake City-, Utah
Guy Carleton Swan Lawrence, Mass.
Devi Dyal Virmani Bahawalpore, India
Waldo Ralph Waelty Santa Clara
William Irvin Weaver Colorado Springs, Colo.
BOTANY
Taylor Jay Blethen Portland, Ore.
Arthur Dickie Borden Palo Alto
Ollis Willard Newman Santa Barbara
Frank Jason Smiley Fresno
PHYSIOLOGY AND HISTOLOGY
Albert Gordon Bower Salt Lake City, Utah
Roscal Leroy Draper Arroyo Grande
Florence Edetha Dunlop Vale, Ore.
George Stevenson Holcman Riverside
Leonard R. Jenkins Ogden, Utah
Merton James Price San Francisco
Karl Ludwig Schaupp Santa Rosa
John Philip Stricklcr San Diego
fCharles Ernest von Geldern San Francisco
*Carleton Wolsey Washburne Sierra Madre
fClyde T. Wetmore Hollister
Robert William Wilcox Delta, Colo.
fElsa Will Rochester, N. Y.
ZOOLOGY
Clara Crosby Santa Cruz
Mary 1* isk Los Angeles
ENTOMOLOGY AND BIONOMICS
Leroy Childs Redlands
fWarren Locke Smith Ferndale
Verne Genoa Stevens Palo Alto
GEOLOGY AND MINING
Robert Edwin Anderson San Francisco
Harry Mayo Andreen Redwood City
fCarl Hugh Beal Palo Alto
Edward Burke Corbet San Francisco
Waldemar Fenn Dietrich San Francisco
Benjamin Edward Erb Chemainus, B. C.
Andrew Douglas Fyfe Oceanside
fWilliam Conrad Gehrmann Davenport, la.
Mortimer Louis Hall Pasadena
Harold Briggs Hannibal San Jose
Olaf Pitt Jenkins Stanford* University
Grover Berner Lantz Colton
tßernard Harold Lasky San Francisco
*Robcrt James McCann Pacific Grove
fHarvey Wright Parmelee Santa Barbara
*Alonzo William Peake Los Angeles
Arthur E. Remington Watertown, N. Y.
*Edwin John Stewart Los Angeles
CIVIL ENGINEERING
Charles Edward Beechcr Monrovia
Edwin Prcscott Bly Los Angeles
I von Clay Briggs San Francisco

some others equally important. In
like manner the choicest thoughts and
worthiest ideals of America are
thoughts and ideals long before treas
ured by the advanced minds of Europe.
Another lesson from America is that
of the effective federation. The United
States is composed of fortliy-eight
self-governing states, each an entity
within itself managing its own affairs,
with its own officials and its own
laws, controlled by the nation in those
interests only which it shares with
its sister states. Some of these states
are as populous and wealthy as the
Kingdom of Europe, but each is a
jurisdiction, not a power. None can
make war alone, either by force of
arms or force of tariffs. While there
is all machinery for settling disputes
between states such disputes never
arise, because no state has the right
to use its force to promote private
business.
Stilts Equality
The states in a federal union meet
as jurisdictions. The small ones have
no fear of the large ones, and those
not touching the sea suffer in no way
from their restricted position. A
"Power" hampered as is the state of
Illinois would chafe against its limita
tions, and its jingoes would talk of
fighting their way to the ocean. But
viewed as a jurisdiction, surrounded by
similar jurisdictions, the people of
Illinois have no consciousness of limi
tation.
And this should be our ultimate con
ception of a nation. Its boundary line
should represent merely the limit of
jurisdiction. That jurisdiction ceases
does not imply need of violence be
tween the people on the two sides nor
require fortification for the purpose
of repelling violence. The Canadian
boundary is an example of this meet
ing of nations not as powers but as
jurisdictions.
This four-thousand-mile line, rang
ing through all kinds of territory and
all sorts of conditions, disputed nearly
all the way "with all the brutal frank
ness common to blood relations," has
for nearly a hundred years not known
a fortress, a soldier, a warship or a
gun. It is a peace boundary, the limit
of the jurisdiction of one self-govern
ing nation, the beginning of that of
another. It lacks but one thing to
make it ideally perfect, the re
moval of the custom-house, the em
blem of national suspicion and greed,
the remnant, of the days when it was
considered good economics for a na
tion to "have its taxes paid by for
eigners."
Europe in Turmoil
Viewed as "great powers" devoted
to the exploitation of the wealth of
other regions the leading nations of
Europe are in constant turmoil. The
German empire for example, is hamp
ered on every side. Her scant sea
coast is split in two by the presence
of Denmark. Her German Rhine dis
charges itself through Holland. The
ports of Amsterdam, Rotterdam, Ant
werp and Ostend, geographically her's,
are occupied by alien people whom she
could crush out in a moment, were it
not. for the physical force of the rest
of Europe and the moral power of the
world. Of Poland, she has too much
or too little. A large part of the Ger
man people live in the alien empire of
Austro-Hungary and in the republic
of Switzerland, while after forty years
of possession, Germany scarcely owns
Alsace or Lorraine. The states are a
thorn in the side of the empire, a bur
den and a weakness, just so long as
their two millions of people are held in
semi-vassalhood by the rule of force.
A free republic of Alasace Lorraine, a
second Swithzerland, half-German,
half-French separating and joining
two great nations would be a strength
and an inspiration to both. The true
gateways of the Rhine held by the
power of blood and iron is a centre
of menace to civilization. For the
wrong done at the Treaty of Frank
fort forty years ago, Europe has had to
pay most dearly for it is around the
question of Alsace-Lorraine that half
the crushing armament of Europe has
been built up. She is hemmed in
everywhere by the scare of old strugg
les, to her perennial discomfort. For
this reason, she suffers from the
"Drang nach Osten," she seeks a road
to the Persian gulf, an empire over
seas, and every form of imperial ex
tension to lands "under the sun,"
which may for the moment seem
plausible or possible.
But Germany as a jurisdiction suf
fers none of these limitations. Her
powers are only those which are
needed for the people's good. They
are merely her public duties. It mat
ters noting that her sway is checked
on almost, every side before it reaches
the sea. Other jurisdictions inter
vene, and each of these looks after
the public needs of man, which are
mostly justice, conservation, educa
tion, sanitation, and peace. As one of
the "Great Powers" of the world, Ger
many (with her fellow states as well)
is a center of friction, injustice and
unrest.
"A Power" is u Menace.
As a jurisdiction Germany is busy
with profitable and constantly ad
vancing industries, with an admir
able system of education and exten
sive provision for all the people's
needs, and no enlargement of boun
daries could in the least increase her
usefulness, her wealth or her happi
ness. As "a power" Germany is a
menace to the well being of civiliza
tion as every other "power" of similar
nature must be in its degree For
the prosperity of every people de
pends on international peace, and
all power-manifestations are either
actual or potential war. War is a
form of world-sickness from which
every function of civilization suffers,
and most of all those bonds of com
mon thought and common interest
sumed up in internationalism. And
to the members of an international
state, German in blood and in sym
pathy as well as English, all these
destructive rivalries of state with
state seem mediaeval and unworthy.
There is, in fact, something primitive,
outworn and unprogressive in the
spectacle of a civilized nation com
posed of millions of clever people
trusting for its defense to forts and
ships. With all the resources of
business, of science, ef education, of
thought, to depend on force seems a
lazy, even cowardly, shirking of the
higher possibilities of national
strength. To be surrounded by armed
guards, "holding the drop" on all
Commercial rivals is not a lofty con
ception of a nations's greatness. This
attitude has been as disastrous to
England's own peace of mind as it has
been menacing to the world's welfare.
To escape from this condition is not
a matter of a day nor a generation. Tt
is not easy for America even to

Revoe Carlisle Briggs Pasadena
fFloyd Cromwell Brown Selma
fEdward James Cullen Gilroy
Harry Bascom Davis Pomona
Wilbur Harvey Doxsee Redwood City
Robert Francis Duryea Palo Alto
fClarence Bernard Goodwin Sunnyvale
fCharles Stewart Grace Rivera
John Stanley Grepe, Jr East Highlands
tNorman Marshall Ilalcombe San Francisco
George William Hawley Portland, Ore.
George Walter Hunt San Jose
Paul Eells Jeffers Los Angeles
William Aiken Laird Lindsay
Alexander Stuart Macdonald San Francisco
tßobert Patchen Miller Los Angeles
Maurice Everard Morrison Morgan Hill
fßoger Wolcott Olmsted Los Angeles
Chauncey Smith Elie, Manitoba, Canada
Thomas Joseph Spellman Colma
fßurroughs Agin Stephenson Los Altos
Harry George Todtmann Chicago, 111.
George Harlan Trask Los Angeles
Charles Ralph Tupper San Jose
Romney Leigh Vaughn San Francisco
Guss Valentine Wallach Boonville
Carlton Levi Wyant Montecito
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING
■fClarence P. Campbell Los Angeles
tWallace Rolland Finney...* Modesto
*Burdette Lord Hostettler Erie, Pa.
Kenneth Irving Marshall Los Angeles
tAugustus Mudge Sanborn Redlands
Cecil Stocker Simon Los Gatos
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
*Edward Niles Adam Melville, Mont.
Frank Edward Anderson Los Angeles
fClarence Cannon Argabrite Ventura
John Watson Fleming Armstrong....Fivemiletown, Tyrone, Ire.
Everett Morse Calderwood Palo Alto
Melville Nathaniel Clark Dayton, Me.
John Francis Cullen Gilroy
Walter Jennings Dodge Los Angeles
Charles Greenlaw Duffin Comas, Wash.
Harry Adolph Fore Campbell
Frank Julius Gleiss Los Angeles
Walter J. Hammond ! Grinncll, la.
Tomiichi Haraguchi Nagasaki, Japan
George Edward Holditch Orange
Edgar Alden Jackson Cupertino
Linford C. Lull, Jr Los Angeles
James Arthur Miller Hanford
Rea Cambridge Newman Santa Barbara
George Washington Poison Menlo Park
Gaylord Kenyon Snyder Los Angeles
fGiistav Wade Naples
George Ireland Wright Pasadena
BACHELOR OF LAWS
Jerome Devereaux Peters San Jose
Granville Numan Wood, Jr Blue Lake
MASTER OF ARTS
LATIN
Flora Anne Bagley Burlingame
fßuth Beard Modesto
Catherine Ida Birch Redlands
fAnna Shipley Cox San Jose
Mabel Harriett Usinger Berkeley
Malcolm Leland Yeary Los Angeles
GERMAN
Edward Vere Brewer Elyria, Ohio
Catharine Morris Cox San Jose
Lydia Lucilc Meyer . Milwaukee, Wis.
Clara Lydia Schaaf Fort Wayne, -Ind.
fElsie Louise Whittemore Alhambra
ENGLISH LITERATURE
Anais Julia Allen Pasadena
Walter Clyde Curry Gray-Court, S. C.
ENGLISH PHILOLOGY
Maude Cleveland Stanford University
EDUCATION
tWilliam Samuel Marten San Jose
Clarence Lucien Phelps Jamestown, Ky.
William Thomas Root, Jr Pasadena
William Roy Tanner Minneapolis, Minn.

emancipate herself from reactionary
influences in Europe. There are many
interests in a wealthy nation who find
an aid or an affinity in militarism.
Debt creates debt, and those inter
ested in spending band together
against reform.
These matters proceed by slow pro
gress, interrupted by reaction; we
are in a period of relapse at present,
when reactionary forces seem to be in
the ascendant. Hut this very fact with
its burdens and horrors may be count
ed on to turn the balance in the other
direction.
Neither will there be a formal fed
eration of nations in this era. In
deed federation in fact will come long
before it comes in name. A single
unified world-government with cen
tralized rule under one set of men at
some one place, is only a dream—and
not a cheerful dream at that. What
the world needs is more self-control,
more local responsibility not more
governmental machinery. Neverthe
less every step in removing injustice,
in eliminating sources of friction, in
extending common interests, as the
postol union, the telegraph union, in
ternational law, international police
duties, international conferences and
congresses, arbitration treaties a nd
other agreements—are steps in the di
rection of the passing of war. To this
end, three great contributing agencies
are: the growth of the popular con
science, the interlocking of personal
interests, and the ruinous expence
which the progress of science has
brought to every branch of the mili
tar art.
All this has its part in the great
movement towards common interna
tional life, "La Vie Internationale" of
the dreams of La Fontaine, a life
which shall make war impossible and
will, in time, do away with exploita
tions, with tariff barriers and with all
the products of that narrow nativism,
which considers only the purposes or
enrichment of the selfish few, the one
in-group against all the out-groups of
the world.
Value of Open Diplomacy
Another lesson which the United
States may teach is the value of open
diplomacy. A secret agreement of
any kind whatever. It was a warning
of Washington that his nation should
beware of Entangling Alliances. A
formal alliance is for the purpose of
making enemies, never of making
friends. Friendship among nations
rests on common interests, on the in
terlocking of minds, the interlocking
of trade.
In the United States a treaty can be
entered into only with the open and
public consent of the Senate. Every
international relation is therefore
open to the world. No minister, no
president, no group of men whatever
can secretly pledge the nation to any
line of action. No president, no cabi
net, no minister, no congress acting
alone can make any declaration of
public policy. For these reasons the
United States must stand outside the
tangled snare of concessions and intri
gues we call world politics. She must
play her games of diplomacy with
open hands. She cannot be the secret
friend of any other nation. She can
not be a secret enemy because all her
acts, friendly or hostile, are known to
all the world.
The secret treaty in the interest of
imperial spoliation is the bane of
Europe. It ties each foreign office to
the service of the most reckless and
greedy of its great exploiting inter
ests. It has reduced the chancelleries
of more than one nation to be nothing
more than the firm name under which
its exploiting corporations compass
their ends in Asia or in Africa.
The secret is a relic of the military
state. The civilzed world is still or
ganized on the mediaeval theory that
war is a natural function to he ex
pected in the normal course of events,
not a hideous inorau, physical;. and
financial catastrophe. la the old
theory as expounded by Machiavelli,
the king has no other business but
war. It is the duty of his ministers
to find weak places in the defenses of
other kings through which war may
be successful, and to find, after the
fact, excuses by which' war can be
justified. The secret treaty, the .con
cession to a friendly power, ithe. arti-.
ficial interference with a rival, —all
these belong to the days' of Ma<?hia
velli. If . all parties concerpe.4 ( |cojJ>ld :
come out.into the open, .Wihsre . t-het
United States is forced to stahd, we
should soon have an end to tneAttgld-
German struggle, of the rivalry be
tween the Triple Entente and the
Triple Alliance.
Outworn ideas ot' national glory, out
worn figures of.speech as tp national
purposes, outworn mediaevalism in
our -conception of the state.—all'these
find expression in the "secret treaty,"
the "entangling alliance," which is a'
chief obstacle in the way of the -con
ciliation of nations. ?>• -
Historically, the influence of Amer
ica has been exerted in opposition to
Imperialism and to infringement of
the great nations on the rights of the
sniall. This is the inception of the
Monroe Doctrine, which in spite of its
perversion and its wrong accentuation r
has protected Latin America from the
fate of Africa. That this should now
be a Pan-American, not njerely an.
American doctrine goes without say
ing. And it must never be allowed i.o
degenerate-into " a Dollar Diplomacy"
which would.reserve Tropical America
as a special "sphere of, .influence-' for
American exploitation,. For the true,
and final form of the Mojiuae.Doctrine
is found, in the Drago .Doctrine,. of the
republics of South Ameripa,, that tiie
forqe of . arms should. be used-ras.
an,instrument iu industiriul spoliation.
This the people of the United States
should adopt as• their-.own. « <
Principle Disregarded '
In a recent deciskm- of- arbitration;
the King 'of Swed'ant'laW down 'this
principle: that a nation "has 110
right to land- troops in .order-to pYe-'
serve the property or the rights of her
nationals.". This''lwinciple. ha,s '-beefr
disregarded in the •strangling of
Persia, the rape of Mongolia and of
Tibet, in the chronic robbery of
China, and in the annexation of Egypt, <
of Korea, uf Morocco and of Tripoli.
But it is for all that a just.-and honor
able principle, and it is disregarded
only when a nation, by virtue of super
ior strength or superior civilization
feels itself justified in taking posses
sion of another for its good, and inci
dentally for the commercial advant
age of its own exploitating interests.
It is true that the smaller nations of
the tropics are subject to violent
political disturbances. They have not
learned the value of liberty as regu
lated hjy law. Yet it is highly prob
able that not one in ten of these
periodical/ revolutions I's of spontan- 1
eous native origin. of them are
started for purposes of spoliation by

autside adventurer's and a large ma
jority are paid for by adventurers
'State. The Public School exists
everywhere at the public expense, and
belonging to one or more of the great
epinniarqia'ruatrojis tit', fheiear'th.. When."
'the"fi v nal' iriitli'Ts"known'"of unhappy
Mexico the responsibility for hfei' dis
(Mfer'sl will rest nht on'her martyred
president, ridr "on the' sol
"diers'of fortune by whose hands he
•fell, but on the men in New York or
in London perhaps,' whose nioiWy has
kept iliese revolutions going. Mexico,
with fatal riches of oil and gold, is not
tlie first nation to Ite torn asunder by
'conflicting ."sphere's of influence."
The. influence of the republic has
been always thrown against another
form of imperialism involved in the
phrase "Control of the Sea." America
has never claimed any such control
nor has she admitted the right to
others. It is a mediaeval idea going
back foiir hundred years to the time
when the great seas were divided be
tween Spain and Portugal. America
has stood for the open sea, the restric
tion of national jurisdiction to the
three-mile limit, the extermination of
piracy, and in iater years for the most
important doctrine of the immunity of
war. To make the high seas an open

HI STORY
Ella Wissie Beaver ...T. .Tulare
fEmrria Howse Kuno Palo Alto
George Lutes Righter '.Campbell
Francis Marion Russell .Los Angeles
MATHEMATICS
Rose Margaret Bennett »....San Diego
Amanda Westhold ..Quincy, 111:
CHEMISTRY
Alicje. .Ruth Bergcr San Jose
Elton Marion Hogg. v Saratoga
Charles Kirkton McWilliams San Joss
tWilliam John Van Sicklen Castle-ton, Ontario,,Canada
BOTANY
Charlotte Elliott Del Rapids, S. D.
BACTERIOLOGY
Frank Maltaner .Cincinnati, O.
ZOOLOGY
Josephine Louise Dows Randall Stanford University
ENTOMOLOGY
F rankie Willard Galexioo
GEOLOGY
Theodore Chapin., Los Angeles
Joseph Stanley Hook jjPerris ■
ENGINEER
CHEMICAL ENGINEERING
. Louis Wjlliam Pingree.-. ; Ogden-, Utah
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING
fDexter Simpson Kimball N. Y.
Lyman Stevenson King Oakland .
r *• . V <
JURIS DOCTOR
George Armand Ditz Stockton f-1
Maurice Timothy Dooling • Hollistter ,
fEmmet Ross Fertig Nobl.esvjlle, Ind.
fFrank Louis Guerena rs .. „Spnora
George Juan Hatfield ...Oakland-,
Frank Howard Hilton ; Portland, Ore.
Grant Holcomb San Bernardino^
Ignatius Martin Peckham tV| . San . Jose
Edmund Wright Pugh Los. (Angeles..
Alfred'Worcester Robertson Saflt? Ba,rbru:a ..
Chester Harvey Warlow : . r ., . ( Fresno,
Herbert Eustace White Saotamento^.
tFrederick feertram Wood i. . Alto.
* September 6, 1912
fjanuary 10, 1013 "O '?t it

highway-to be tr.a.ver?ed , ( afc ( anytime,-
in absolute--safety, by any, vessel what
ever would-gp/t'ar away
witji international..waff,.-and iSitill ftWH
ther in ren^.vi!),£..tlve- and dnv<-
gerous burden of naval protectioni»'l£;
all military operations.- at. sea couidibe
confined to the <oa,nnon shot.
from the. shore, the- original motive
of the three-mile limit of. jurisdiction,
it would represent one of ,the most
practical triumphs of civilization.- Ttfe
nations should join to make the ocean
safe, not to fill it with floating fort
resses designed t tp. protect merchant
ships from robbery by the very per
sons with whom they trade.
Still another lesson from. America is
one in which, we all agree; the divorce
of religion from political control and
therefore from the,domain of politics.
Absolute religions freedom exists .in
America because the state assumes
no relation of any kind to religious
corporations as such, So long as these
do not interfere with the freedom of
soul or body of men not. belonging to
them, their acts do not concern the
state. And on no, one policy is there
more firm agreement.in America* than
in the absolute separation of Church
nowhere can any sect or gpoup of seets
claim any dominating relation in re

gard to It. To the average American
the strife over Church properties and
Church interests so real in Europe
seem incomprehensible. The Church,
any church, is in every way better oif
for separation from the government.
Whatever achievement; whatever pro
gress it may make is its own, and this
progress is solid because it involves,
no ulterior political end.
Connected with the freedom of the
church is the freedom of the people
from other forms of paternalism. The
state becomes benevolent only when it
lias failed to be just. It allows special
opportunities to individuals only
where it has denied opportunity to
men at large.
The "old-age pension" is a conven
ient'illustration,.'lt has been justly
compared to- the. free pass homeward
granted to the human wrecks who
have lost their all in the. gambling
rooms of-Monte Carlo. It is the shill
ing given to the man run over by my
lord's automobile.
In a better system he would not have
been run over. He would not have
lost his money in a vile resort, lie
would not have needed an outside
pittance to carry him through old age.
Host Workers Died in War
The old-age pension exists in Eng
land as a convenient balm for inequal
ity and injustice. The best of her
workers have died in her wars/ leav
ing a weaker stock to breed from.
These have grown' up unskilled, in de
fault of the shools that make men
strong. They have grown up in the
atmosphere of the public house, sod
den with lust and beer and whisky.
They have lost the opportiiniy tljat
should be theirs, and at the end their
jfellows must be taxed to feed tliem.
The tragedy of the East End of Lon
don is no normal part of the tragedy
of Life. It is no part of the normal
America. It is no part of a nation
which has given opportunity.
Brit'in America a' new country, fresh,
unspoiled, full of life and hope, it is
possible to hctt'd' government" to its
rigid purpose, to develop opportunity
by the elimination of privilege, teacfy,.
men to lean' not on' government but
on themselves, and to aid by'fraternal '
giving those who have fallen in. tbg
prang 1 ; not "to weaken by unearned
public money those who are falling but
who can be made to stand, 'tfie wav
Up it i '">• vtc.
t)t the transgressor is hard and we
not make it eapier'ff we could;
|We' could not if we would'. To. give a..
plkh'a chance to'rise,' i'.s to allow him'
hlfbthe choice t<>Tali:" ' *';•"
1 is ! •?; . " *
foii.fession of Failure , '
■ "Tho old-age pension" .is, so- far as 1
it goes, a confession of failure of de- ■
jnocracy,. Except as a measure of'"
e |1 £r-fie.pcy, l Jts real purpose in Eng
land, it has no justification in good '
government. Clean up the. social at
mosphere, restore to the people, what ■
is rightfully theirs, and they will care, 1
rare accidents .excepted, for their own
old age.
in America tlie struggle, between '
labor and capital can never assume
the form it has in Europe. In a gov
ei nment which stands for justice, and
which is in no way occupied with
making money for its people, nor from
its People, nor in supporting exploiting
intei ests in other lauds, there is uo
visable necessity for universal col
lective ownership. Where classes do
not leally exist there is no pertinence
in the artificial distinctions of aristoc
racy, proletariat and bourgeoisie
which have been so laboriously
brought over from Europe. If these*
distinctions exist, most of us in Amer
ica belong to one single class, that of
the bourgeoisie.
There exist in America as elsewhere,
vast fortunes, disproportionate to the
ability or the efforts of those who con
trol them. But their history has been
of short duration. They are not leg
acies from an unjust past. Their or
igin belongs to the present. It is
mainly individual. Great luck, great
skill or ingeniously managed privilege
stands behind each of them. By the
same means as in Europe, by co
operation through interlocking direc
torates, these great fortunes have
been made to stand together and thus
by a process of financial suction to
build up fortunes still greater. But
one most important difference exists.
The national government, in theory
and for the most in fact, stands aloof
from these combinations. The con
trol of public affairs, even of financial
matters is beyond their permanent
reach. Their influence on foreign
diplomacy is limited because no secret
influence can control, and the power
of money for evil is mostly lost in
publicity.
Property May Rule
In all their operations, they are sur
rounded by an alert and in the long
run victorious opposition of democ
racy. In America property may rule,
but only for a time. In the earlier
•centuries of Europe, the period of
Absolutism, when monarchy was a
political power not a function of so
ciety, it was, of course, true that prop
erty ruled. But it was the ruler who
had the property. It was his by force
of position. Not until the money lend
ers of the last century secured the
strangle hold on the nations of
Europe was this condition brought to
an end.
Then again, property ruled, but it
was not that the King and the nobles
held the property. Property held
them, and in Europe today it is money
that rules, and it rules King and
peasant alike, for everything el3e
hinges on the Imperial Explotation of
foreign lands.
In America, this is true in a degree,
but the rule of money has its visible
limits. For the United States belongs
to its people.
"Dollar Diplomacy"
While Europe generally, the alliance
between financial interests and the
government is open and avowed, such
•connections in America have proved
fatal to political leaders and to polit
ical parties. The methods by which
the "powers of Europe" through their
foreign offices bolster up adventures
in foreign lands, could not be used in
America. The diplomacy of persua
sion, threats or force of arms in the
interest of private ventures would be
impossible here. The people might
consent to "Dollar Diplomacy" but
•only for a time and until its nature
is understood. The recent, repudia
tion of our relation to the "Six Power
Loan' to China will serve as a case in
point.
And here again we must admit that
out democratic conception of govern
ment has to struggle for acceptance
in America. The protective tariff in
theory and in practice is a flat viola
tion of its principles. Tt is a flat
violation of the spirit of the American
■constitution. It is privilege pure and
simple granted to the few by the
many, in the belief that in the long
run the many would profit by it. Its

purpose was to diversify industries by
letting the farmer help pay the ex
penses of the manufacturer. It has
just that effect, and the farmer and
laborer are becoming increasingly
discontented with its burdens and the
inequalities before the law which are
part and parcel of its operations.
In America, the army and navy,
though the latter has grown beyound
all reason through the rivalry from
England and Germany, still represent
a democratic ideal. We still hold to
the thought that our officers are not
rulers but servants of the people.
Our military element stands near
the parting of the ways, for all offi
cialism tends to aggrandize itself,
most of all that which is associated
with pomp and with patriotism. Mili
tarism for its own sake belongs to the
state in whoch property rules. "It
furnishes," says John A. Hobson, "a
profitable support to certain strong
vested interests. It is a decorative
element in social life and above all, it
is necessary to keep down the
pressure of the forces of internal
reform."
>o Room for Militarism
The ideals of Militarism and Democ
racy can never coexist. And this na
tion is too far given over to democ
racy ever to do more than dally with
the military ideal. In a nation that
knows no caste, and has no aristioc
racy other than temporary and self
selected, no military traditions will
ever be permanent. There can never
be a warrior caste holding special
privilege or special authority.
As a people, we of the United States
are too rich in resources of wealth, of
education and of intelligence to be
controlled by influences of militarism.
And thus and for the same reasons, in
the republic of America, the state ex
ists for the man, not the man for the
state. This is the fundamental differ
ence between the Eighteenth Century
and Twentieth. And let us speed the
day when it may be said not only that
"America means Opportunity" but
that the same hopeful word may be
spoken of Germany and England and
France and Russia and of all the na
tions in the sisterhood of civilization.
Lord Acton thus sums up the move
ment of the history of civilization:
"It is by the combined efforts of the
weak made under compulsion to re
sist the reign of force and constant
wrong that in the rapid change but
slow progress of four hundred years
liberty has been preserved and se
cured and extended and finally under
stood."
And as America comes to under
stand her own message of democracy,
internationalism and peace, she will
carry this understanding back to the
motherland of Europe.
Within the last two months Presi
dent Wilson and Mr. Bryan have
planned a most practical and effective
means of bringing American influence
to bear on the problems of World
peace.
The end in view is to relegate war
to a position of last resort in times
of international difference, to place
soldiers and dreadnaughts in the
background—not in the front of na
tional movement.
The essence of this American policy
is that in case of friction between
nations, the matter be placed for six
months in the hands of a joint high
Commission of investigation, chosen
in part from the contending nations,
the majority from friendly neutrals.
These- for six months shall study the
question at issue, neither nation in the

meantime demonstrating, mobilizing
or increasing the armament, until the
final report is made. After this each
nation is free to choose conciliation,
concession, compromise, arbitration
or war. And with six months to think
it over there will be no war. Wars are
waged for greed, for politics, or be
cause the mob has been stirred by
senseless speech or reckless journal
ism. And in many cases this reckless
journalism has been carefully cal :u
--lated and fully paid for by those in
terested in the sale of the accessories
of war.
The treaty of arbitration will natur
ally follow on the treaty for investi
gation. Courts will naturally supple
ment results of friendly offices. But
the agreement for friendly conference
comes first and is for the present the
more important. The Treaty of Arbi
tration is most valuable, — not as
preventing war, for a nation bent on
war, if there is such a case, will not
stop to agree to arbitrate. The world
is finally ruled by public opinion. Ar
bitration treaties clinch public opinion
and hold it to its duty.
The present decade has been char
acterized by needless, costly and
brutal wars, the result not of actual
conditions of today, but of blunders
and crimes committed in the past.
Wars do not spring up afresh in our
civilization. They spring from old
wars whose seeds were not destroyed
by peace.
Rut, however, dark the present out
look may seem with half the coined
money of the world spent each year
on war and war's accessories, the far
outlook is most promising. The cruel
horror of the Balkan war, the waste of
armed peace and frustrate war
throughout the civilized world, — all
these make powerfully for peace, for
real peace — the Peace of Law and
Trust, and not the Peace of Force.
And just now is the time when
American influence can be most defi
nitely crystallized and made effective.
And we are thankful that we have in
the seats of Authority at Washington
men who definitely work for peace
and whom war and war's fripperies
do not dazzle nor attract.
Two hundred and seven students were awarded the Bachelor of
Arts Degree by President David Stu rr Jordan in the Assembly Hull tills
morning. Two were granted the Bachelor of Laws Degree, while
thirty-five were given the Master of Arts Degree. In addition to these
the Academic Council also awarded three Engineer, thirteen .luris Doc
tor of Philosophy Degrees. The Co miuencemnet address preceded the
presenting of the sheepskins, *Th e Conquest of Europe by America,"
wsis the subject of the strong address delivered by Doctor Jordan.

I wish this morning to say a serious
word to you as citizens of the great
republic and as future leaders in its
thought and action. I wish you to
think earnestly of the part American
influence must play in the world his
tory of our century. It is for us to
help cure the accumulated evils of
the older civilization. Those men in
Europe who look furthest into the
future hope for the salvation of
Europe through ideals brought back
from practical service in America.
One of these. Senator La Fontaine of
Brussels, has given me my title as the
expression of the hope of his life,
"The Conquest of Europe by America."
I hasten to say that 1 do not mean
conquest by force of arms, for 1 have
no interest in such conquests and no
belief that victories thus won result in
any permanent good to any nation.
Nor do I mean financial conquests,
the floating of imperial loans or the
permeation of any part of European
business by financiers from the New
World. Still less do I celebrate a
shoppers' contest on the Place de
I'Opera or among the dazzling bar
gains of the Hon Marche. Nor does
the trail of American tourists who
cross with gold the palms of Europe's
servitors, all the way from Piccadilly
to the Pyramids awaken in me any
pride of nation or of race. The only
permanent conquest is that of ideas.
America stands, has always stood, for
two ideals from which she cannot
escape, for they are fundamental in
her origin and in her growth. These
are internationalism and democracy,
and these ideals being invincible
must conquer America, and through
her, reconquer Europe. And as both
are incompatible with war, their final
triumph marks the end of spoliation,
of and of that relation be
tween nations which breeds suspicion
and hatred. The conquest of the
world by the ideals of International
ism and Democracy marks the coming
of universal peace.
In the address at Baltimore in 1911,
Henri La Fontaine of Brussels, the
veteran prophet of International Life,
used these striking words.
"Emigration perhaps more than
war has deprived the old, historic
countries of their most energetic and
fittest ones to build the progressive
and wealthy people you are on this side
of the Atlantic. You are for us
Europeans, the beloved Brotherland,
Do not forget that Europe is always

and will still remain for you the be
loved Motherland. Europe is now for
America what Greece was for Europe.
Europe has liberated (Ireece. Amer
ica has to liberate Europe from its
burdens, its prejudices, its hatreds.
It is your duty, it is your highest duty
to reconcile outside your borders the
people you have reconciled within
your borders. For indeed the Amer
ican people is at present the true
international people. It is the elect
people which alone can further inter
nationalism and can transform all of
the people of the Earth into a family
of nations, a brotherhood of men, an
international people." "For coloniza
tion is not mainly done by men and by
capital, but also by ideas, by example,
by experiment."
Not Always True to Ideals
We may freely admit in the begin
ning that America has not always been
true to her own ideals, and that she
has not always clearly seen her own
future. She has had her own lapses,
moral and social, some of these be
cause of associations with Europe and
through imitation of glories alien to
her history. If she had been true to
herself she would never have known
a single foreign war. She has no part in
those greeds and jealousies of money
or of race which still keep up turmoil
in Europe. Her war with Spain with
its eagerness for exploitation, its
tinsel imperialism and its pride of
participation in "world politics" rep
resents the worst of these lapses, and
its evil effects are long in passing.
But though the inception of this affair
was European in method, its contin
uance has been characteristically
American. Instead of exploitation, we
have brought to the Philippines educa
tion and sanitation. We have expend
ed on them a hundred times what we
have received, and if ever imperilism
can be respectable we have made it so.
Another false movement has been
in the building of warships and forts
in America. This lacks the motive
for similar extravagances in Europe,
because the peace of the new world is
no where threatened. But with us as
everjwhere the military spirit grows
with the money spent on it. The more
mouths fed by the State the greater
the clamor for the feeding of still
more. We have also to reckon with
the desire for giant decoration, for
big navies for sheer bigness' sake, the
feeling that this is the richest and'
most progressive nation on the globe,

and that as such she can beat old
Europe at her own game even though
that game be not worth the candle.
But with all lapses and delinquin
cies the fact of internationalism and
the ideal of democracy have been and
must always remain with the United
States, and from the United States
these ideals will react with greater
and greater force on the thoughts and
deeds of Europe.
Internationalism is the heritage of
America, not of choice at first, but cf
necessity. She has perforce grown
up with this ideal, because no other
was possible. She became the cosmo
politan nation of the world because
of her complex origin and with this
origin she could be nothing else. In
a new civilization, in the struggles of
the frontier each man is rated for
what he is worth. Under these condi
tions no one cares for the petty pre
cedences of rank or race. What a
man can do in the next twenty-four
hours outvalues any question as to
who were his ancestors.
All Hate Dies
On a railway train not long ago
some one was overheard to say: "This
is the land where all hate dies. My
father was German; my mother was
French. What do I care for all that?
I am an American. The old hatreds
and rivalries are nothing to me."
America was English, first. In lang
uage, in spirit, in conscience and in
government it is England which domi
nates. For the English race, above
all others, with its adaptation for co
operation and for compromise is the
builder of free states.
It was the chosen among the Eng
lishmen of three centuries ago who
founded the germ colonies of Virginia
and Massachusetts May. In the fol
lowing years it has been the like
minded from their own nation and
from others who have crossed the seas
to enter into their work.
The first who came were the bold,
the free, the self-ruling, the pleasure
scorning element of English life. They
came to escape from the state
church and the church-state, that they
might worship in their own fashion
and according to dictates of their indi
vidual consciences.
They detested the law of primogeni
ture which thrust the spirit of pre
cedence into the bosom of every fam
ily. They abhorred the law of entail
which burdened the land with the
curse of privilege even to unborn gen
erations.
They had caught from France the

spirit of liberty, equality, fraternity,
but as befits the calmer blood of the
north, they gave this spirit a con
structive interpretation, and the idea
of equality was to them especially rich
in practical results. Equality before
the law, equal access to land, to edu
cation, to professions and trades,
. equal access to legislat ion, each of
these conceptions broadened out into
the spirit of democracy.
And after England came to other
nations of Europe, each with its own
part and in its own degree giving its
contingent of free-born men, the ad
| mixture of blood gave strength and
! versatility to the rising nation.
But withal, the dominant note is
English still, with as many diver-
I gences from the England of today as
j from the England of the Stuarts.
In later years other immigration has
come, not alone the bold in search of
adventure, of new homes and new free
doms, but the weak and the oppressed,
"the beaten men of the beaten races,"
who llee from war taxation in search
of living wages and of daily bread.
But all these are cast into the same
melting pot and in most of them there
arises a clear response to the call of
free institutions.
In this melting pot of America, all
the old racial antipathies disappear
and all hereditary hatreds. There is
110 final distinction of British or Ger
j man, of French or Italian, of Spanish
|or Slav, of Dutch or Scandinavian,
!or of Jew or Gentile. The average
| American is as cosmopolitan in origin
j and relationship as is royalty in
Europe, though for a different set of
| reasons. But in America there is 110
[ distinction of common or noble, of
high or low, of aristocracy, bour
j geoisie or proletariat except as these
| are artificially emphasized in the in
dustrial strife we have inherited from
Eu rope.
To the international mind of Amer
ica, there seems 110 need or pertinence
to an Anglo-Saxon alliance as against
any other people. In so far as such
alliance is desirable or humanly pos
sible it exists already in a common
sympathy and a common literature, ft
would lie weakened by a stated agree
ment of the Anglo-Saxon group to
swell each others Meets with dread
naughts. The true bond of Union of
the Greater Britain involves no rup
ture with the Greater Germany, or the
Greater France or the Greater Scandi
navia to which we in America likewise
claim allegiance.
To the American, "Pan-Germanism,"
Pan-Slavism," as lie hears these ex
pounded seem a meaningless return to
ideals of tlie Middle Ages. They re
mind him of the Holy Roman Empire,
which never was, and should never be,
or still more they hark back to Pan-
Islamism the futile dream of the light
ing Turk.
There is nothing in aggrandizement
of race as such which appeals to the
American, the child of all European
races. That such races are ennobled
by conquest of lesser tribes and by
their undigested exploitation he does
not believe. To the American even
England's greatness does not exist on
her Indian Empire, but rather in spite
of it.
Within the last forty years there lias
grown up a new world in Europe and
in the range of civilization. The old
conception of the states of Europe
as opposed to one another and mutu
ally destructive must, pass away in the
broader aspects of civilization.
The growth of International life is
one of the most striking aspects of
this new relation. The extention of
travel, the spread of commerce, the
achievements of science, the exchanges
in education, all these tend to make
a great "melting pot" of the civilized
world. Neither in his business, in his
pleasures, nor in his intellectual pur
suits is the educated man anywhere
limited to any one country. All
rational human interests are con
nected by interlocking bonds of many
kinds, joining one people with another.
The hundreds of international con
gresses held every summer the world
over and covering almost every gen
eral interest of men is the strongest
possible evidence of this Interlocking,
and all this constitutes an inter
national bond not to be lightly severe.!.
A declaration of war between nations
is now little less than an attack on
civilization in all its most cherished
aspects, social, moral, as well as finan
cial. The lines of national policy
taken for granted half a century ago
are fast becoming impossible, their
very suggestion being ruinous.
I'c ideiicj toward < oix'ilintion
The influence of America tends to
wards international conciliation. It
involves the recognition of men as
men, each valued for what he is or
wlnit tie can do. Both of these deter
mined, of course, by bis blood and his
education, but not to be judged in ad
vance by any wholesale distinctions.
This is the spirit of the Interna
tionale, the common life and common
sympathy among civilized people, re
gardless of national boundaries. This
International life constitutes the final
and lasting basis of International
Peace.
As the history of America rests on
internationalism so is her social fab
ric built on democracy. Historically
her democracy has a double origin. Its
theory was French, its practice was
English. The French philosophers
furnished the one, the reaction against
British methods the other.
For inequality before the law is the
foundation of the polity of Great
Britain. Her constitution stands on
privilege. Her social customs rest on
precedence of classes, precedence of
individuals. England chooses her lords
and magnates, her patrons and tyrants
long before they are born. These be
long to her system of privilege by
which cities like Westminster, Shef
field, Davenport, Arundel, were so
long held, virtually tax-free, by men
whose ancestors received their land as
royal gifts or bought tlieni as cow
pastures. The law of favor rises above
the law of justice.

Hut men of the pioneer type, the
Roundhead, the Pilgrim, the Puritan,
the American have hated favor and
privilege and precedence of every
form. The toll of tin 1 rich and the dole
of the poor are alike offensive to them.
And this dislike of overreaching and of
coddling has passed over to their de
scendents. John Hay once said of the
people of the new state of Ohio. "They
looked to no one as their superiors,
and on none as their inferiors. They
knew 110 want they could not them
selves satisfy," and to this Senator
Bayard added the further note, "They
were too self-willed and independent
to allow any to rule over them but
t heniselves."
This in a word is the spirit of de
mocracy, of the democracy of the
pioneer if you like, but America is the
land of pioneers, and this fact still in-

11 uences all her acts unci her insti
tutions. Her people find their polit
ical ideals in an equal start with equal
opportunity, in equality before the
law, in equal access to education, in
equal access to the land, in equal ac
cess to legislation.
The nation is built on individuals
each responsible for himself. The
state is a mutual adjustment for their
collective benefit. The individual in
America does not live for the state, is
not the property of the state, the state
has no control over him except that
which the individual lias delegated. It
is no duty of the state to promote his
prosperity or the prosperity of his
group. The state is rather the umpire
which decides questions of justice, the
servant by which the needs of the
many are met by co-operation in so far
as these needs are general and conson
ant, with ideals of justice.
As the founders of our state were
frontiersmen scattered far and wide,
without cities, without corporations,
without great collective utilities, their
democracy became that of individual
ism. The demands of society, of col

leetive action, of national power were
little considered because such de
mands did not exist, and they have
never existed in the forms in which
hhirope knows them. And for this
reason, if for no other, the native
American lias not been strongly at
tracted to the various doctrines called
socialism in 13uropi. Like conditions
produce like results, and the growth
nl' industrialism with its successes and
its oppressions brings the same re
action as in Furope. But as a matter
of fact, those who take part in these
reactions are for the most part re
cent immigrants, whoso ideals of gov
ernment even in democracy are collec
tive, standing in strong contrast with
tho individualistic democracy native
to the soil.
Fifty year. - , ago, in lsC!, Fdouard
Laboulaye published bis renrirkable

hook "Paris <>n Amerique," (Paris in
America.) Its motive was to show
what a great city might become under
the conditions of freedom which pre
vailed in America. The America was
idealized of course. It, represented
the noblest ideals of free-born men,
rather than the actual America, the
forces of democracy must strive with
all the other forces extant in modern
civilization.
j The influence of this volume was
wide spread and long continued. It
was my fortune to know two men of
power, the one a Dane, the other a
Swiss who were drawn to America by
the charm of Laboulaye and who were
not disappointed. They found what
they sought, and this is a perennial
characteristic of the republic. Who
ever comes to America and with what
ever motive will find what he seeks.
If he remains long enough and has
penetration to look below the surface
I he will find America.
If one seeks religious freedom he
will find it. Our fathers provided for
that. Whatever form or type of re
ligious discipline he seeks he will find

accordingly, I>ut its discipline is vol
untary not enforced by the state. If
one would escape from all religious in
fluence he can do so in America. It is
for him to choose.
If one seeks for class distinction, for
domination of the great over the small,
hereditary or otherwise, he will find it
in personal and local only, not
wrought into the fabric of society. If
one would find privilege enthroned
even as in Europe he will find it in
America, just as powerful as in
Europe, Imi everywhere surrounded
by an equally powerful movement of
insurgency. If one would find greed,
selfishness, lust, vanity, tolerance,
anything which belongs to the dregs
of humanity, he will find it in America,
and it may be embodied in powerful
and defiant institutions. For freedom
guarantees only freedom, and the
meaning of freedom is opportunity.
In Laboulaye's work, the official
Napoleonic view, which "Paris in
America" takes as its point of depar
ture is thus expressed. "A society
without administration, without army,
without police, with the savage liberty
of praying, speaking, writing, acting
each in his fashion would not last a
quarter of an hour. It is the negation
of all these principles, of all the con
ditions of this civilization which
makes the unity of our French nation.
In constituting our administration,
hierarehal and centralized, the wis
dom of our fathers lias long since
raised France to the first rank and
shown to the French people that
Liberty is Obedience, then is our Glory
and our Force."
Ketcrse 01 Napoleon's Ideals
The distinctive character of the
American ideals reverses this. It is
the building up of a society in which
the government stands only for jus
tice. The state does not concern itself
with right, worship or wrong worship,
with right thinking or wrong think
ing, with writing truth or writing
falsehood, with right acts or words or
ceremonies, except as abuse of liberty
may infringe on the liberty of others.
"I'ne societe sans administration,
sans armee, sans gendarmes, avec
la liberie sauvage de prier. de ponser,
de parler, d'ecrire, d'agir. chacun a
sa facon ne durerait pas 1111 quart
d'heure. ("est la negation de tons ces
principcs, de toutes les conditions de
cette civilisation qui fait I'unite dp la
nation francaise. En constituant
notre administration bierarchis.ee et
centralised, la sagesse de 110s peres a
depuis longtemps eleve la France a
premier rang et appris aux Francais
<pie la liberte ("est l'obeissance. C'est
la notre glorie et notre force."
The state is not pious, benevolent,
virtuous, generous, because these per
sonal virtues, cannot be exercised by
officialism leads to their abuse.
Privilege to the poor means privilege
to the rich; privilege to the rich
means privilege to the poor, but al
ways the more powerful arm secures
the greater privilege. The essence of
democracy is that no one. rich or
poor should have a lease on privilege.
The wealth of the republic does not
rest on its great sweep of prairies,
its mines or its commerce. Its primal
source is in its free schools, and its
freedom of choice of trade or profes
sion. The results of this freedom
can be measured in money as well as
in power. Now as ever, "America
means opportunity," opportunity for
each man and woman to prepare for
the work he can do best, opportunity
for each to find his place in life, op


I'IIESIDKXT DAVID KTAitlt .lOUD \ X
portunity for the work that neeils to
be done to find the man who can do it.
It is for each man to plan his own
career, to make his rwn escape "from
status to contract." The democracy
of America can acknowledge no mas
sters save of its own creation and the
power that makes these is adequate
to set them aside.
While every conception In Europe
has its reflex in America, while every
idea of administration from absolut
ism to anarchy finds its earnest advo
cates, none of these seem likely to
displace the fundamental ideal of
democratic individualism developed by
the fathers of the republic. This ideal
was expressed by Lincoln and long be
fore him by Anstolle. It is the function
of the state to establish justice among
men and to perform those acts of com
mon necessity, contributing to the pre
servation and enjoyment of human life
which collective action can accomp
lish better than private effort. Fur
ther than that, democracy which is
simply enforced co-operation should
not go, and by this principle, that no
theory of government should be
pushed beyond the consideration of its
practical results, the republic escapes
the choice of any single one among
the hundreds of remedies for political
ills. There is 110 possibility of the
adoption of anarchism, socialism, col
lectivism or individualism or any
other system as an exclusive and ex
cluding finality. The people of Amer
ica are interested in actual results
rather than any form of logical neces
sity as a ground for political action.
The Test of Solidarity
The test of national solidarity may
be found in its freedom from the need
of force or authority in the conduct of
its affairs. Let us imagine if we can,
a catastrophe which should remove
from the United States every repre
sentative of coercive power, every offi
cial of whatever rank from the Presi
dent to the last notary public, every
representative of army or of navy, or
of church, every policeman, every
authority of whatever kind.
Such a loss might create wied
spread bewilderment or profound
sorrow. It would have no relation to
anarchy. Except among certain un
assimilated foreign populatipns in
large cities it would lead to no
violence, to no riots. The functions
of national life would go on as before.
One by one communities would come
together and provide for the election
of officers. It was said that the death
of Lincoln gave a new proof of how
"republics live, not by a single life
but the right divine of man, the mil
lion trained to be free."
I.ret us apply the same test to other
nations. 111 the France of Napoleon
111, we are assured that without force,
society would not endure "for a quar
ter of an hour." What would be the
result in Germany today? No one can
tell. The German is endlessly patient,
even under needless burdens. What
would he do, if burdens were all sud
denly thrown off, if "Strengstens Ver
boten," the motto of Prussian rule
were suddenly found to have no force
behind it?
The lesson of democracy is therefore
the lesson of the United States. It is
no new lesson. The people of the
United States are merely European
people who have had some additional
experience, have learned some things
in their travels, perhaps forgetting

Patterson Dana Nowell Tulare
Frank Herbert Richey Tipton, Ind.
Edga r Clarence Smith Azusa
Homer Roberts Spence Alameda
GRAPHIC ART
Ethel Ora Qardin Salinas
James Leo Duff Menlo Park
fErnest P»ruce Nelson San Jose
Louise Rider Watsonville
Stella Belle Sankey Clearfield, Pa.
Cordelia Madison Smith Venice
MATHEMATICS
Sydnie Aileen Gardner Orange
Dorothy Marian Hindle Del Mar
Julia R. Johnson Aberdeen, Wash.
Ralph Matthews Noble Galesburg, 111.
Margaret Marion Steele San Jose
Mary Hilda Volkmor Whittier
APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Grace Raymond Helmick Helena, Mont.
CHEMISTRY
George Henry Beurhaus Tacoma, Wash.
Hector Crandall San Francisco
fEdwin Reginald Harding San Bernardino
fPaul Mark Levy San Francisco
Hugh Harold Mosher San Jose
Robert Lindley Murray Palo Alto
+Zeno Ostenberg.. San Jose
Alfred Liles Phillips Santa Cruz
PHYSICS
Herbert Rovell Benham McKittrick
Francis Sitwell Pratt Ontario
Albert John Scholl, Jr Los Angeles
Ruth Sceley Los Gatos
Glen Miller Smyth Salt Lake City-, Utah
Guy Carleton Swan Lawrence, Mass.
Devi Dyal Virmani Bahawalpore, India
Waldo Ralph Waelty Santa Clara
William Irvin Weaver Colorado Springs, Colo.
BOTANY
Taylor Jay Blethen Portland, Ore.
Arthur Dickie Borden Palo Alto
Ollis Willard Newman Santa Barbara
Frank Jason Smiley Fresno
PHYSIOLOGY AND HISTOLOGY
Albert Gordon Bower Salt Lake City, Utah
Roscal Leroy Draper Arroyo Grande
Florence Edetha Dunlop Vale, Ore.
George Stevenson Holcman Riverside
Leonard R. Jenkins Ogden, Utah
Merton James Price San Francisco
Karl Ludwig Schaupp Santa Rosa
John Philip Stricklcr San Diego
fCharles Ernest von Geldern San Francisco
*Carleton Wolsey Washburne Sierra Madre
fClyde T. Wetmore Hollister
Robert William Wilcox Delta, Colo.
fElsa Will Rochester, N. Y.
ZOOLOGY
Clara Crosby Santa Cruz
Mary 1* isk Los Angeles
ENTOMOLOGY AND BIONOMICS
Leroy Childs Redlands
fWarren Locke Smith Ferndale
Verne Genoa Stevens Palo Alto
GEOLOGY AND MINING
Robert Edwin Anderson San Francisco
Harry Mayo Andreen Redwood City
fCarl Hugh Beal Palo Alto
Edward Burke Corbet San Francisco
Waldemar Fenn Dietrich San Francisco
Benjamin Edward Erb Chemainus, B. C.
Andrew Douglas Fyfe Oceanside
fWilliam Conrad Gehrmann Davenport, la.
Mortimer Louis Hall Pasadena
Harold Briggs Hannibal San Jose
Olaf Pitt Jenkins Stanford* University
Grover Berner Lantz Colton
tßernard Harold Lasky San Francisco
*Robcrt James McCann Pacific Grove
fHarvey Wright Parmelee Santa Barbara
*Alonzo William Peake Los Angeles
Arthur E. Remington Watertown, N. Y.
*Edwin John Stewart Los Angeles
CIVIL ENGINEERING
Charles Edward Beechcr Monrovia
Edwin Prcscott Bly Los Angeles
I von Clay Briggs San Francisco

some others equally important. In
like manner the choicest thoughts and
worthiest ideals of America are
thoughts and ideals long before treas
ured by the advanced minds of Europe.
Another lesson from America is that
of the effective federation. The United
States is composed of fortliy-eight
self-governing states, each an entity
within itself managing its own affairs,
with its own officials and its own
laws, controlled by the nation in those
interests only which it shares with
its sister states. Some of these states
are as populous and wealthy as the
Kingdom of Europe, but each is a
jurisdiction, not a power. None can
make war alone, either by force of
arms or force of tariffs. While there
is all machinery for settling disputes
between states such disputes never
arise, because no state has the right
to use its force to promote private
business.
Stilts Equality
The states in a federal union meet
as jurisdictions. The small ones have
no fear of the large ones, and those
not touching the sea suffer in no way
from their restricted position. A
"Power" hampered as is the state of
Illinois would chafe against its limita
tions, and its jingoes would talk of
fighting their way to the ocean. But
viewed as a jurisdiction, surrounded by
similar jurisdictions, the people of
Illinois have no consciousness of limi
tation.
And this should be our ultimate con
ception of a nation. Its boundary line
should represent merely the limit of
jurisdiction. That jurisdiction ceases
does not imply need of violence be
tween the people on the two sides nor
require fortification for the purpose
of repelling violence. The Canadian
boundary is an example of this meet
ing of nations not as powers but as
jurisdictions.
This four-thousand-mile line, rang
ing through all kinds of territory and
all sorts of conditions, disputed nearly
all the way "with all the brutal frank
ness common to blood relations," has
for nearly a hundred years not known
a fortress, a soldier, a warship or a
gun. It is a peace boundary, the limit
of the jurisdiction of one self-govern
ing nation, the beginning of that of
another. It lacks but one thing to
make it ideally perfect, the re
moval of the custom-house, the em
blem of national suspicion and greed,
the remnant, of the days when it was
considered good economics for a na
tion to "have its taxes paid by for
eigners."
Europe in Turmoil
Viewed as "great powers" devoted
to the exploitation of the wealth of
other regions the leading nations of
Europe are in constant turmoil. The
German empire for example, is hamp
ered on every side. Her scant sea
coast is split in two by the presence
of Denmark. Her German Rhine dis
charges itself through Holland. The
ports of Amsterdam, Rotterdam, Ant
werp and Ostend, geographically her's,
are occupied by alien people whom she
could crush out in a moment, were it
not. for the physical force of the rest
of Europe and the moral power of the
world. Of Poland, she has too much
or too little. A large part of the Ger
man people live in the alien empire of
Austro-Hungary and in the republic
of Switzerland, while after forty years
of possession, Germany scarcely owns
Alsace or Lorraine. The states are a
thorn in the side of the empire, a bur
den and a weakness, just so long as
their two millions of people are held in
semi-vassalhood by the rule of force.
A free republic of Alasace Lorraine, a
second Swithzerland, half-German,
half-French separating and joining
two great nations would be a strength
and an inspiration to both. The true
gateways of the Rhine held by the
power of blood and iron is a centre
of menace to civilization. For the
wrong done at the Treaty of Frank
fort forty years ago, Europe has had to
pay most dearly for it is around the
question of Alsace-Lorraine that half
the crushing armament of Europe has
been built up. She is hemmed in
everywhere by the scare of old strugg
les, to her perennial discomfort. For
this reason, she suffers from the
"Drang nach Osten," she seeks a road
to the Persian gulf, an empire over
seas, and every form of imperial ex
tension to lands "under the sun,"
which may for the moment seem
plausible or possible.
But Germany as a jurisdiction suf
fers none of these limitations. Her
powers are only those which are
needed for the people's good. They
are merely her public duties. It mat
ters noting that her sway is checked
on almost, every side before it reaches
the sea. Other jurisdictions inter
vene, and each of these looks after
the public needs of man, which are
mostly justice, conservation, educa
tion, sanitation, and peace. As one of
the "Great Powers" of the world, Ger
many (with her fellow states as well)
is a center of friction, injustice and
unrest.
"A Power" is u Menace.
As a jurisdiction Germany is busy
with profitable and constantly ad
vancing industries, with an admir
able system of education and exten
sive provision for all the people's
needs, and no enlargement of boun
daries could in the least increase her
usefulness, her wealth or her happi
ness. As "a power" Germany is a
menace to the well being of civiliza
tion as every other "power" of similar
nature must be in its degree For
the prosperity of every people de
pends on international peace, and
all power-manifestations are either
actual or potential war. War is a
form of world-sickness from which
every function of civilization suffers,
and most of all those bonds of com
mon thought and common interest
sumed up in internationalism. And
to the members of an international
state, German in blood and in sym
pathy as well as English, all these
destructive rivalries of state with
state seem mediaeval and unworthy.
There is, in fact, something primitive,
outworn and unprogressive in the
spectacle of a civilized nation com
posed of millions of clever people
trusting for its defense to forts and
ships. With all the resources of
business, of science, ef education, of
thought, to depend on force seems a
lazy, even cowardly, shirking of the
higher possibilities of national
strength. To be surrounded by armed
guards, "holding the drop" on all
Commercial rivals is not a lofty con
ception of a nations's greatness. This
attitude has been as disastrous to
England's own peace of mind as it has
been menacing to the world's welfare.
To escape from this condition is not
a matter of a day nor a generation. Tt
is not easy for America even to

Revoe Carlisle Briggs Pasadena
fFloyd Cromwell Brown Selma
fEdward James Cullen Gilroy
Harry Bascom Davis Pomona
Wilbur Harvey Doxsee Redwood City
Robert Francis Duryea Palo Alto
fClarence Bernard Goodwin Sunnyvale
fCharles Stewart Grace Rivera
John Stanley Grepe, Jr East Highlands
tNorman Marshall Ilalcombe San Francisco
George William Hawley Portland, Ore.
George Walter Hunt San Jose
Paul Eells Jeffers Los Angeles
William Aiken Laird Lindsay
Alexander Stuart Macdonald San Francisco
tßobert Patchen Miller Los Angeles
Maurice Everard Morrison Morgan Hill
fßoger Wolcott Olmsted Los Angeles
Chauncey Smith Elie, Manitoba, Canada
Thomas Joseph Spellman Colma
fßurroughs Agin Stephenson Los Altos
Harry George Todtmann Chicago, 111.
George Harlan Trask Los Angeles
Charles Ralph Tupper San Jose
Romney Leigh Vaughn San Francisco
Guss Valentine Wallach Boonville
Carlton Levi Wyant Montecito
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING
■fClarence P. Campbell Los Angeles
tWallace Rolland Finney...* Modesto
*Burdette Lord Hostettler Erie, Pa.
Kenneth Irving Marshall Los Angeles
tAugustus Mudge Sanborn Redlands
Cecil Stocker Simon Los Gatos
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
*Edward Niles Adam Melville, Mont.
Frank Edward Anderson Los Angeles
fClarence Cannon Argabrite Ventura
John Watson Fleming Armstrong....Fivemiletown, Tyrone, Ire.
Everett Morse Calderwood Palo Alto
Melville Nathaniel Clark Dayton, Me.
John Francis Cullen Gilroy
Walter Jennings Dodge Los Angeles
Charles Greenlaw Duffin Comas, Wash.
Harry Adolph Fore Campbell
Frank Julius Gleiss Los Angeles
Walter J. Hammond ! Grinncll, la.
Tomiichi Haraguchi Nagasaki, Japan
George Edward Holditch Orange
Edgar Alden Jackson Cupertino
Linford C. Lull, Jr Los Angeles
James Arthur Miller Hanford
Rea Cambridge Newman Santa Barbara
George Washington Poison Menlo Park
Gaylord Kenyon Snyder Los Angeles
fGiistav Wade Naples
George Ireland Wright Pasadena
BACHELOR OF LAWS
Jerome Devereaux Peters San Jose
Granville Numan Wood, Jr Blue Lake
MASTER OF ARTS
LATIN
Flora Anne Bagley Burlingame
fßuth Beard Modesto
Catherine Ida Birch Redlands
fAnna Shipley Cox San Jose
Mabel Harriett Usinger Berkeley
Malcolm Leland Yeary Los Angeles
GERMAN
Edward Vere Brewer Elyria, Ohio
Catharine Morris Cox San Jose
Lydia Lucilc Meyer . Milwaukee, Wis.
Clara Lydia Schaaf Fort Wayne, -Ind.
fElsie Louise Whittemore Alhambra
ENGLISH LITERATURE
Anais Julia Allen Pasadena
Walter Clyde Curry Gray-Court, S. C.
ENGLISH PHILOLOGY
Maude Cleveland Stanford University
EDUCATION
tWilliam Samuel Marten San Jose
Clarence Lucien Phelps Jamestown, Ky.
William Thomas Root, Jr Pasadena
William Roy Tanner Minneapolis, Minn.

emancipate herself from reactionary
influences in Europe. There are many
interests in a wealthy nation who find
an aid or an affinity in militarism.
Debt creates debt, and those inter
ested in spending band together
against reform.
These matters proceed by slow pro
gress, interrupted by reaction; we
are in a period of relapse at present,
when reactionary forces seem to be in
the ascendant. Hut this very fact with
its burdens and horrors may be count
ed on to turn the balance in the other
direction.
Neither will there be a formal fed
eration of nations in this era. In
deed federation in fact will come long
before it comes in name. A single
unified world-government with cen
tralized rule under one set of men at
some one place, is only a dream—and
not a cheerful dream at that. What
the world needs is more self-control,
more local responsibility not more
governmental machinery. Neverthe
less every step in removing injustice,
in eliminating sources of friction, in
extending common interests, as the
postol union, the telegraph union, in
ternational law, international police
duties, international conferences and
congresses, arbitration treaties a nd
other agreements—are steps in the di
rection of the passing of war. To this
end, three great contributing agencies
are: the growth of the popular con
science, the interlocking of personal
interests, and the ruinous expence
which the progress of science has
brought to every branch of the mili
tar art.
All this has its part in the great
movement towards common interna
tional life, "La Vie Internationale" of
the dreams of La Fontaine, a life
which shall make war impossible and
will, in time, do away with exploita
tions, with tariff barriers and with all
the products of that narrow nativism,
which considers only the purposes or
enrichment of the selfish few, the one
in-group against all the out-groups of
the world.
Value of Open Diplomacy
Another lesson which the United
States may teach is the value of open
diplomacy. A secret agreement of
any kind whatever. It was a warning
of Washington that his nation should
beware of Entangling Alliances. A
formal alliance is for the purpose of
making enemies, never of making
friends. Friendship among nations
rests on common interests, on the in
terlocking of minds, the interlocking
of trade.
In the United States a treaty can be
entered into only with the open and
public consent of the Senate. Every
international relation is therefore
open to the world. No minister, no
president, no group of men whatever
can secretly pledge the nation to any
line of action. No president, no cabi
net, no minister, no congress acting
alone can make any declaration of
public policy. For these reasons the
United States must stand outside the
tangled snare of concessions and intri
gues we call world politics. She must
play her games of diplomacy with
open hands. She cannot be the secret
friend of any other nation. She can
not be a secret enemy because all her
acts, friendly or hostile, are known to
all the world.
The secret treaty in the interest of
imperial spoliation is the bane of
Europe. It ties each foreign office to
the service of the most reckless and
greedy of its great exploiting inter
ests. It has reduced the chancelleries
of more than one nation to be nothing
more than the firm name under which
its exploiting corporations compass
their ends in Asia or in Africa.
The secret is a relic of the military
state. The civilzed world is still or
ganized on the mediaeval theory that
war is a natural function to he ex
pected in the normal course of events,
not a hideous inorau, physical;. and
financial catastrophe. la the old
theory as expounded by Machiavelli,
the king has no other business but
war. It is the duty of his ministers
to find weak places in the defenses of
other kings through which war may
be successful, and to find, after the
fact, excuses by which' war can be
justified. The secret treaty, the .con
cession to a friendly power, ithe. arti-.
ficial interference with a rival, —all
these belong to the days' of Ma<?hia
velli. If . all parties concerpe.4 ( |cojJ>ld :
come out.into the open, .Wihsre . t-het
United States is forced to stahd, we
should soon have an end to tneAttgld-
German struggle, of the rivalry be
tween the Triple Entente and the
Triple Alliance.
Outworn ideas ot' national glory, out
worn figures of.speech as tp national
purposes, outworn mediaevalism in
our -conception of the state.—all'these
find expression in the "secret treaty,"
the "entangling alliance," which is a'
chief obstacle in the way of the -con
ciliation of nations. ?>• -
Historically, the influence of Amer
ica has been exerted in opposition to
Imperialism and to infringement of
the great nations on the rights of the
sniall. This is the inception of the
Monroe Doctrine, which in spite of its
perversion and its wrong accentuation r
has protected Latin America from the
fate of Africa. That this should now
be a Pan-American, not njerely an.
American doctrine goes without say
ing. And it must never be allowed i.o
degenerate-into " a Dollar Diplomacy"
which would.reserve Tropical America
as a special "sphere of, .influence-' for
American exploitation,. For the true,
and final form of the Mojiuae.Doctrine
is found, in the Drago .Doctrine,. of the
republics of South Ameripa,, that tiie
forqe of . arms should. be used-ras.
an,instrument iu industiriul spoliation.
This the people of the United States
should adopt as• their-.own. « <
Principle Disregarded '
In a recent deciskm- of- arbitration;
the King 'of Swed'ant'laW down 'this
principle: that a nation "has 110
right to land- troops in .order-to pYe-'
serve the property or the rights of her
nationals.". This''lwinciple. ha,s '-beefr
disregarded in the •strangling of
Persia, the rape of Mongolia and of
Tibet, in the chronic robbery of
China, and in the annexation of Egypt, <
of Korea, uf Morocco and of Tripoli.
But it is for all that a just.-and honor
able principle, and it is disregarded
only when a nation, by virtue of super
ior strength or superior civilization
feels itself justified in taking posses
sion of another for its good, and inci
dentally for the commercial advant
age of its own exploitating interests.
It is true that the smaller nations of
the tropics are subject to violent
political disturbances. They have not
learned the value of liberty as regu
lated hjy law. Yet it is highly prob
able that not one in ten of these
periodical/ revolutions I's of spontan- 1
eous native origin. of them are
started for purposes of spoliation by

autside adventurer's and a large ma
jority are paid for by adventurers
'State. The Public School exists
everywhere at the public expense, and
belonging to one or more of the great
epinniarqia'ruatrojis tit', fheiear'th.. When."
'the"fi v nal' iriitli'Ts"known'"of unhappy
Mexico the responsibility for hfei' dis
(Mfer'sl will rest nht on'her martyred
president, ridr "on the' sol
"diers'of fortune by whose hands he
•fell, but on the men in New York or
in London perhaps,' whose nioiWy has
kept iliese revolutions going. Mexico,
with fatal riches of oil and gold, is not
tlie first nation to Ite torn asunder by
'conflicting ."sphere's of influence."
The. influence of the republic has
been always thrown against another
form of imperialism involved in the
phrase "Control of the Sea." America
has never claimed any such control
nor has she admitted the right to
others. It is a mediaeval idea going
back foiir hundred years to the time
when the great seas were divided be
tween Spain and Portugal. America
has stood for the open sea, the restric
tion of national jurisdiction to the
three-mile limit, the extermination of
piracy, and in iater years for the most
important doctrine of the immunity of
war. To make the high seas an open

HI STORY
Ella Wissie Beaver ...T. .Tulare
fEmrria Howse Kuno Palo Alto
George Lutes Righter '.Campbell
Francis Marion Russell .Los Angeles
MATHEMATICS
Rose Margaret Bennett »....San Diego
Amanda Westhold ..Quincy, 111:
CHEMISTRY
Alicje. .Ruth Bergcr San Jose
Elton Marion Hogg. v Saratoga
Charles Kirkton McWilliams San Joss
tWilliam John Van Sicklen Castle-ton, Ontario,,Canada
BOTANY
Charlotte Elliott Del Rapids, S. D.
BACTERIOLOGY
Frank Maltaner .Cincinnati, O.
ZOOLOGY
Josephine Louise Dows Randall Stanford University
ENTOMOLOGY
F rankie Willard Galexioo
GEOLOGY
Theodore Chapin., Los Angeles
Joseph Stanley Hook jjPerris ■
ENGINEER
CHEMICAL ENGINEERING
. Louis Wjlliam Pingree.-. ; Ogden-, Utah
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING
fDexter Simpson Kimball N. Y.
Lyman Stevenson King Oakland .
r *• . V <
JURIS DOCTOR
George Armand Ditz Stockton f-1
Maurice Timothy Dooling • Hollistter ,
fEmmet Ross Fertig Nobl.esvjlle, Ind.
fFrank Louis Guerena rs .. „Spnora
George Juan Hatfield ...Oakland-,
Frank Howard Hilton ; Portland, Ore.
Grant Holcomb San Bernardino^
Ignatius Martin Peckham tV| . San . Jose
Edmund Wright Pugh Los. (Angeles..
Alfred'Worcester Robertson Saflt? Ba,rbru:a ..
Chester Harvey Warlow : . r ., . ( Fresno,
Herbert Eustace White Saotamento^.
tFrederick feertram Wood i. . Alto.
* September 6, 1912
fjanuary 10, 1013 "O '?t it

highway-to be tr.a.ver?ed , ( afc ( anytime,-
in absolute--safety, by any, vessel what
ever would-gp/t'ar away
witji international..waff,.-and iSitill ftWH
ther in ren^.vi!),£..tlve- and dnv<-
gerous burden of naval protectioni»'l£;
all military operations.- at. sea couidibe
confined to the <oa,nnon shot.
from the. shore, the- original motive
of the three-mile limit of. jurisdiction,
it would represent one of ,the most
practical triumphs of civilization.- Ttfe
nations should join to make the ocean
safe, not to fill it with floating fort
resses designed t tp. protect merchant
ships from robbery by the very per
sons with whom they trade.
Still another lesson from. America is
one in which, we all agree; the divorce
of religion from political control and
therefore from the,domain of politics.
Absolute religions freedom exists .in
America because the state assumes
no relation of any kind to religious
corporations as such, So long as these
do not interfere with the freedom of
soul or body of men not. belonging to
them, their acts do not concern the
state. And on no, one policy is there
more firm agreement.in America* than
in the absolute separation of Church
nowhere can any sect or gpoup of seets
claim any dominating relation in re

gard to It. To the average American
the strife over Church properties and
Church interests so real in Europe
seem incomprehensible. The Church,
any church, is in every way better oif
for separation from the government.
Whatever achievement; whatever pro
gress it may make is its own, and this
progress is solid because it involves,
no ulterior political end.
Connected with the freedom of the
church is the freedom of the people
from other forms of paternalism. The
state becomes benevolent only when it
lias failed to be just. It allows special
opportunities to individuals only
where it has denied opportunity to
men at large.
The "old-age pension" is a conven
ient'illustration,.'lt has been justly
compared to- the. free pass homeward
granted to the human wrecks who
have lost their all in the. gambling
rooms of-Monte Carlo. It is the shill
ing given to the man run over by my
lord's automobile.
In a better system he would not have
been run over. He would not have
lost his money in a vile resort, lie
would not have needed an outside
pittance to carry him through old age.
Host Workers Died in War
The old-age pension exists in Eng
land as a convenient balm for inequal
ity and injustice. The best of her
workers have died in her wars/ leav
ing a weaker stock to breed from.
These have grown' up unskilled, in de
fault of the shools that make men
strong. They have grown up in the
atmosphere of the public house, sod
den with lust and beer and whisky.
They have lost the opportiiniy tljat
should be theirs, and at the end their
jfellows must be taxed to feed tliem.
The tragedy of the East End of Lon
don is no normal part of the tragedy
of Life. It is no part of the normal
America. It is no part of a nation
which has given opportunity.
Brit'in America a' new country, fresh,
unspoiled, full of life and hope, it is
possible to hctt'd' government" to its
rigid purpose, to develop opportunity
by the elimination of privilege, teacfy,.
men to lean' not on' government but
on themselves, and to aid by'fraternal '
giving those who have fallen in. tbg
prang 1 ; not "to weaken by unearned
public money those who are falling but
who can be made to stand, 'tfie wav
Up it i '">• vtc.
t)t the transgressor is hard and we
not make it eapier'ff we could;
|We' could not if we would'. To. give a..
plkh'a chance to'rise,' i'.s to allow him'
hlfbthe choice t<>Tali:" ' *';•"
1 is ! •?; . " *
foii.fession of Failure , '
■ "Tho old-age pension" .is, so- far as 1
it goes, a confession of failure of de- ■
jnocracy,. Except as a measure of'"
e |1 £r-fie.pcy, l Jts real purpose in Eng
land, it has no justification in good '
government. Clean up the. social at
mosphere, restore to the people, what ■
is rightfully theirs, and they will care, 1
rare accidents .excepted, for their own
old age.
in America tlie struggle, between '
labor and capital can never assume
the form it has in Europe. In a gov
ei nment which stands for justice, and
which is in no way occupied with
making money for its people, nor from
its People, nor in supporting exploiting
intei ests in other lauds, there is uo
visable necessity for universal col
lective ownership. Where classes do
not leally exist there is no pertinence
in the artificial distinctions of aristoc
racy, proletariat and bourgeoisie
which have been so laboriously
brought over from Europe. If these*
distinctions exist, most of us in Amer
ica belong to one single class, that of
the bourgeoisie.
There exist in America as elsewhere,
vast fortunes, disproportionate to the
ability or the efforts of those who con
trol them. But their history has been
of short duration. They are not leg
acies from an unjust past. Their or
igin belongs to the present. It is
mainly individual. Great luck, great
skill or ingeniously managed privilege
stands behind each of them. By the
same means as in Europe, by co
operation through interlocking direc
torates, these great fortunes have
been made to stand together and thus
by a process of financial suction to
build up fortunes still greater. But
one most important difference exists.
The national government, in theory
and for the most in fact, stands aloof
from these combinations. The con
trol of public affairs, even of financial
matters is beyond their permanent
reach. Their influence on foreign
diplomacy is limited because no secret
influence can control, and the power
of money for evil is mostly lost in
publicity.
Property May Rule
In all their operations, they are sur
rounded by an alert and in the long
run victorious opposition of democ
racy. In America property may rule,
but only for a time. In the earlier
•centuries of Europe, the period of
Absolutism, when monarchy was a
political power not a function of so
ciety, it was, of course, true that prop
erty ruled. But it was the ruler who
had the property. It was his by force
of position. Not until the money lend
ers of the last century secured the
strangle hold on the nations of
Europe was this condition brought to
an end.
Then again, property ruled, but it
was not that the King and the nobles
held the property. Property held
them, and in Europe today it is money
that rules, and it rules King and
peasant alike, for everything el3e
hinges on the Imperial Explotation of
foreign lands.
In America, this is true in a degree,
but the rule of money has its visible
limits. For the United States belongs
to its people.
"Dollar Diplomacy"
While Europe generally, the alliance
between financial interests and the
government is open and avowed, such
•connections in America have proved
fatal to political leaders and to polit
ical parties. The methods by which
the "powers of Europe" through their
foreign offices bolster up adventures
in foreign lands, could not be used in
America. The diplomacy of persua
sion, threats or force of arms in the
interest of private ventures would be
impossible here. The people might
consent to "Dollar Diplomacy" but
•only for a time and until its nature
is understood. The recent, repudia
tion of our relation to the "Six Power
Loan' to China will serve as a case in
point.
And here again we must admit that
out democratic conception of govern
ment has to struggle for acceptance
in America. The protective tariff in
theory and in practice is a flat viola
tion of its principles. Tt is a flat
violation of the spirit of the American
■constitution. It is privilege pure and
simple granted to the few by the
many, in the belief that in the long
run the many would profit by it. Its

purpose was to diversify industries by
letting the farmer help pay the ex
penses of the manufacturer. It has
just that effect, and the farmer and
laborer are becoming increasingly
discontented with its burdens and the
inequalities before the law which are
part and parcel of its operations.
In America, the army and navy,
though the latter has grown beyound
all reason through the rivalry from
England and Germany, still represent
a democratic ideal. We still hold to
the thought that our officers are not
rulers but servants of the people.
Our military element stands near
the parting of the ways, for all offi
cialism tends to aggrandize itself,
most of all that which is associated
with pomp and with patriotism. Mili
tarism for its own sake belongs to the
state in whoch property rules. "It
furnishes," says John A. Hobson, "a
profitable support to certain strong
vested interests. It is a decorative
element in social life and above all, it
is necessary to keep down the
pressure of the forces of internal
reform."
>o Room for Militarism
The ideals of Militarism and Democ
racy can never coexist. And this na
tion is too far given over to democ
racy ever to do more than dally with
the military ideal. In a nation that
knows no caste, and has no aristioc
racy other than temporary and self
selected, no military traditions will
ever be permanent. There can never
be a warrior caste holding special
privilege or special authority.
As a people, we of the United States
are too rich in resources of wealth, of
education and of intelligence to be
controlled by influences of militarism.
And thus and for the same reasons, in
the republic of America, the state ex
ists for the man, not the man for the
state. This is the fundamental differ
ence between the Eighteenth Century
and Twentieth. And let us speed the
day when it may be said not only that
"America means Opportunity" but
that the same hopeful word may be
spoken of Germany and England and
France and Russia and of all the na
tions in the sisterhood of civilization.
Lord Acton thus sums up the move
ment of the history of civilization:
"It is by the combined efforts of the
weak made under compulsion to re
sist the reign of force and constant
wrong that in the rapid change but
slow progress of four hundred years
liberty has been preserved and se
cured and extended and finally under
stood."
And as America comes to under
stand her own message of democracy,
internationalism and peace, she will
carry this understanding back to the
motherland of Europe.
Within the last two months Presi
dent Wilson and Mr. Bryan have
planned a most practical and effective
means of bringing American influence
to bear on the problems of World
peace.
The end in view is to relegate war
to a position of last resort in times
of international difference, to place
soldiers and dreadnaughts in the
background—not in the front of na
tional movement.
The essence of this American policy
is that in case of friction between
nations, the matter be placed for six
months in the hands of a joint high
Commission of investigation, chosen
in part from the contending nations,
the majority from friendly neutrals.
These- for six months shall study the
question at issue, neither nation in the

meantime demonstrating, mobilizing
or increasing the armament, until the
final report is made. After this each
nation is free to choose conciliation,
concession, compromise, arbitration
or war. And with six months to think
it over there will be no war. Wars are
waged for greed, for politics, or be
cause the mob has been stirred by
senseless speech or reckless journal
ism. And in many cases this reckless
journalism has been carefully cal :u
--lated and fully paid for by those in
terested in the sale of the accessories
of war.
The treaty of arbitration will natur
ally follow on the treaty for investi
gation. Courts will naturally supple
ment results of friendly offices. But
the agreement for friendly conference
comes first and is for the present the
more important. The Treaty of Arbi
tration is most valuable, — not as
preventing war, for a nation bent on
war, if there is such a case, will not
stop to agree to arbitrate. The world
is finally ruled by public opinion. Ar
bitration treaties clinch public opinion
and hold it to its duty.
The present decade has been char
acterized by needless, costly and
brutal wars, the result not of actual
conditions of today, but of blunders
and crimes committed in the past.
Wars do not spring up afresh in our
civilization. They spring from old
wars whose seeds were not destroyed
by peace.
Rut, however, dark the present out
look may seem with half the coined
money of the world spent each year
on war and war's accessories, the far
outlook is most promising. The cruel
horror of the Balkan war, the waste of
armed peace and frustrate war
throughout the civilized world, — all
these make powerfully for peace, for
real peace — the Peace of Law and
Trust, and not the Peace of Force.
And just now is the time when
American influence can be most defi
nitely crystallized and made effective.
And we are thankful that we have in
the seats of Authority at Washington
men who definitely work for peace
and whom war and war's fripperies
do not dazzle nor attract.
Two hundred and seven students were awarded the Bachelor of
Arts Degree by President David Stu rr Jordan in the Assembly Hull tills
morning. Two were granted the Bachelor of Laws Degree, while
thirty-five were given the Master of Arts Degree. In addition to these
the Academic Council also awarded three Engineer, thirteen .luris Doc
tor of Philosophy Degrees. The Co miuencemnet address preceded the
presenting of the sheepskins, *Th e Conquest of Europe by America,"
wsis the subject of the strong address delivered by Doctor Jordan.

I wish this morning to say a serious
word to you as citizens of the great
republic and as future leaders in its
thought and action. I wish you to
think earnestly of the part American
influence must play in the world his
tory of our century. It is for us to
help cure the accumulated evils of
the older civilization. Those men in
Europe who look furthest into the
future hope for the salvation of
Europe through ideals brought back
from practical service in America.
One of these. Senator La Fontaine of
Brussels, has given me my title as the
expression of the hope of his life,
"The Conquest of Europe by America."
I hasten to say that 1 do not mean
conquest by force of arms, for 1 have
no interest in such conquests and no
belief that victories thus won result in
any permanent good to any nation.
Nor do I mean financial conquests,
the floating of imperial loans or the
permeation of any part of European
business by financiers from the New
World. Still less do I celebrate a
shoppers' contest on the Place de
I'Opera or among the dazzling bar
gains of the Hon Marche. Nor does
the trail of American tourists who
cross with gold the palms of Europe's
servitors, all the way from Piccadilly
to the Pyramids awaken in me any
pride of nation or of race. The only
permanent conquest is that of ideas.
America stands, has always stood, for
two ideals from which she cannot
escape, for they are fundamental in
her origin and in her growth. These
are internationalism and democracy,
and these ideals being invincible
must conquer America, and through
her, reconquer Europe. And as both
are incompatible with war, their final
triumph marks the end of spoliation,
of and of that relation be
tween nations which breeds suspicion
and hatred. The conquest of the
world by the ideals of International
ism and Democracy marks the coming
of universal peace.
In the address at Baltimore in 1911,
Henri La Fontaine of Brussels, the
veteran prophet of International Life,
used these striking words.
"Emigration perhaps more than
war has deprived the old, historic
countries of their most energetic and
fittest ones to build the progressive
and wealthy people you are on this side
of the Atlantic. You are for us
Europeans, the beloved Brotherland,
Do not forget that Europe is always

and will still remain for you the be
loved Motherland. Europe is now for
America what Greece was for Europe.
Europe has liberated (Ireece. Amer
ica has to liberate Europe from its
burdens, its prejudices, its hatreds.
It is your duty, it is your highest duty
to reconcile outside your borders the
people you have reconciled within
your borders. For indeed the Amer
ican people is at present the true
international people. It is the elect
people which alone can further inter
nationalism and can transform all of
the people of the Earth into a family
of nations, a brotherhood of men, an
international people." "For coloniza
tion is not mainly done by men and by
capital, but also by ideas, by example,
by experiment."
Not Always True to Ideals
We may freely admit in the begin
ning that America has not always been
true to her own ideals, and that she
has not always clearly seen her own
future. She has had her own lapses,
moral and social, some of these be
cause of associations with Europe and
through imitation of glories alien to
her history. If she had been true to
herself she would never have known
a single foreign war. She has no part in
those greeds and jealousies of money
or of race which still keep up turmoil
in Europe. Her war with Spain with
its eagerness for exploitation, its
tinsel imperialism and its pride of
participation in "world politics" rep
resents the worst of these lapses, and
its evil effects are long in passing.
But though the inception of this affair
was European in method, its contin
uance has been characteristically
American. Instead of exploitation, we
have brought to the Philippines educa
tion and sanitation. We have expend
ed on them a hundred times what we
have received, and if ever imperilism
can be respectable we have made it so.
Another false movement has been
in the building of warships and forts
in America. This lacks the motive
for similar extravagances in Europe,
because the peace of the new world is
no where threatened. But with us as
everjwhere the military spirit grows
with the money spent on it. The more
mouths fed by the State the greater
the clamor for the feeding of still
more. We have also to reckon with
the desire for giant decoration, for
big navies for sheer bigness' sake, the
feeling that this is the richest and'
most progressive nation on the globe,

and that as such she can beat old
Europe at her own game even though
that game be not worth the candle.
But with all lapses and delinquin
cies the fact of internationalism and
the ideal of democracy have been and
must always remain with the United
States, and from the United States
these ideals will react with greater
and greater force on the thoughts and
deeds of Europe.
Internationalism is the heritage of
America, not of choice at first, but cf
necessity. She has perforce grown
up with this ideal, because no other
was possible. She became the cosmo
politan nation of the world because
of her complex origin and with this
origin she could be nothing else. In
a new civilization, in the struggles of
the frontier each man is rated for
what he is worth. Under these condi
tions no one cares for the petty pre
cedences of rank or race. What a
man can do in the next twenty-four
hours outvalues any question as to
who were his ancestors.
All Hate Dies
On a railway train not long ago
some one was overheard to say: "This
is the land where all hate dies. My
father was German; my mother was
French. What do I care for all that?
I am an American. The old hatreds
and rivalries are nothing to me."
America was English, first. In lang
uage, in spirit, in conscience and in
government it is England which domi
nates. For the English race, above
all others, with its adaptation for co
operation and for compromise is the
builder of free states.
It was the chosen among the Eng
lishmen of three centuries ago who
founded the germ colonies of Virginia
and Massachusetts May. In the fol
lowing years it has been the like
minded from their own nation and
from others who have crossed the seas
to enter into their work.
The first who came were the bold,
the free, the self-ruling, the pleasure
scorning element of English life. They
came to escape from the state
church and the church-state, that they
might worship in their own fashion
and according to dictates of their indi
vidual consciences.
They detested the law of primogeni
ture which thrust the spirit of pre
cedence into the bosom of every fam
ily. They abhorred the law of entail
which burdened the land with the
curse of privilege even to unborn gen
erations.
They had caught from France the

spirit of liberty, equality, fraternity,
but as befits the calmer blood of the
north, they gave this spirit a con
structive interpretation, and the idea
of equality was to them especially rich
in practical results. Equality before
the law, equal access to land, to edu
cation, to professions and trades,
. equal access to legislat ion, each of
these conceptions broadened out into
the spirit of democracy.
And after England came to other
nations of Europe, each with its own
part and in its own degree giving its
contingent of free-born men, the ad
| mixture of blood gave strength and
! versatility to the rising nation.
But withal, the dominant note is
English still, with as many diver-
I gences from the England of today as
j from the England of the Stuarts.
In later years other immigration has
come, not alone the bold in search of
adventure, of new homes and new free
doms, but the weak and the oppressed,
"the beaten men of the beaten races,"
who llee from war taxation in search
of living wages and of daily bread.
But all these are cast into the same
melting pot and in most of them there
arises a clear response to the call of
free institutions.
In this melting pot of America, all
the old racial antipathies disappear
and all hereditary hatreds. There is
110 final distinction of British or Ger
j man, of French or Italian, of Spanish
|or Slav, of Dutch or Scandinavian,
!or of Jew or Gentile. The average
| American is as cosmopolitan in origin
j and relationship as is royalty in
Europe, though for a different set of
| reasons. But in America there is 110
[ distinction of common or noble, of
high or low, of aristocracy, bour
j geoisie or proletariat except as these
| are artificially emphasized in the in
dustrial strife we have inherited from
Eu rope.
To the international mind of Amer
ica, there seems 110 need or pertinence
to an Anglo-Saxon alliance as against
any other people. In so far as such
alliance is desirable or humanly pos
sible it exists already in a common
sympathy and a common literature, ft
would lie weakened by a stated agree
ment of the Anglo-Saxon group to
swell each others Meets with dread
naughts. The true bond of Union of
the Greater Britain involves no rup
ture with the Greater Germany, or the
Greater France or the Greater Scandi
navia to which we in America likewise
claim allegiance.
To the American, "Pan-Germanism,"
Pan-Slavism," as lie hears these ex
pounded seem a meaningless return to
ideals of tlie Middle Ages. They re
mind him of the Holy Roman Empire,
which never was, and should never be,
or still more they hark back to Pan-
Islamism the futile dream of the light
ing Turk.
There is nothing in aggrandizement
of race as such which appeals to the
American, the child of all European
races. That such races are ennobled
by conquest of lesser tribes and by
their undigested exploitation he does
not believe. To the American even
England's greatness does not exist on
her Indian Empire, but rather in spite
of it.
Within the last forty years there lias
grown up a new world in Europe and
in the range of civilization. The old
conception of the states of Europe
as opposed to one another and mutu
ally destructive must, pass away in the
broader aspects of civilization.
The growth of International life is
one of the most striking aspects of
this new relation. The extention of
travel, the spread of commerce, the
achievements of science, the exchanges
in education, all these tend to make
a great "melting pot" of the civilized
world. Neither in his business, in his
pleasures, nor in his intellectual pur
suits is the educated man anywhere
limited to any one country. All
rational human interests are con
nected by interlocking bonds of many
kinds, joining one people with another.
The hundreds of international con
gresses held every summer the world
over and covering almost every gen
eral interest of men is the strongest
possible evidence of this Interlocking,
and all this constitutes an inter
national bond not to be lightly severe.!.
A declaration of war between nations
is now little less than an attack on
civilization in all its most cherished
aspects, social, moral, as well as finan
cial. The lines of national policy
taken for granted half a century ago
are fast becoming impossible, their
very suggestion being ruinous.
I'c ideiicj toward < oix'ilintion
The influence of America tends to
wards international conciliation. It
involves the recognition of men as
men, each valued for what he is or
wlnit tie can do. Both of these deter
mined, of course, by bis blood and his
education, but not to be judged in ad
vance by any wholesale distinctions.
This is the spirit of the Interna
tionale, the common life and common
sympathy among civilized people, re
gardless of national boundaries. This
International life constitutes the final
and lasting basis of International
Peace.
As the history of America rests on
internationalism so is her social fab
ric built on democracy. Historically
her democracy has a double origin. Its
theory was French, its practice was
English. The French philosophers
furnished the one, the reaction against
British methods the other.
For inequality before the law is the
foundation of the polity of Great
Britain. Her constitution stands on
privilege. Her social customs rest on
precedence of classes, precedence of
individuals. England chooses her lords
and magnates, her patrons and tyrants
long before they are born. These be
long to her system of privilege by
which cities like Westminster, Shef
field, Davenport, Arundel, were so
long held, virtually tax-free, by men
whose ancestors received their land as
royal gifts or bought tlieni as cow
pastures. The law of favor rises above
the law of justice.

Hut men of the pioneer type, the
Roundhead, the Pilgrim, the Puritan,
the American have hated favor and
privilege and precedence of every
form. The toll of tin 1 rich and the dole
of the poor are alike offensive to them.
And this dislike of overreaching and of
coddling has passed over to their de
scendents. John Hay once said of the
people of the new state of Ohio. "They
looked to no one as their superiors,
and on none as their inferiors. They
knew 110 want they could not them
selves satisfy," and to this Senator
Bayard added the further note, "They
were too self-willed and independent
to allow any to rule over them but
t heniselves."
This in a word is the spirit of de
mocracy, of the democracy of the
pioneer if you like, but America is the
land of pioneers, and this fact still in-

11 uences all her acts unci her insti
tutions. Her people find their polit
ical ideals in an equal start with equal
opportunity, in equality before the
law, in equal access to education, in
equal access to the land, in equal ac
cess to legislation.
The nation is built on individuals
each responsible for himself. The
state is a mutual adjustment for their
collective benefit. The individual in
America does not live for the state, is
not the property of the state, the state
has no control over him except that
which the individual lias delegated. It
is no duty of the state to promote his
prosperity or the prosperity of his
group. The state is rather the umpire
which decides questions of justice, the
servant by which the needs of the
many are met by co-operation in so far
as these needs are general and conson
ant, with ideals of justice.
As the founders of our state were
frontiersmen scattered far and wide,
without cities, without corporations,
without great collective utilities, their
democracy became that of individual
ism. The demands of society, of col

leetive action, of national power were
little considered because such de
mands did not exist, and they have
never existed in the forms in which
hhirope knows them. And for this
reason, if for no other, the native
American lias not been strongly at
tracted to the various doctrines called
socialism in 13uropi. Like conditions
produce like results, and the growth
nl' industrialism with its successes and
its oppressions brings the same re
action as in Furope. But as a matter
of fact, those who take part in these
reactions are for the most part re
cent immigrants, whoso ideals of gov
ernment even in democracy are collec
tive, standing in strong contrast with
tho individualistic democracy native
to the soil.
Fifty year. - , ago, in lsC!, Fdouard
Laboulaye published bis renrirkable

hook "Paris <>n Amerique," (Paris in
America.) Its motive was to show
what a great city might become under
the conditions of freedom which pre
vailed in America. The America was
idealized of course. It, represented
the noblest ideals of free-born men,
rather than the actual America, the
forces of democracy must strive with
all the other forces extant in modern
civilization.
j The influence of this volume was
wide spread and long continued. It
was my fortune to know two men of
power, the one a Dane, the other a
Swiss who were drawn to America by
the charm of Laboulaye and who were
not disappointed. They found what
they sought, and this is a perennial
characteristic of the republic. Who
ever comes to America and with what
ever motive will find what he seeks.
If he remains long enough and has
penetration to look below the surface
I he will find America.
If one seeks religious freedom he
will find it. Our fathers provided for
that. Whatever form or type of re
ligious discipline he seeks he will find

accordingly, I>ut its discipline is vol
untary not enforced by the state. If
one would escape from all religious in
fluence he can do so in America. It is
for him to choose.
If one seeks for class distinction, for
domination of the great over the small,
hereditary or otherwise, he will find it
in personal and local only, not
wrought into the fabric of society. If
one would find privilege enthroned
even as in Europe he will find it in
America, just as powerful as in
Europe, Imi everywhere surrounded
by an equally powerful movement of
insurgency. If one would find greed,
selfishness, lust, vanity, tolerance,
anything which belongs to the dregs
of humanity, he will find it in America,
and it may be embodied in powerful
and defiant institutions. For freedom
guarantees only freedom, and the
meaning of freedom is opportunity.
In Laboulaye's work, the official
Napoleonic view, which "Paris in
America" takes as its point of depar
ture is thus expressed. "A society
without administration, without army,
without police, with the savage liberty
of praying, speaking, writing, acting
each in his fashion would not last a
quarter of an hour. It is the negation
of all these principles, of all the con
ditions of this civilization which
makes the unity of our French nation.
In constituting our administration,
hierarehal and centralized, the wis
dom of our fathers lias long since
raised France to the first rank and
shown to the French people that
Liberty is Obedience, then is our Glory
and our Force."
Ketcrse 01 Napoleon's Ideals
The distinctive character of the
American ideals reverses this. It is
the building up of a society in which
the government stands only for jus
tice. The state does not concern itself
with right, worship or wrong worship,
with right thinking or wrong think
ing, with writing truth or writing
falsehood, with right acts or words or
ceremonies, except as abuse of liberty
may infringe on the liberty of others.
"I'ne societe sans administration,
sans armee, sans gendarmes, avec
la liberie sauvage de prier. de ponser,
de parler, d'ecrire, d'agir. chacun a
sa facon ne durerait pas 1111 quart
d'heure. ("est la negation de tons ces
principcs, de toutes les conditions de
cette civilisation qui fait I'unite dp la
nation francaise. En constituant
notre administration bierarchis.ee et
centralised, la sagesse de 110s peres a
depuis longtemps eleve la France a
premier rang et appris aux Francais
<pie la liberte ("est l'obeissance. C'est
la notre glorie et notre force."
The state is not pious, benevolent,
virtuous, generous, because these per
sonal virtues, cannot be exercised by
officialism leads to their abuse.
Privilege to the poor means privilege
to the rich; privilege to the rich
means privilege to the poor, but al
ways the more powerful arm secures
the greater privilege. The essence of
democracy is that no one. rich or
poor should have a lease on privilege.
The wealth of the republic does not
rest on its great sweep of prairies,
its mines or its commerce. Its primal
source is in its free schools, and its
freedom of choice of trade or profes
sion. The results of this freedom
can be measured in money as well as
in power. Now as ever, "America
means opportunity," opportunity for
each man and woman to prepare for
the work he can do best, opportunity
for each to find his place in life, op


I'IIESIDKXT DAVID KTAitlt .lOUD \ X
portunity for the work that neeils to
be done to find the man who can do it.
It is for each man to plan his own
career, to make his rwn escape "from
status to contract." The democracy
of America can acknowledge no mas
sters save of its own creation and the
power that makes these is adequate
to set them aside.
While every conception In Europe
has its reflex in America, while every
idea of administration from absolut
ism to anarchy finds its earnest advo
cates, none of these seem likely to
displace the fundamental ideal of
democratic individualism developed by
the fathers of the republic. This ideal
was expressed by Lincoln and long be
fore him by Anstolle. It is the function
of the state to establish justice among
men and to perform those acts of com
mon necessity, contributing to the pre
servation and enjoyment of human life
which collective action can accomp
lish better than private effort. Fur
ther than that, democracy which is
simply enforced co-operation should
not go, and by this principle, that no
theory of government should be
pushed beyond the consideration of its
practical results, the republic escapes
the choice of any single one among
the hundreds of remedies for political
ills. There is 110 possibility of the
adoption of anarchism, socialism, col
lectivism or individualism or any
other system as an exclusive and ex
cluding finality. The people of Amer
ica are interested in actual results
rather than any form of logical neces
sity as a ground for political action.
The Test of Solidarity
The test of national solidarity may
be found in its freedom from the need
of force or authority in the conduct of
its affairs. Let us imagine if we can,
a catastrophe which should remove
from the United States every repre
sentative of coercive power, every offi
cial of whatever rank from the Presi
dent to the last notary public, every
representative of army or of navy, or
of church, every policeman, every
authority of whatever kind.
Such a loss might create wied
spread bewilderment or profound
sorrow. It would have no relation to
anarchy. Except among certain un
assimilated foreign populatipns in
large cities it would lead to no
violence, to no riots. The functions
of national life would go on as before.
One by one communities would come
together and provide for the election
of officers. It was said that the death
of Lincoln gave a new proof of how
"republics live, not by a single life
but the right divine of man, the mil
lion trained to be free."
I.ret us apply the same test to other
nations. 111 the France of Napoleon
111, we are assured that without force,
society would not endure "for a quar
ter of an hour." What would be the
result in Germany today? No one can
tell. The German is endlessly patient,
even under needless burdens. What
would he do, if burdens were all sud
denly thrown off, if "Strengstens Ver
boten," the motto of Prussian rule
were suddenly found to have no force
behind it?
The lesson of democracy is therefore
the lesson of the United States. It is
no new lesson. The people of the
United States are merely European
people who have had some additional
experience, have learned some things
in their travels, perhaps forgetting

Patterson Dana Nowell Tulare
Frank Herbert Richey Tipton, Ind.
Edga r Clarence Smith Azusa
Homer Roberts Spence Alameda
GRAPHIC ART
Ethel Ora Qardin Salinas
James Leo Duff Menlo Park
fErnest P»ruce Nelson San Jose
Louise Rider Watsonville
Stella Belle Sankey Clearfield, Pa.
Cordelia Madison Smith Venice
MATHEMATICS
Sydnie Aileen Gardner Orange
Dorothy Marian Hindle Del Mar
Julia R. Johnson Aberdeen, Wash.
Ralph Matthews Noble Galesburg, 111.
Margaret Marion Steele San Jose
Mary Hilda Volkmor Whittier
APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Grace Raymond Helmick Helena, Mont.
CHEMISTRY
George Henry Beurhaus Tacoma, Wash.
Hector Crandall San Francisco
fEdwin Reginald Harding San Bernardino
fPaul Mark Levy San Francisco
Hugh Harold Mosher San Jose
Robert Lindley Murray Palo Alto
+Zeno Ostenberg.. San Jose
Alfred Liles Phillips Santa Cruz
PHYSICS
Herbert Rovell Benham McKittrick
Francis Sitwell Pratt Ontario
Albert John Scholl, Jr Los Angeles
Ruth Sceley Los Gatos
Glen Miller Smyth Salt Lake City-, Utah
Guy Carleton Swan Lawrence, Mass.
Devi Dyal Virmani Bahawalpore, India
Waldo Ralph Waelty Santa Clara
William Irvin Weaver Colorado Springs, Colo.
BOTANY
Taylor Jay Blethen Portland, Ore.
Arthur Dickie Borden Palo Alto
Ollis Willard Newman Santa Barbara
Frank Jason Smiley Fresno
PHYSIOLOGY AND HISTOLOGY
Albert Gordon Bower Salt Lake City, Utah
Roscal Leroy Draper Arroyo Grande
Florence Edetha Dunlop Vale, Ore.
George Stevenson Holcman Riverside
Leonard R. Jenkins Ogden, Utah
Merton James Price San Francisco
Karl Ludwig Schaupp Santa Rosa
John Philip Stricklcr San Diego
fCharles Ernest von Geldern San Francisco
*Carleton Wolsey Washburne Sierra Madre
fClyde T. Wetmore Hollister
Robert William Wilcox Delta, Colo.
fElsa Will Rochester, N. Y.
ZOOLOGY
Clara Crosby Santa Cruz
Mary 1* isk Los Angeles
ENTOMOLOGY AND BIONOMICS
Leroy Childs Redlands
fWarren Locke Smith Ferndale
Verne Genoa Stevens Palo Alto
GEOLOGY AND MINING
Robert Edwin Anderson San Francisco
Harry Mayo Andreen Redwood City
fCarl Hugh Beal Palo Alto
Edward Burke Corbet San Francisco
Waldemar Fenn Dietrich San Francisco
Benjamin Edward Erb Chemainus, B. C.
Andrew Douglas Fyfe Oceanside
fWilliam Conrad Gehrmann Davenport, la.
Mortimer Louis Hall Pasadena
Harold Briggs Hannibal San Jose
Olaf Pitt Jenkins Stanford* University
Grover Berner Lantz Colton
tßernard Harold Lasky San Francisco
*Robcrt James McCann Pacific Grove
fHarvey Wright Parmelee Santa Barbara
*Alonzo William Peake Los Angeles
Arthur E. Remington Watertown, N. Y.
*Edwin John Stewart Los Angeles
CIVIL ENGINEERING
Charles Edward Beechcr Monrovia
Edwin Prcscott Bly Los Angeles
I von Clay Briggs San Francisco

some others equally important. In
like manner the choicest thoughts and
worthiest ideals of America are
thoughts and ideals long before treas
ured by the advanced minds of Europe.
Another lesson from America is that
of the effective federation. The United
States is composed of fortliy-eight
self-governing states, each an entity
within itself managing its own affairs,
with its own officials and its own
laws, controlled by the nation in those
interests only which it shares with
its sister states. Some of these states
are as populous and wealthy as the
Kingdom of Europe, but each is a
jurisdiction, not a power. None can
make war alone, either by force of
arms or force of tariffs. While there
is all machinery for settling disputes
between states such disputes never
arise, because no state has the right
to use its force to promote private
business.
Stilts Equality
The states in a federal union meet
as jurisdictions. The small ones have
no fear of the large ones, and those
not touching the sea suffer in no way
from their restricted position. A
"Power" hampered as is the state of
Illinois would chafe against its limita
tions, and its jingoes would talk of
fighting their way to the ocean. But
viewed as a jurisdiction, surrounded by
similar jurisdictions, the people of
Illinois have no consciousness of limi
tation.
And this should be our ultimate con
ception of a nation. Its boundary line
should represent merely the limit of
jurisdiction. That jurisdiction ceases
does not imply need of violence be
tween the people on the two sides nor
require fortification for the purpose
of repelling violence. The Canadian
boundary is an example of this meet
ing of nations not as powers but as
jurisdictions.
This four-thousand-mile line, rang
ing through all kinds of territory and
all sorts of conditions, disputed nearly
all the way "with all the brutal frank
ness common to blood relations," has
for nearly a hundred years not known
a fortress, a soldier, a warship or a
gun. It is a peace boundary, the limit
of the jurisdiction of one self-govern
ing nation, the beginning of that of
another. It lacks but one thing to
make it ideally perfect, the re
moval of the custom-house, the em
blem of national suspicion and greed,
the remnant, of the days when it was
considered good economics for a na
tion to "have its taxes paid by for
eigners."
Europe in Turmoil
Viewed as "great powers" devoted
to the exploitation of the wealth of
other regions the leading nations of
Europe are in constant turmoil. The
German empire for example, is hamp
ered on every side. Her scant sea
coast is split in two by the presence
of Denmark. Her German Rhine dis
charges itself through Holland. The
ports of Amsterdam, Rotterdam, Ant
werp and Ostend, geographically her's,
are occupied by alien people whom she
could crush out in a moment, were it
not. for the physical force of the rest
of Europe and the moral power of the
world. Of Poland, she has too much
or too little. A large part of the Ger
man people live in the alien empire of
Austro-Hungary and in the republic
of Switzerland, while after forty years
of possession, Germany scarcely owns
Alsace or Lorraine. The states are a
thorn in the side of the empire, a bur
den and a weakness, just so long as
their two millions of people are held in
semi-vassalhood by the rule of force.
A free republic of Alasace Lorraine, a
second Swithzerland, half-German,
half-French separating and joining
two great nations would be a strength
and an inspiration to both. The true
gateways of the Rhine held by the
power of blood and iron is a centre
of menace to civilization. For the
wrong done at the Treaty of Frank
fort forty years ago, Europe has had to
pay most dearly for it is around the
question of Alsace-Lorraine that half
the crushing armament of Europe has
been built up. She is hemmed in
everywhere by the scare of old strugg
les, to her perennial discomfort. For
this reason, she suffers from the
"Drang nach Osten," she seeks a road
to the Persian gulf, an empire over
seas, and every form of imperial ex
tension to lands "under the sun,"
which may for the moment seem
plausible or possible.
But Germany as a jurisdiction suf
fers none of these limitations. Her
powers are only those which are
needed for the people's good. They
are merely her public duties. It mat
ters noting that her sway is checked
on almost, every side before it reaches
the sea. Other jurisdictions inter
vene, and each of these looks after
the public needs of man, which are
mostly justice, conservation, educa
tion, sanitation, and peace. As one of
the "Great Powers" of the world, Ger
many (with her fellow states as well)
is a center of friction, injustice and
unrest.
"A Power" is u Menace.
As a jurisdiction Germany is busy
with profitable and constantly ad
vancing industries, with an admir
able system of education and exten
sive provision for all the people's
needs, and no enlargement of boun
daries could in the least increase her
usefulness, her wealth or her happi
ness. As "a power" Germany is a
menace to the well being of civiliza
tion as every other "power" of similar
nature must be in its degree For
the prosperity of every people de
pends on international peace, and
all power-manifestations are either
actual or potential war. War is a
form of world-sickness from which
every function of civilization suffers,
and most of all those bonds of com
mon thought and common interest
sumed up in internationalism. And
to the members of an international
state, German in blood and in sym
pathy as well as English, all these
destructive rivalries of state with
state seem mediaeval and unworthy.
There is, in fact, something primitive,
outworn and unprogressive in the
spectacle of a civilized nation com
posed of millions of clever people
trusting for its defense to forts and
ships. With all the resources of
business, of science, ef education, of
thought, to depend on force seems a
lazy, even cowardly, shirking of the
higher possibilities of national
strength. To be surrounded by armed
guards, "holding the drop" on all
Commercial rivals is not a lofty con
ception of a nations's greatness. This
attitude has been as disastrous to
England's own peace of mind as it has
been menacing to the world's welfare.
To escape from this condition is not
a matter of a day nor a generation. Tt
is not easy for America even to

Revoe Carlisle Briggs Pasadena
fFloyd Cromwell Brown Selma
fEdward James Cullen Gilroy
Harry Bascom Davis Pomona
Wilbur Harvey Doxsee Redwood City
Robert Francis Duryea Palo Alto
fClarence Bernard Goodwin Sunnyvale
fCharles Stewart Grace Rivera
John Stanley Grepe, Jr East Highlands
tNorman Marshall Ilalcombe San Francisco
George William Hawley Portland, Ore.
George Walter Hunt San Jose
Paul Eells Jeffers Los Angeles
William Aiken Laird Lindsay
Alexander Stuart Macdonald San Francisco
tßobert Patchen Miller Los Angeles
Maurice Everard Morrison Morgan Hill
fßoger Wolcott Olmsted Los Angeles
Chauncey Smith Elie, Manitoba, Canada
Thomas Joseph Spellman Colma
fßurroughs Agin Stephenson Los Altos
Harry George Todtmann Chicago, 111.
George Harlan Trask Los Angeles
Charles Ralph Tupper San Jose
Romney Leigh Vaughn San Francisco
Guss Valentine Wallach Boonville
Carlton Levi Wyant Montecito
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING
■fClarence P. Campbell Los Angeles
tWallace Rolland Finney...* Modesto
*Burdette Lord Hostettler Erie, Pa.
Kenneth Irving Marshall Los Angeles
tAugustus Mudge Sanborn Redlands
Cecil Stocker Simon Los Gatos
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
*Edward Niles Adam Melville, Mont.
Frank Edward Anderson Los Angeles
fClarence Cannon Argabrite Ventura
John Watson Fleming Armstrong....Fivemiletown, Tyrone, Ire.
Everett Morse Calderwood Palo Alto
Melville Nathaniel Clark Dayton, Me.
John Francis Cullen Gilroy
Walter Jennings Dodge Los Angeles
Charles Greenlaw Duffin Comas, Wash.
Harry Adolph Fore Campbell
Frank Julius Gleiss Los Angeles
Walter J. Hammond ! Grinncll, la.
Tomiichi Haraguchi Nagasaki, Japan
George Edward Holditch Orange
Edgar Alden Jackson Cupertino
Linford C. Lull, Jr Los Angeles
James Arthur Miller Hanford
Rea Cambridge Newman Santa Barbara
George Washington Poison Menlo Park
Gaylord Kenyon Snyder Los Angeles
fGiistav Wade Naples
George Ireland Wright Pasadena
BACHELOR OF LAWS
Jerome Devereaux Peters San Jose
Granville Numan Wood, Jr Blue Lake
MASTER OF ARTS
LATIN
Flora Anne Bagley Burlingame
fßuth Beard Modesto
Catherine Ida Birch Redlands
fAnna Shipley Cox San Jose
Mabel Harriett Usinger Berkeley
Malcolm Leland Yeary Los Angeles
GERMAN
Edward Vere Brewer Elyria, Ohio
Catharine Morris Cox San Jose
Lydia Lucilc Meyer . Milwaukee, Wis.
Clara Lydia Schaaf Fort Wayne, -Ind.
fElsie Louise Whittemore Alhambra
ENGLISH LITERATURE
Anais Julia Allen Pasadena
Walter Clyde Curry Gray-Court, S. C.
ENGLISH PHILOLOGY
Maude Cleveland Stanford University
EDUCATION
tWilliam Samuel Marten San Jose
Clarence Lucien Phelps Jamestown, Ky.
William Thomas Root, Jr Pasadena
William Roy Tanner Minneapolis, Minn.

emancipate herself from reactionary
influences in Europe. There are many
interests in a wealthy nation who find
an aid or an affinity in militarism.
Debt creates debt, and those inter
ested in spending band together
against reform.
These matters proceed by slow pro
gress, interrupted by reaction; we
are in a period of relapse at present,
when reactionary forces seem to be in
the ascendant. Hut this very fact with
its burdens and horrors may be count
ed on to turn the balance in the other
direction.
Neither will there be a formal fed
eration of nations in this era. In
deed federation in fact will come long
before it comes in name. A single
unified world-government with cen
tralized rule under one set of men at
some one place, is only a dream—and
not a cheerful dream at that. What
the world needs is more self-control,
more local responsibility not more
governmental machinery. Neverthe
less every step in removing injustice,
in eliminating sources of friction, in
extending common interests, as the
postol union, the telegraph union, in
ternational law, international police
duties, international conferences and
congresses, arbitration treaties a nd
other agreements—are steps in the di
rection of the passing of war. To this
end, three great contributing agencies
are: the growth of the popular con
science, the interlocking of personal
interests, and the ruinous expence
which the progress of science has
brought to every branch of the mili
tar art.
All this has its part in the great
movement towards common interna
tional life, "La Vie Internationale" of
the dreams of La Fontaine, a life
which shall make war impossible and
will, in time, do away with exploita
tions, with tariff barriers and with all
the products of that narrow nativism,
which considers only the purposes or
enrichment of the selfish few, the one
in-group against all the out-groups of
the world.
Value of Open Diplomacy
Another lesson which the United
States may teach is the value of open
diplomacy. A secret agreement of
any kind whatever. It was a warning
of Washington that his nation should
beware of Entangling Alliances. A
formal alliance is for the purpose of
making enemies, never of making
friends. Friendship among nations
rests on common interests, on the in
terlocking of minds, the interlocking
of trade.
In the United States a treaty can be
entered into only with the open and
public consent of the Senate. Every
international relation is therefore
open to the world. No minister, no
president, no group of men whatever
can secretly pledge the nation to any
line of action. No president, no cabi
net, no minister, no congress acting
alone can make any declaration of
public policy. For these reasons the
United States must stand outside the
tangled snare of concessions and intri
gues we call world politics. She must
play her games of diplomacy with
open hands. She cannot be the secret
friend of any other nation. She can
not be a secret enemy because all her
acts, friendly or hostile, are known to
all the world.
The secret treaty in the interest of
imperial spoliation is the bane of
Europe. It ties each foreign office to
the service of the most reckless and
greedy of its great exploiting inter
ests. It has reduced the chancelleries
of more than one nation to be nothing
more than the firm name under which
its exploiting corporations compass
their ends in Asia or in Africa.
The secret is a relic of the military
state. The civilzed world is still or
ganized on the mediaeval theory that
war is a natural function to he ex
pected in the normal course of events,
not a hideous inorau, physical;. and
financial catastrophe. la the old
theory as expounded by Machiavelli,
the king has no other business but
war. It is the duty of his ministers
to find weak places in the defenses of
other kings through which war may
be successful, and to find, after the
fact, excuses by which' war can be
justified. The secret treaty, the .con
cession to a friendly power, ithe. arti-.
ficial interference with a rival, —all
these belong to the days' of Ma<?hia
velli. If . all parties concerpe.4 ( |cojJ>ld :
come out.into the open, .Wihsre . t-het
United States is forced to stahd, we
should soon have an end to tneAttgld-
German struggle, of the rivalry be
tween the Triple Entente and the
Triple Alliance.
Outworn ideas ot' national glory, out
worn figures of.speech as tp national
purposes, outworn mediaevalism in
our -conception of the state.—all'these
find expression in the "secret treaty,"
the "entangling alliance," which is a'
chief obstacle in the way of the -con
ciliation of nations. ?>• -
Historically, the influence of Amer
ica has been exerted in opposition to
Imperialism and to infringement of
the great nations on the rights of the
sniall. This is the inception of the
Monroe Doctrine, which in spite of its
perversion and its wrong accentuation r
has protected Latin America from the
fate of Africa. That this should now
be a Pan-American, not njerely an.
American doctrine goes without say
ing. And it must never be allowed i.o
degenerate-into " a Dollar Diplomacy"
which would.reserve Tropical America
as a special "sphere of, .influence-' for
American exploitation,. For the true,
and final form of the Mojiuae.Doctrine
is found, in the Drago .Doctrine,. of the
republics of South Ameripa,, that tiie
forqe of . arms should. be used-ras.
an,instrument iu industiriul spoliation.
This the people of the United States
should adopt as• their-.own. « <
Principle Disregarded '
In a recent deciskm- of- arbitration;
the King 'of Swed'ant'laW down 'this
principle: that a nation "has 110
right to land- troops in .order-to pYe-'
serve the property or the rights of her
nationals.". This''lwinciple. ha,s '-beefr
disregarded in the •strangling of
Persia, the rape of Mongolia and of
Tibet, in the chronic robbery of
China, and in the annexation of Egypt, <
of Korea, uf Morocco and of Tripoli.
But it is for all that a just.-and honor
able principle, and it is disregarded
only when a nation, by virtue of super
ior strength or superior civilization
feels itself justified in taking posses
sion of another for its good, and inci
dentally for the commercial advant
age of its own exploitating interests.
It is true that the smaller nations of
the tropics are subject to violent
political disturbances. They have not
learned the value of liberty as regu
lated hjy law. Yet it is highly prob
able that not one in ten of these
periodical/ revolutions I's of spontan- 1
eous native origin. of them are
started for purposes of spoliation by

autside adventurer's and a large ma
jority are paid for by adventurers
'State. The Public School exists
everywhere at the public expense, and
belonging to one or more of the great
epinniarqia'ruatrojis tit', fheiear'th.. When."
'the"fi v nal' iriitli'Ts"known'"of unhappy
Mexico the responsibility for hfei' dis
(Mfer'sl will rest nht on'her martyred
president, ridr "on the' sol
"diers'of fortune by whose hands he
•fell, but on the men in New York or
in London perhaps,' whose nioiWy has
kept iliese revolutions going. Mexico,
with fatal riches of oil and gold, is not
tlie first nation to Ite torn asunder by
'conflicting ."sphere's of influence."
The. influence of the republic has
been always thrown against another
form of imperialism involved in the
phrase "Control of the Sea." America
has never claimed any such control
nor has she admitted the right to
others. It is a mediaeval idea going
back foiir hundred years to the time
when the great seas were divided be
tween Spain and Portugal. America
has stood for the open sea, the restric
tion of national jurisdiction to the
three-mile limit, the extermination of
piracy, and in iater years for the most
important doctrine of the immunity of
war. To make the high seas an open

HI STORY
Ella Wissie Beaver ...T. .Tulare
fEmrria Howse Kuno Palo Alto
George Lutes Righter '.Campbell
Francis Marion Russell .Los Angeles
MATHEMATICS
Rose Margaret Bennett »....San Diego
Amanda Westhold ..Quincy, 111:
CHEMISTRY
Alicje. .Ruth Bergcr San Jose
Elton Marion Hogg. v Saratoga
Charles Kirkton McWilliams San Joss
tWilliam John Van Sicklen Castle-ton, Ontario,,Canada
BOTANY
Charlotte Elliott Del Rapids, S. D.
BACTERIOLOGY
Frank Maltaner .Cincinnati, O.
ZOOLOGY
Josephine Louise Dows Randall Stanford University
ENTOMOLOGY
F rankie Willard Galexioo
GEOLOGY
Theodore Chapin., Los Angeles
Joseph Stanley Hook jjPerris ■
ENGINEER
CHEMICAL ENGINEERING
. Louis Wjlliam Pingree.-. ; Ogden-, Utah
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING
fDexter Simpson Kimball N. Y.
Lyman Stevenson King Oakland .
r *• . V <
JURIS DOCTOR
George Armand Ditz Stockton f-1
Maurice Timothy Dooling • Hollistter ,
fEmmet Ross Fertig Nobl.esvjlle, Ind.
fFrank Louis Guerena rs .. „Spnora
George Juan Hatfield ...Oakland-,
Frank Howard Hilton ; Portland, Ore.
Grant Holcomb San Bernardino^
Ignatius Martin Peckham tV| . San . Jose
Edmund Wright Pugh Los. (Angeles..
Alfred'Worcester Robertson Saflt? Ba,rbru:a ..
Chester Harvey Warlow : . r ., . ( Fresno,
Herbert Eustace White Saotamento^.
tFrederick feertram Wood i. . Alto.
* September 6, 1912
fjanuary 10, 1013 "O '?t it

highway-to be tr.a.ver?ed , ( afc ( anytime,-
in absolute--safety, by any, vessel what
ever would-gp/t'ar away
witji international..waff,.-and iSitill ftWH
ther in ren^.vi!),£..tlve- and dnv<-
gerous burden of naval protectioni»'l£;
all military operations.- at. sea couidibe
confined to the <oa,nnon shot.
from the. shore, the- original motive
of the three-mile limit of. jurisdiction,
it would represent one of ,the most
practical triumphs of civilization.- Ttfe
nations should join to make the ocean
safe, not to fill it with floating fort
resses designed t tp. protect merchant
ships from robbery by the very per
sons with whom they trade.
Still another lesson from. America is
one in which, we all agree; the divorce
of religion from political control and
therefore from the,domain of politics.
Absolute religions freedom exists .in
America because the state assumes
no relation of any kind to religious
corporations as such, So long as these
do not interfere with the freedom of
soul or body of men not. belonging to
them, their acts do not concern the
state. And on no, one policy is there
more firm agreement.in America* than
in the absolute separation of Church
nowhere can any sect or gpoup of seets
claim any dominating relation in re

gard to It. To the average American
the strife over Church properties and
Church interests so real in Europe
seem incomprehensible. The Church,
any church, is in every way better oif
for separation from the government.
Whatever achievement; whatever pro
gress it may make is its own, and this
progress is solid because it involves,
no ulterior political end.
Connected with the freedom of the
church is the freedom of the people
from other forms of paternalism. The
state becomes benevolent only when it
lias failed to be just. It allows special
opportunities to individuals only
where it has denied opportunity to
men at large.
The "old-age pension" is a conven
ient'illustration,.'lt has been justly
compared to- the. free pass homeward
granted to the human wrecks who
have lost their all in the. gambling
rooms of-Monte Carlo. It is the shill
ing given to the man run over by my
lord's automobile.
In a better system he would not have
been run over. He would not have
lost his money in a vile resort, lie
would not have needed an outside
pittance to carry him through old age.
Host Workers Died in War
The old-age pension exists in Eng
land as a convenient balm for inequal
ity and injustice. The best of her
workers have died in her wars/ leav
ing a weaker stock to breed from.
These have grown' up unskilled, in de
fault of the shools that make men
strong. They have grown up in the
atmosphere of the public house, sod
den with lust and beer and whisky.
They have lost the opportiiniy tljat
should be theirs, and at the end their
jfellows must be taxed to feed tliem.
The tragedy of the East End of Lon
don is no normal part of the tragedy
of Life. It is no part of the normal
America. It is no part of a nation
which has given opportunity.
Brit'in America a' new country, fresh,
unspoiled, full of life and hope, it is
possible to hctt'd' government" to its
rigid purpose, to develop opportunity
by the elimination of privilege, teacfy,.
men to lean' not on' government but
on themselves, and to aid by'fraternal '
giving those who have fallen in. tbg
prang 1 ; not "to weaken by unearned
public money those who are falling but
who can be made to stand, 'tfie wav
Up it i '">• vtc.
t)t the transgressor is hard and we
not make it eapier'ff we could;
|We' could not if we would'. To. give a..
plkh'a chance to'rise,' i'.s to allow him'
hlfbthe choice t<>Tali:" ' *';•"
1 is ! •?; . " *
foii.fession of Failure , '
■ "Tho old-age pension" .is, so- far as 1
it goes, a confession of failure of de- ■
jnocracy,. Except as a measure of'"
e |1 £r-fie.pcy, l Jts real purpose in Eng
land, it has no justification in good '
government. Clean up the. social at
mosphere, restore to the people, what ■
is rightfully theirs, and they will care, 1
rare accidents .excepted, for their own
old age.
in America tlie struggle, between '
labor and capital can never assume
the form it has in Europe. In a gov
ei nment which stands for justice, and
which is in no way occupied with
making money for its people, nor from
its People, nor in supporting exploiting
intei ests in other lauds, there is uo
visable necessity for universal col
lective ownership. Where classes do
not leally exist there is no pertinence
in the artificial distinctions of aristoc
racy, proletariat and bourgeoisie
which have been so laboriously
brought over from Europe. If these*
distinctions exist, most of us in Amer
ica belong to one single class, that of
the bourgeoisie.
There exist in America as elsewhere,
vast fortunes, disproportionate to the
ability or the efforts of those who con
trol them. But their history has been
of short duration. They are not leg
acies from an unjust past. Their or
igin belongs to the present. It is
mainly individual. Great luck, great
skill or ingeniously managed privilege
stands behind each of them. By the
same means as in Europe, by co
operation through interlocking direc
torates, these great fortunes have
been made to stand together and thus
by a process of financial suction to
build up fortunes still greater. But
one most important difference exists.
The national government, in theory
and for the most in fact, stands aloof
from these combinations. The con
trol of public affairs, even of financial
matters is beyond their permanent
reach. Their influence on foreign
diplomacy is limited because no secret
influence can control, and the power
of money for evil is mostly lost in
publicity.
Property May Rule
In all their operations, they are sur
rounded by an alert and in the long
run victorious opposition of democ
racy. In America property may rule,
but only for a time. In the earlier
•centuries of Europe, the period of
Absolutism, when monarchy was a
political power not a function of so
ciety, it was, of course, true that prop
erty ruled. But it was the ruler who
had the property. It was his by force
of position. Not until the money lend
ers of the last century secured the
strangle hold on the nations of
Europe was this condition brought to
an end.
Then again, property ruled, but it
was not that the King and the nobles
held the property. Property held
them, and in Europe today it is money
that rules, and it rules King and
peasant alike, for everything el3e
hinges on the Imperial Explotation of
foreign lands.
In America, this is true in a degree,
but the rule of money has its visible
limits. For the United States belongs
to its people.
"Dollar Diplomacy"
While Europe generally, the alliance
between financial interests and the
government is open and avowed, such
•connections in America have proved
fatal to political leaders and to polit
ical parties. The methods by which
the "powers of Europe" through their
foreign offices bolster up adventures
in foreign lands, could not be used in
America. The diplomacy of persua
sion, threats or force of arms in the
interest of private ventures would be
impossible here. The people might
consent to "Dollar Diplomacy" but
•only for a time and until its nature
is understood. The recent, repudia
tion of our relation to the "Six Power
Loan' to China will serve as a case in
point.
And here again we must admit that
out democratic conception of govern
ment has to struggle for acceptance
in America. The protective tariff in
theory and in practice is a flat viola
tion of its principles. Tt is a flat
violation of the spirit of the American
■constitution. It is privilege pure and
simple granted to the few by the
many, in the belief that in the long
run the many would profit by it. Its

purpose was to diversify industries by
letting the farmer help pay the ex
penses of the manufacturer. It has
just that effect, and the farmer and
laborer are becoming increasingly
discontented with its burdens and the
inequalities before the law which are
part and parcel of its operations.
In America, the army and navy,
though the latter has grown beyound
all reason through the rivalry from
England and Germany, still represent
a democratic ideal. We still hold to
the thought that our officers are not
rulers but servants of the people.
Our military element stands near
the parting of the ways, for all offi
cialism tends to aggrandize itself,
most of all that which is associated
with pomp and with patriotism. Mili
tarism for its own sake belongs to the
state in whoch property rules. "It
furnishes," says John A. Hobson, "a
profitable support to certain strong
vested interests. It is a decorative
element in social life and above all, it
is necessary to keep down the
pressure of the forces of internal
reform."
>o Room for Militarism
The ideals of Militarism and Democ
racy can never coexist. And this na
tion is too far given over to democ
racy ever to do more than dally with
the military ideal. In a nation that
knows no caste, and has no aristioc
racy other than temporary and self
selected, no military traditions will
ever be permanent. There can never
be a warrior caste holding special
privilege or special authority.
As a people, we of the United States
are too rich in resources of wealth, of
education and of intelligence to be
controlled by influences of militarism.
And thus and for the same reasons, in
the republic of America, the state ex
ists for the man, not the man for the
state. This is the fundamental differ
ence between the Eighteenth Century
and Twentieth. And let us speed the
day when it may be said not only that
"America means Opportunity" but
that the same hopeful word may be
spoken of Germany and England and
France and Russia and of all the na
tions in the sisterhood of civilization.
Lord Acton thus sums up the move
ment of the history of civilization:
"It is by the combined efforts of the
weak made under compulsion to re
sist the reign of force and constant
wrong that in the rapid change but
slow progress of four hundred years
liberty has been preserved and se
cured and extended and finally under
stood."
And as America comes to under
stand her own message of democracy,
internationalism and peace, she will
carry this understanding back to the
motherland of Europe.
Within the last two months Presi
dent Wilson and Mr. Bryan have
planned a most practical and effective
means of bringing American influence
to bear on the problems of World
peace.
The end in view is to relegate war
to a position of last resort in times
of international difference, to place
soldiers and dreadnaughts in the
background—not in the front of na
tional movement.
The essence of this American policy
is that in case of friction between
nations, the matter be placed for six
months in the hands of a joint high
Commission of investigation, chosen
in part from the contending nations,
the majority from friendly neutrals.
These- for six months shall study the
question at issue, neither nation in the

meantime demonstrating, mobilizing
or increasing the armament, until the
final report is made. After this each
nation is free to choose conciliation,
concession, compromise, arbitration
or war. And with six months to think
it over there will be no war. Wars are
waged for greed, for politics, or be
cause the mob has been stirred by
senseless speech or reckless journal
ism. And in many cases this reckless
journalism has been carefully cal :u
--lated and fully paid for by those in
terested in the sale of the accessories
of war.
The treaty of arbitration will natur
ally follow on the treaty for investi
gation. Courts will naturally supple
ment results of friendly offices. But
the agreement for friendly conference
comes first and is for the present the
more important. The Treaty of Arbi
tration is most valuable, — not as
preventing war, for a nation bent on
war, if there is such a case, will not
stop to agree to arbitrate. The world
is finally ruled by public opinion. Ar
bitration treaties clinch public opinion
and hold it to its duty.
The present decade has been char
acterized by needless, costly and
brutal wars, the result not of actual
conditions of today, but of blunders
and crimes committed in the past.
Wars do not spring up afresh in our
civilization. They spring from old
wars whose seeds were not destroyed
by peace.
Rut, however, dark the present out
look may seem with half the coined
money of the world spent each year
on war and war's accessories, the far
outlook is most promising. The cruel
horror of the Balkan war, the waste of
armed peace and frustrate war
throughout the civilized world, — all
these make powerfully for peace, for
real peace — the Peace of Law and
Trust, and not the Peace of Force.
And just now is the time when
American influence can be most defi
nitely crystallized and made effective.
And we are thankful that we have in
the seats of Authority at Washington
men who definitely work for peace
and whom war and war's fripperies
do not dazzle nor attract.
Two hundred and seven students were awarded the Bachelor of
Arts Degree by President David Stu rr Jordan in the Assembly Hull tills
morning. Two were granted the Bachelor of Laws Degree, while
thirty-five were given the Master of Arts Degree. In addition to these
the Academic Council also awarded three Engineer, thirteen .luris Doc
tor of Philosophy Degrees. The Co miuencemnet address preceded the
presenting of the sheepskins, *Th e Conquest of Europe by America,"
wsis the subject of the strong address delivered by Doctor Jordan.

I wish this morning to say a serious
word to you as citizens of the great
republic and as future leaders in its
thought and action. I wish you to
think earnestly of the part American
influence must play in the world his
tory of our century. It is for us to
help cure the accumulated evils of
the older civilization. Those men in
Europe who look furthest into the
future hope for the salvation of
Europe through ideals brought back
from practical service in America.
One of these. Senator La Fontaine of
Brussels, has given me my title as the
expression of the hope of his life,
"The Conquest of Europe by America."
I hasten to say that 1 do not mean
conquest by force of arms, for 1 have
no interest in such conquests and no
belief that victories thus won result in
any permanent good to any nation.
Nor do I mean financial conquests,
the floating of imperial loans or the
permeation of any part of European
business by financiers from the New
World. Still less do I celebrate a
shoppers' contest on the Place de
I'Opera or among the dazzling bar
gains of the Hon Marche. Nor does
the trail of American tourists who
cross with gold the palms of Europe's
servitors, all the way from Piccadilly
to the Pyramids awaken in me any
pride of nation or of race. The only
permanent conquest is that of ideas.
America stands, has always stood, for
two ideals from which she cannot
escape, for they are fundamental in
her origin and in her growth. These
are internationalism and democracy,
and these ideals being invincible
must conquer America, and through
her, reconquer Europe. And as both
are incompatible with war, their final
triumph marks the end of spoliation,
of and of that relation be
tween nations which breeds suspicion
and hatred. The conquest of the
world by the ideals of International
ism and Democracy marks the coming
of universal peace.
In the address at Baltimore in 1911,
Henri La Fontaine of Brussels, the
veteran prophet of International Life,
used these striking words.
"Emigration perhaps more than
war has deprived the old, historic
countries of their most energetic and
fittest ones to build the progressive
and wealthy people you are on this side
of the Atlantic. You are for us
Europeans, the beloved Brotherland,
Do not forget that Europe is always

and will still remain for you the be
loved Motherland. Europe is now for
America what Greece was for Europe.
Europe has liberated (Ireece. Amer
ica has to liberate Europe from its
burdens, its prejudices, its hatreds.
It is your duty, it is your highest duty
to reconcile outside your borders the
people you have reconciled within
your borders. For indeed the Amer
ican people is at present the true
international people. It is the elect
people which alone can further inter
nationalism and can transform all of
the people of the Earth into a family
of nations, a brotherhood of men, an
international people." "For coloniza
tion is not mainly done by men and by
capital, but also by ideas, by example,
by experiment."
Not Always True to Ideals
We may freely admit in the begin
ning that America has not always been
true to her own ideals, and that she
has not always clearly seen her own
future. She has had her own lapses,
moral and social, some of these be
cause of associations with Europe and
through imitation of glories alien to
her history. If she had been true to
herself she would never have known
a single foreign war. She has no part in
those greeds and jealousies of money
or of race which still keep up turmoil
in Europe. Her war with Spain with
its eagerness for exploitation, its
tinsel imperialism and its pride of
participation in "world politics" rep
resents the worst of these lapses, and
its evil effects are long in passing.
But though the inception of this affair
was European in method, its contin
uance has been characteristically
American. Instead of exploitation, we
have brought to the Philippines educa
tion and sanitation. We have expend
ed on them a hundred times what we
have received, and if ever imperilism
can be respectable we have made it so.
Another false movement has been
in the building of warships and forts
in America. This lacks the motive
for similar extravagances in Europe,
because the peace of the new world is
no where threatened. But with us as
everjwhere the military spirit grows
with the money spent on it. The more
mouths fed by the State the greater
the clamor for the feeding of still
more. We have also to reckon with
the desire for giant decoration, for
big navies for sheer bigness' sake, the
feeling that this is the richest and'
most progressive nation on the globe,

and that as such she can beat old
Europe at her own game even though
that game be not worth the candle.
But with all lapses and delinquin
cies the fact of internationalism and
the ideal of democracy have been and
must always remain with the United
States, and from the United States
these ideals will react with greater
and greater force on the thoughts and
deeds of Europe.
Internationalism is the heritage of
America, not of choice at first, but cf
necessity. She has perforce grown
up with this ideal, because no other
was possible. She became the cosmo
politan nation of the world because
of her complex origin and with this
origin she could be nothing else. In
a new civilization, in the struggles of
the frontier each man is rated for
what he is worth. Under these condi
tions no one cares for the petty pre
cedences of rank or race. What a
man can do in the next twenty-four
hours outvalues any question as to
who were his ancestors.
All Hate Dies
On a railway train not long ago
some one was overheard to say: "This
is the land where all hate dies. My
father was German; my mother was
French. What do I care for all that?
I am an American. The old hatreds
and rivalries are nothing to me."
America was English, first. In lang
uage, in spirit, in conscience and in
government it is England which domi
nates. For the English race, above
all others, with its adaptation for co
operation and for compromise is the
builder of free states.
It was the chosen among the Eng
lishmen of three centuries ago who
founded the germ colonies of Virginia
and Massachusetts May. In the fol
lowing years it has been the like
minded from their own nation and
from others who have crossed the seas
to enter into their work.
The first who came were the bold,
the free, the self-ruling, the pleasure
scorning element of English life. They
came to escape from the state
church and the church-state, that they
might worship in their own fashion
and according to dictates of their indi
vidual consciences.
They detested the law of primogeni
ture which thrust the spirit of pre
cedence into the bosom of every fam
ily. They abhorred the law of entail
which burdened the land with the
curse of privilege even to unborn gen
erations.
They had caught from France the

spirit of liberty, equality, fraternity,
but as befits the calmer blood of the
north, they gave this spirit a con
structive interpretation, and the idea
of equality was to them especially rich
in practical results. Equality before
the law, equal access to land, to edu
cation, to professions and trades,
. equal access to legislat ion, each of
these conceptions broadened out into
the spirit of democracy.
And after England came to other
nations of Europe, each with its own
part and in its own degree giving its
contingent of free-born men, the ad
| mixture of blood gave strength and
! versatility to the rising nation.
But withal, the dominant note is
English still, with as many diver-
I gences from the England of today as
j from the England of the Stuarts.
In later years other immigration has
come, not alone the bold in search of
adventure, of new homes and new free
doms, but the weak and the oppressed,
"the beaten men of the beaten races,"
who llee from war taxation in search
of living wages and of daily bread.
But all these are cast into the same
melting pot and in most of them there
arises a clear response to the call of
free institutions.
In this melting pot of America, all
the old racial antipathies disappear
and all hereditary hatreds. There is
110 final distinction of British or Ger
j man, of French or Italian, of Spanish
|or Slav, of Dutch or Scandinavian,
!or of Jew or Gentile. The average
| American is as cosmopolitan in origin
j and relationship as is royalty in
Europe, though for a different set of
| reasons. But in America there is 110
[ distinction of common or noble, of
high or low, of aristocracy, bour
j geoisie or proletariat except as these
| are artificially emphasized in the in
dustrial strife we have inherited from
Eu rope.
To the international mind of Amer
ica, there seems 110 need or pertinence
to an Anglo-Saxon alliance as against
any other people. In so far as such
alliance is desirable or humanly pos
sible it exists already in a common
sympathy and a common literature, ft
would lie weakened by a stated agree
ment of the Anglo-Saxon group to
swell each others Meets with dread
naughts. The true bond of Union of
the Greater Britain involves no rup
ture with the Greater Germany, or the
Greater France or the Greater Scandi
navia to which we in America likewise
claim allegiance.
To the American, "Pan-Germanism,"
Pan-Slavism," as lie hears these ex
pounded seem a meaningless return to
ideals of tlie Middle Ages. They re
mind him of the Holy Roman Empire,
which never was, and should never be,
or still more they hark back to Pan-
Islamism the futile dream of the light
ing Turk.
There is nothing in aggrandizement
of race as such which appeals to the
American, the child of all European
races. That such races are ennobled
by conquest of lesser tribes and by
their undigested exploitation he does
not believe. To the American even
England's greatness does not exist on
her Indian Empire, but rather in spite
of it.
Within the last forty years there lias
grown up a new world in Europe and
in the range of civilization. The old
conception of the states of Europe
as opposed to one another and mutu
ally destructive must, pass away in the
broader aspects of civilization.
The growth of International life is
one of the most striking aspects of
this new relation. The extention of
travel, the spread of commerce, the
achievements of science, the exchanges
in education, all these tend to make
a great "melting pot" of the civilized
world. Neither in his business, in his
pleasures, nor in his intellectual pur
suits is the educated man anywhere
limited to any one country. All
rational human interests are con
nected by interlocking bonds of many
kinds, joining one people with another.
The hundreds of international con
gresses held every summer the world
over and covering almost every gen
eral interest of men is the strongest
possible evidence of this Interlocking,
and all this constitutes an inter
national bond not to be lightly severe.!.
A declaration of war between nations
is now little less than an attack on
civilization in all its most cherished
aspects, social, moral, as well as finan
cial. The lines of national policy
taken for granted half a century ago
are fast becoming impossible, their
very suggestion being ruinous.
I'c ideiicj toward < oix'ilintion
The influence of America tends to
wards international conciliation. It
involves the recognition of men as
men, each valued for what he is or
wlnit tie can do. Both of these deter
mined, of course, by bis blood and his
education, but not to be judged in ad
vance by any wholesale distinctions.
This is the spirit of the Interna
tionale, the common life and common
sympathy among civilized people, re
gardless of national boundaries. This
International life constitutes the final
and lasting basis of International
Peace.
As the history of America rests on
internationalism so is her social fab
ric built on democracy. Historically
her democracy has a double origin. Its
theory was French, its practice was
English. The French philosophers
furnished the one, the reaction against
British methods the other.
For inequality before the law is the
foundation of the polity of Great
Britain. Her constitution stands on
privilege. Her social customs rest on
precedence of classes, precedence of
individuals. England chooses her lords
and magnates, her patrons and tyrants
long before they are born. These be
long to her system of privilege by
which cities like Westminster, Shef
field, Davenport, Arundel, were so
long held, virtually tax-free, by men
whose ancestors received their land as
royal gifts or bought tlieni as cow
pastures. The law of favor rises above
the law of justice.

Hut men of the pioneer type, the
Roundhead, the Pilgrim, the Puritan,
the American have hated favor and
privilege and precedence of every
form. The toll of tin 1 rich and the dole
of the poor are alike offensive to them.
And this dislike of overreaching and of
coddling has passed over to their de
scendents. John Hay once said of the
people of the new state of Ohio. "They
looked to no one as their superiors,
and on none as their inferiors. They
knew 110 want they could not them
selves satisfy," and to this Senator
Bayard added the further note, "They
were too self-willed and independent
to allow any to rule over them but
t heniselves."
This in a word is the spirit of de
mocracy, of the democracy of the
pioneer if you like, but America is the
land of pioneers, and this fact still in-

11 uences all her acts unci her insti
tutions. Her people find their polit
ical ideals in an equal start with equal
opportunity, in equality before the
law, in equal access to education, in
equal access to the land, in equal ac
cess to legislation.
The nation is built on individuals
each responsible for himself. The
state is a mutual adjustment for their
collective benefit. The individual in
America does not live for the state, is
not the property of the state, the state
has no control over him except that
which the individual lias delegated. It
is no duty of the state to promote his
prosperity or the prosperity of his
group. The state is rather the umpire
which decides questions of justice, the
servant by which the needs of the
many are met by co-operation in so far
as these needs are general and conson
ant, with ideals of justice.
As the founders of our state were
frontiersmen scattered far and wide,
without cities, without corporations,
without great collective utilities, their
democracy became that of individual
ism. The demands of society, of col

leetive action, of national power were
little considered because such de
mands did not exist, and they have
never existed in the forms in which
hhirope knows them. And for this
reason, if for no other, the native
American lias not been strongly at
tracted to the various doctrines called
socialism in 13uropi. Like conditions
produce like results, and the growth
nl' industrialism with its successes and
its oppressions brings the same re
action as in Furope. But as a matter
of fact, those who take part in these
reactions are for the most part re
cent immigrants, whoso ideals of gov
ernment even in democracy are collec
tive, standing in strong contrast with
tho individualistic democracy native
to the soil.
Fifty year. - , ago, in lsC!, Fdouard
Laboulaye published bis renrirkable

hook "Paris <>n Amerique," (Paris in
America.) Its motive was to show
what a great city might become under
the conditions of freedom which pre
vailed in America. The America was
idealized of course. It, represented
the noblest ideals of free-born men,
rather than the actual America, the
forces of democracy must strive with
all the other forces extant in modern
civilization.
j The influence of this volume was
wide spread and long continued. It
was my fortune to know two men of
power, the one a Dane, the other a
Swiss who were drawn to America by
the charm of Laboulaye and who were
not disappointed. They found what
they sought, and this is a perennial
characteristic of the republic. Who
ever comes to America and with what
ever motive will find what he seeks.
If he remains long enough and has
penetration to look below the surface
I he will find America.
If one seeks religious freedom he
will find it. Our fathers provided for
that. Whatever form or type of re
ligious discipline he seeks he will find

accordingly, I>ut its discipline is vol
untary not enforced by the state. If
one would escape from all religious in
fluence he can do so in America. It is
for him to choose.
If one seeks for class distinction, for
domination of the great over the small,
hereditary or otherwise, he will find it
in personal and local only, not
wrought into the fabric of society. If
one would find privilege enthroned
even as in Europe he will find it in
America, just as powerful as in
Europe, Imi everywhere surrounded
by an equally powerful movement of
insurgency. If one would find greed,
selfishness, lust, vanity, tolerance,
anything which belongs to the dregs
of humanity, he will find it in America,
and it may be embodied in powerful
and defiant institutions. For freedom
guarantees only freedom, and the
meaning of freedom is opportunity.
In Laboulaye's work, the official
Napoleonic view, which "Paris in
America" takes as its point of depar
ture is thus expressed. "A society
without administration, without army,
without police, with the savage liberty
of praying, speaking, writing, acting
each in his fashion would not last a
quarter of an hour. It is the negation
of all these principles, of all the con
ditions of this civilization which
makes the unity of our French nation.
In constituting our administration,
hierarehal and centralized, the wis
dom of our fathers lias long since
raised France to the first rank and
shown to the French people that
Liberty is Obedience, then is our Glory
and our Force."
Ketcrse 01 Napoleon's Ideals
The distinctive character of the
American ideals reverses this. It is
the building up of a society in which
the government stands only for jus
tice. The state does not concern itself
with right, worship or wrong worship,
with right thinking or wrong think
ing, with writing truth or writing
falsehood, with right acts or words or
ceremonies, except as abuse of liberty
may infringe on the liberty of others.
"I'ne societe sans administration,
sans armee, sans gendarmes, avec
la liberie sauvage de prier. de ponser,
de parler, d'ecrire, d'agir. chacun a
sa facon ne durerait pas 1111 quart
d'heure. ("est la negation de tons ces
principcs, de toutes les conditions de
cette civilisation qui fait I'unite dp la
nation francaise. En constituant
notre administration bierarchis.ee et
centralised, la sagesse de 110s peres a
depuis longtemps eleve la France a
premier rang et appris aux Francais
<pie la liberte ("est l'obeissance. C'est
la notre glorie et notre force."
The state is not pious, benevolent,
virtuous, generous, because these per
sonal virtues, cannot be exercised by
officialism leads to their abuse.
Privilege to the poor means privilege
to the rich; privilege to the rich
means privilege to the poor, but al
ways the more powerful arm secures
the greater privilege. The essence of
democracy is that no one. rich or
poor should have a lease on privilege.
The wealth of the republic does not
rest on its great sweep of prairies,
its mines or its commerce. Its primal
source is in its free schools, and its
freedom of choice of trade or profes
sion. The results of this freedom
can be measured in money as well as
in power. Now as ever, "America
means opportunity," opportunity for
each man and woman to prepare for
the work he can do best, opportunity
for each to find his place in life, op


I'IIESIDKXT DAVID KTAitlt .lOUD \ X
portunity for the work that neeils to
be done to find the man who can do it.
It is for each man to plan his own
career, to make his rwn escape "from
status to contract." The democracy
of America can acknowledge no mas
sters save of its own creation and the
power that makes these is adequate
to set them aside.
While every conception In Europe
has its reflex in America, while every
idea of administration from absolut
ism to anarchy finds its earnest advo
cates, none of these seem likely to
displace the fundamental ideal of
democratic individualism developed by
the fathers of the republic. This ideal
was expressed by Lincoln and long be
fore him by Anstolle. It is the function
of the state to establish justice among
men and to perform those acts of com
mon necessity, contributing to the pre
servation and enjoyment of human life
which collective action can accomp
lish better than private effort. Fur
ther than that, democracy which is
simply enforced co-operation should
not go, and by this principle, that no
theory of government should be
pushed beyond the consideration of its
practical results, the republic escapes
the choice of any single one among
the hundreds of remedies for political
ills. There is 110 possibility of the
adoption of anarchism, socialism, col
lectivism or individualism or any
other system as an exclusive and ex
cluding finality. The people of Amer
ica are interested in actual results
rather than any form of logical neces
sity as a ground for political action.
The Test of Solidarity
The test of national solidarity may
be found in its freedom from the need
of force or authority in the conduct of
its affairs. Let us imagine if we can,
a catastrophe which should remove
from the United States every repre
sentative of coercive power, every offi
cial of whatever rank from the Presi
dent to the last notary public, every
representative of army or of navy, or
of church, every policeman, every
authority of whatever kind.
Such a loss might create wied
spread bewilderment or profound
sorrow. It would have no relation to
anarchy. Except among certain un
assimilated foreign populatipns in
large cities it would lead to no
violence, to no riots. The functions
of national life would go on as before.
One by one communities would come
together and provide for the election
of officers. It was said that the death
of Lincoln gave a new proof of how
"republics live, not by a single life
but the right divine of man, the mil
lion trained to be free."
I.ret us apply the same test to other
nations. 111 the France of Napoleon
111, we are assured that without force,
society would not endure "for a quar
ter of an hour." What would be the
result in Germany today? No one can
tell. The German is endlessly patient,
even under needless burdens. What
would he do, if burdens were all sud
denly thrown off, if "Strengstens Ver
boten," the motto of Prussian rule
were suddenly found to have no force
behind it?
The lesson of democracy is therefore
the lesson of the United States. It is
no new lesson. The people of the
United States are merely European
people who have had some additional
experience, have learned some things
in their travels, perhaps forgetting

Patterson Dana Nowell Tulare
Frank Herbert Richey Tipton, Ind.
Edga r Clarence Smith Azusa
Homer Roberts Spence Alameda
GRAPHIC ART
Ethel Ora Qardin Salinas
James Leo Duff Menlo Park
fErnest P»ruce Nelson San Jose
Louise Rider Watsonville
Stella Belle Sankey Clearfield, Pa.
Cordelia Madison Smith Venice
MATHEMATICS
Sydnie Aileen Gardner Orange
Dorothy Marian Hindle Del Mar
Julia R. Johnson Aberdeen, Wash.
Ralph Matthews Noble Galesburg, 111.
Margaret Marion Steele San Jose
Mary Hilda Volkmor Whittier
APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Grace Raymond Helmick Helena, Mont.
CHEMISTRY
George Henry Beurhaus Tacoma, Wash.
Hector Crandall San Francisco
fEdwin Reginald Harding San Bernardino
fPaul Mark Levy San Francisco
Hugh Harold Mosher San Jose
Robert Lindley Murray Palo Alto
+Zeno Ostenberg.. San Jose
Alfred Liles Phillips Santa Cruz
PHYSICS
Herbert Rovell Benham McKittrick
Francis Sitwell Pratt Ontario
Albert John Scholl, Jr Los Angeles
Ruth Sceley Los Gatos
Glen Miller Smyth Salt Lake City-, Utah
Guy Carleton Swan Lawrence, Mass.
Devi Dyal Virmani Bahawalpore, India
Waldo Ralph Waelty Santa Clara
William Irvin Weaver Colorado Springs, Colo.
BOTANY
Taylor Jay Blethen Portland, Ore.
Arthur Dickie Borden Palo Alto
Ollis Willard Newman Santa Barbara
Frank Jason Smiley Fresno
PHYSIOLOGY AND HISTOLOGY
Albert Gordon Bower Salt Lake City, Utah
Roscal Leroy Draper Arroyo Grande
Florence Edetha Dunlop Vale, Ore.
George Stevenson Holcman Riverside
Leonard R. Jenkins Ogden, Utah
Merton James Price San Francisco
Karl Ludwig Schaupp Santa Rosa
John Philip Stricklcr San Diego
fCharles Ernest von Geldern San Francisco
*Carleton Wolsey Washburne Sierra Madre
fClyde T. Wetmore Hollister
Robert William Wilcox Delta, Colo.
fElsa Will Rochester, N. Y.
ZOOLOGY
Clara Crosby Santa Cruz
Mary 1* isk Los Angeles
ENTOMOLOGY AND BIONOMICS
Leroy Childs Redlands
fWarren Locke Smith Ferndale
Verne Genoa Stevens Palo Alto
GEOLOGY AND MINING
Robert Edwin Anderson San Francisco
Harry Mayo Andreen Redwood City
fCarl Hugh Beal Palo Alto
Edward Burke Corbet San Francisco
Waldemar Fenn Dietrich San Francisco
Benjamin Edward Erb Chemainus, B. C.
Andrew Douglas Fyfe Oceanside
fWilliam Conrad Gehrmann Davenport, la.
Mortimer Louis Hall Pasadena
Harold Briggs Hannibal San Jose
Olaf Pitt Jenkins Stanford* University
Grover Berner Lantz Colton
tßernard Harold Lasky San Francisco
*Robcrt James McCann Pacific Grove
fHarvey Wright Parmelee Santa Barbara
*Alonzo William Peake Los Angeles
Arthur E. Remington Watertown, N. Y.
*Edwin John Stewart Los Angeles
CIVIL ENGINEERING
Charles Edward Beechcr Monrovia
Edwin Prcscott Bly Los Angeles
I von Clay Briggs San Francisco

some others equally important. In
like manner the choicest thoughts and
worthiest ideals of America are
thoughts and ideals long before treas
ured by the advanced minds of Europe.
Another lesson from America is that
of the effective federation. The United
States is composed of fortliy-eight
self-governing states, each an entity
within itself managing its own affairs,
with its own officials and its own
laws, controlled by the nation in those
interests only which it shares with
its sister states. Some of these states
are as populous and wealthy as the
Kingdom of Europe, but each is a
jurisdiction, not a power. None can
make war alone, either by force of
arms or force of tariffs. While there
is all machinery for settling disputes
between states such disputes never
arise, because no state has the right
to use its force to promote private
business.
Stilts Equality
The states in a federal union meet
as jurisdictions. The small ones have
no fear of the large ones, and those
not touching the sea suffer in no way
from their restricted position. A
"Power" hampered as is the state of
Illinois would chafe against its limita
tions, and its jingoes would talk of
fighting their way to the ocean. But
viewed as a jurisdiction, surrounded by
similar jurisdictions, the people of
Illinois have no consciousness of limi
tation.
And this should be our ultimate con
ception of a nation. Its boundary line
should represent merely the limit of
jurisdiction. That jurisdiction ceases
does not imply need of violence be
tween the people on the two sides nor
require fortification for the purpose
of repelling violence. The Canadian
boundary is an example of this meet
ing of nations not as powers but as
jurisdictions.
This four-thousand-mile line, rang
ing through all kinds of territory and
all sorts of conditions, disputed nearly
all the way "with all the brutal frank
ness common to blood relations," has
for nearly a hundred years not known
a fortress, a soldier, a warship or a
gun. It is a peace boundary, the limit
of the jurisdiction of one self-govern
ing nation, the beginning of that of
another. It lacks but one thing to
make it ideally perfect, the re
moval of the custom-house, the em
blem of national suspicion and greed,
the remnant, of the days when it was
considered good economics for a na
tion to "have its taxes paid by for
eigners."
Europe in Turmoil
Viewed as "great powers" devoted
to the exploitation of the wealth of
other regions the leading nations of
Europe are in constant turmoil. The
German empire for example, is hamp
ered on every side. Her scant sea
coast is split in two by the presence
of Denmark. Her German Rhine dis
charges itself through Holland. The
ports of Amsterdam, Rotterdam, Ant
werp and Ostend, geographically her's,
are occupied by alien people whom she
could crush out in a moment, were it
not. for the physical force of the rest
of Europe and the moral power of the
world. Of Poland, she has too much
or too little. A large part of the Ger
man people live in the alien empire of
Austro-Hungary and in the republic
of Switzerland, while after forty years
of possession, Germany scarcely owns
Alsace or Lorraine. The states are a
thorn in the side of the empire, a bur
den and a weakness, just so long as
their two millions of people are held in
semi-vassalhood by the rule of force.
A free republic of Alasace Lorraine, a
second Swithzerland, half-German,
half-French separating and joining
two great nations would be a strength
and an inspiration to both. The true
gateways of the Rhine held by the
power of blood and iron is a centre
of menace to civilization. For the
wrong done at the Treaty of Frank
fort forty years ago, Europe has had to
pay most dearly for it is around the
question of Alsace-Lorraine that half
the crushing armament of Europe has
been built up. She is hemmed in
everywhere by the scare of old strugg
les, to her perennial discomfort. For
this reason, she suffers from the
"Drang nach Osten," she seeks a road
to the Persian gulf, an empire over
seas, and every form of imperial ex
tension to lands "under the sun,"
which may for the moment seem
plausible or possible.
But Germany as a jurisdiction suf
fers none of these limitations. Her
powers are only those which are
needed for the people's good. They
are merely her public duties. It mat
ters noting that her sway is checked
on almost, every side before it reaches
the sea. Other jurisdictions inter
vene, and each of these looks after
the public needs of man, which are
mostly justice, conservation, educa
tion, sanitation, and peace. As one of
the "Great Powers" of the world, Ger
many (with her fellow states as well)
is a center of friction, injustice and
unrest.
"A Power" is u Menace.
As a jurisdiction Germany is busy
with profitable and constantly ad
vancing industries, with an admir
able system of education and exten
sive provision for all the people's
needs, and no enlargement of boun
daries could in the least increase her
usefulness, her wealth or her happi
ness. As "a power" Germany is a
menace to the well being of civiliza
tion as every other "power" of similar
nature must be in its degree For
the prosperity of every people de
pends on international peace, and
all power-manifestations are either
actual or potential war. War is a
form of world-sickness from which
every function of civilization suffers,
and most of all those bonds of com
mon thought and common interest
sumed up in internationalism. And
to the members of an international
state, German in blood and in sym
pathy as well as English, all these
destructive rivalries of state with
state seem mediaeval and unworthy.
There is, in fact, something primitive,
outworn and unprogressive in the
spectacle of a civilized nation com
posed of millions of clever people
trusting for its defense to forts and
ships. With all the resources of
business, of science, ef education, of
thought, to depend on force seems a
lazy, even cowardly, shirking of the
higher possibilities of national
strength. To be surrounded by armed
guards, "holding the drop" on all
Commercial rivals is not a lofty con
ception of a nations's greatness. This
attitude has been as disastrous to
England's own peace of mind as it has
been menacing to the world's welfare.
To escape from this condition is not
a matter of a day nor a generation. Tt
is not easy for America even to

Revoe Carlisle Briggs Pasadena
fFloyd Cromwell Brown Selma
fEdward James Cullen Gilroy
Harry Bascom Davis Pomona
Wilbur Harvey Doxsee Redwood City
Robert Francis Duryea Palo Alto
fClarence Bernard Goodwin Sunnyvale
fCharles Stewart Grace Rivera
John Stanley Grepe, Jr East Highlands
tNorman Marshall Ilalcombe San Francisco
George William Hawley Portland, Ore.
George Walter Hunt San Jose
Paul Eells Jeffers Los Angeles
William Aiken Laird Lindsay
Alexander Stuart Macdonald San Francisco
tßobert Patchen Miller Los Angeles
Maurice Everard Morrison Morgan Hill
fßoger Wolcott Olmsted Los Angeles
Chauncey Smith Elie, Manitoba, Canada
Thomas Joseph Spellman Colma
fßurroughs Agin Stephenson Los Altos
Harry George Todtmann Chicago, 111.
George Harlan Trask Los Angeles
Charles Ralph Tupper San Jose
Romney Leigh Vaughn San Francisco
Guss Valentine Wallach Boonville
Carlton Levi Wyant Montecito
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING
■fClarence P. Campbell Los Angeles
tWallace Rolland Finney...* Modesto
*Burdette Lord Hostettler Erie, Pa.
Kenneth Irving Marshall Los Angeles
tAugustus Mudge Sanborn Redlands
Cecil Stocker Simon Los Gatos
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
*Edward Niles Adam Melville, Mont.
Frank Edward Anderson Los Angeles
fClarence Cannon Argabrite Ventura
John Watson Fleming Armstrong....Fivemiletown, Tyrone, Ire.
Everett Morse Calderwood Palo Alto
Melville Nathaniel Clark Dayton, Me.
John Francis Cullen Gilroy
Walter Jennings Dodge Los Angeles
Charles Greenlaw Duffin Comas, Wash.
Harry Adolph Fore Campbell
Frank Julius Gleiss Los Angeles
Walter J. Hammond ! Grinncll, la.
Tomiichi Haraguchi Nagasaki, Japan
George Edward Holditch Orange
Edgar Alden Jackson Cupertino
Linford C. Lull, Jr Los Angeles
James Arthur Miller Hanford
Rea Cambridge Newman Santa Barbara
George Washington Poison Menlo Park
Gaylord Kenyon Snyder Los Angeles
fGiistav Wade Naples
George Ireland Wright Pasadena
BACHELOR OF LAWS
Jerome Devereaux Peters San Jose
Granville Numan Wood, Jr Blue Lake
MASTER OF ARTS
LATIN
Flora Anne Bagley Burlingame
fßuth Beard Modesto
Catherine Ida Birch Redlands
fAnna Shipley Cox San Jose
Mabel Harriett Usinger Berkeley
Malcolm Leland Yeary Los Angeles
GERMAN
Edward Vere Brewer Elyria, Ohio
Catharine Morris Cox San Jose
Lydia Lucilc Meyer . Milwaukee, Wis.
Clara Lydia Schaaf Fort Wayne, -Ind.
fElsie Louise Whittemore Alhambra
ENGLISH LITERATURE
Anais Julia Allen Pasadena
Walter Clyde Curry Gray-Court, S. C.
ENGLISH PHILOLOGY
Maude Cleveland Stanford University
EDUCATION
tWilliam Samuel Marten San Jose
Clarence Lucien Phelps Jamestown, Ky.
William Thomas Root, Jr Pasadena
William Roy Tanner Minneapolis, Minn.

emancipate herself from reactionary
influences in Europe. There are many
interests in a wealthy nation who find
an aid or an affinity in militarism.
Debt creates debt, and those inter
ested in spending band together
against reform.
These matters proceed by slow pro
gress, interrupted by reaction; we
are in a period of relapse at present,
when reactionary forces seem to be in
the ascendant. Hut this very fact with
its burdens and horrors may be count
ed on to turn the balance in the other
direction.
Neither will there be a formal fed
eration of nations in this era. In
deed federation in fact will come long
before it comes in name. A single
unified world-government with cen
tralized rule under one set of men at
some one place, is only a dream—and
not a cheerful dream at that. What
the world needs is more self-control,
more local responsibility not more
governmental machinery. Neverthe
less every step in removing injustice,
in eliminating sources of friction, in
extending common interests, as the
postol union, the telegraph union, in
ternational law, international police
duties, international conferences and
congresses, arbitration treaties a nd
other agreements—are steps in the di
rection of the passing of war. To this
end, three great contributing agencies
are: the growth of the popular con
science, the interlocking of personal
interests, and the ruinous expence
which the progress of science has
brought to every branch of the mili
tar art.
All this has its part in the great
movement towards common interna
tional life, "La Vie Internationale" of
the dreams of La Fontaine, a life
which shall make war impossible and
will, in time, do away with exploita
tions, with tariff barriers and with all
the products of that narrow nativism,
which considers only the purposes or
enrichment of the selfish few, the one
in-group against all the out-groups of
the world.
Value of Open Diplomacy
Another lesson which the United
States may teach is the value of open
diplomacy. A secret agreement of
any kind whatever. It was a warning
of Washington that his nation should
beware of Entangling Alliances. A
formal alliance is for the purpose of
making enemies, never of making
friends. Friendship among nations
rests on common interests, on the in
terlocking of minds, the interlocking
of trade.
In the United States a treaty can be
entered into only with the open and
public consent of the Senate. Every
international relation is therefore
open to the world. No minister, no
president, no group of men whatever
can secretly pledge the nation to any
line of action. No president, no cabi
net, no minister, no congress acting
alone can make any declaration of
public policy. For these reasons the
United States must stand outside the
tangled snare of concessions and intri
gues we call world politics. She must
play her games of diplomacy with
open hands. She cannot be the secret
friend of any other nation. She can
not be a secret enemy because all her
acts, friendly or hostile, are known to
all the world.
The secret treaty in the interest of
imperial spoliation is the bane of
Europe. It ties each foreign office to
the service of the most reckless and
greedy of its great exploiting inter
ests. It has reduced the chancelleries
of more than one nation to be nothing
more than the firm name under which
its exploiting corporations compass
their ends in Asia or in Africa.
The secret is a relic of the military
state. The civilzed world is still or
ganized on the mediaeval theory that
war is a natural function to he ex
pected in the normal course of events,
not a hideous inorau, physical;. and
financial catastrophe. la the old
theory as expounded by Machiavelli,
the king has no other business but
war. It is the duty of his ministers
to find weak places in the defenses of
other kings through which war may
be successful, and to find, after the
fact, excuses by which' war can be
justified. The secret treaty, the .con
cession to a friendly power, ithe. arti-.
ficial interference with a rival, —all
these belong to the days' of Ma<?hia
velli. If . all parties concerpe.4 ( |cojJ>ld :
come out.into the open, .Wihsre . t-het
United States is forced to stahd, we
should soon have an end to tneAttgld-
German struggle, of the rivalry be
tween the Triple Entente and the
Triple Alliance.
Outworn ideas ot' national glory, out
worn figures of.speech as tp national
purposes, outworn mediaevalism in
our -conception of the state.—all'these
find expression in the "secret treaty,"
the "entangling alliance," which is a'
chief obstacle in the way of the -con
ciliation of nations. ?>• -
Historically, the influence of Amer
ica has been exerted in opposition to
Imperialism and to infringement of
the great nations on the rights of the
sniall. This is the inception of the
Monroe Doctrine, which in spite of its
perversion and its wrong accentuation r
has protected Latin America from the
fate of Africa. That this should now
be a Pan-American, not njerely an.
American doctrine goes without say
ing. And it must never be allowed i.o
degenerate-into " a Dollar Diplomacy"
which would.reserve Tropical America
as a special "sphere of, .influence-' for
American exploitation,. For the true,
and final form of the Mojiuae.Doctrine
is found, in the Drago .Doctrine,. of the
republics of South Ameripa,, that tiie
forqe of . arms should. be used-ras.
an,instrument iu industiriul spoliation.
This the people of the United States
should adopt as• their-.own. « <
Principle Disregarded '
In a recent deciskm- of- arbitration;
the King 'of Swed'ant'laW down 'this
principle: that a nation "has 110
right to land- troops in .order-to pYe-'
serve the property or the rights of her
nationals.". This''lwinciple. ha,s '-beefr
disregarded in the •strangling of
Persia, the rape of Mongolia and of
Tibet, in the chronic robbery of
China, and in the annexation of Egypt, <
of Korea, uf Morocco and of Tripoli.
But it is for all that a just.-and honor
able principle, and it is disregarded
only when a nation, by virtue of super
ior strength or superior civilization
feels itself justified in taking posses
sion of another for its good, and inci
dentally for the commercial advant
age of its own exploitating interests.
It is true that the smaller nations of
the tropics are subject to violent
political disturbances. They have not
learned the value of liberty as regu
lated hjy law. Yet it is highly prob
able that not one in ten of these
periodical/ revolutions I's of spontan- 1
eous native origin. of them are
started for purposes of spoliation by

autside adventurer's and a large ma
jority are paid for by adventurers
'State. The Public School exists
everywhere at the public expense, and
belonging to one or more of the great
epinniarqia'ruatrojis tit', fheiear'th.. When."
'the"fi v nal' iriitli'Ts"known'"of unhappy
Mexico the responsibility for hfei' dis
(Mfer'sl will rest nht on'her martyred
president, ridr "on the' sol
"diers'of fortune by whose hands he
•fell, but on the men in New York or
in London perhaps,' whose nioiWy has
kept iliese revolutions going. Mexico,
with fatal riches of oil and gold, is not
tlie first nation to Ite torn asunder by
'conflicting ."sphere's of influence."
The. influence of the republic has
been always thrown against another
form of imperialism involved in the
phrase "Control of the Sea." America
has never claimed any such control
nor has she admitted the right to
others. It is a mediaeval idea going
back foiir hundred years to the time
when the great seas were divided be
tween Spain and Portugal. America
has stood for the open sea, the restric
tion of national jurisdiction to the
three-mile limit, the extermination of
piracy, and in iater years for the most
important doctrine of the immunity of
war. To make the high seas an open

HI STORY
Ella Wissie Beaver ...T. .Tulare
fEmrria Howse Kuno Palo Alto
George Lutes Righter '.Campbell
Francis Marion Russell .Los Angeles
MATHEMATICS
Rose Margaret Bennett »....San Diego
Amanda Westhold ..Quincy, 111:
CHEMISTRY
Alicje. .Ruth Bergcr San Jose
Elton Marion Hogg. v Saratoga
Charles Kirkton McWilliams San Joss
tWilliam John Van Sicklen Castle-ton, Ontario,,Canada
BOTANY
Charlotte Elliott Del Rapids, S. D.
BACTERIOLOGY
Frank Maltaner .Cincinnati, O.
ZOOLOGY
Josephine Louise Dows Randall Stanford University
ENTOMOLOGY
F rankie Willard Galexioo
GEOLOGY
Theodore Chapin., Los Angeles
Joseph Stanley Hook jjPerris ■
ENGINEER
CHEMICAL ENGINEERING
. Louis Wjlliam Pingree.-. ; Ogden-, Utah
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING
fDexter Simpson Kimball N. Y.
Lyman Stevenson King Oakland .
r *• . V <
JURIS DOCTOR
George Armand Ditz Stockton f-1
Maurice Timothy Dooling • Hollistter ,
fEmmet Ross Fertig Nobl.esvjlle, Ind.
fFrank Louis Guerena rs .. „Spnora
George Juan Hatfield ...Oakland-,
Frank Howard Hilton ; Portland, Ore.
Grant Holcomb San Bernardino^
Ignatius Martin Peckham tV| . San . Jose
Edmund Wright Pugh Los. (Angeles..
Alfred'Worcester Robertson Saflt? Ba,rbru:a ..
Chester Harvey Warlow : . r ., . ( Fresno,
Herbert Eustace White Saotamento^.
tFrederick feertram Wood i. . Alto.
* September 6, 1912
fjanuary 10, 1013 "O '?t it

highway-to be tr.a.ver?ed , ( afc ( anytime,-
in absolute--safety, by any, vessel what
ever would-gp/t'ar away
witji international..waff,.-and iSitill ftWH
ther in ren^.vi!),£..tlve- and dnv<-
gerous burden of naval protectioni»'l£;
all military operations.- at. sea couidibe
confined to the <oa,nnon shot.
from the. shore, the- original motive
of the three-mile limit of. jurisdiction,
it would represent one of ,the most
practical triumphs of civilization.- Ttfe
nations should join to make the ocean
safe, not to fill it with floating fort
resses designed t tp. protect merchant
ships from robbery by the very per
sons with whom they trade.
Still another lesson from. America is
one in which, we all agree; the divorce
of religion from political control and
therefore from the,domain of politics.
Absolute religions freedom exists .in
America because the state assumes
no relation of any kind to religious
corporations as such, So long as these
do not interfere with the freedom of
soul or body of men not. belonging to
them, their acts do not concern the
state. And on no, one policy is there
more firm agreement.in America* than
in the absolute separation of Church
nowhere can any sect or gpoup of seets
claim any dominating relation in re

gard to It. To the average American
the strife over Church properties and
Church interests so real in Europe
seem incomprehensible. The Church,
any church, is in every way better oif
for separation from the government.
Whatever achievement; whatever pro
gress it may make is its own, and this
progress is solid because it involves,
no ulterior political end.
Connected with the freedom of the
church is the freedom of the people
from other forms of paternalism. The
state becomes benevolent only when it
lias failed to be just. It allows special
opportunities to individuals only
where it has denied opportunity to
men at large.
The "old-age pension" is a conven
ient'illustration,.'lt has been justly
compared to- the. free pass homeward
granted to the human wrecks who
have lost their all in the. gambling
rooms of-Monte Carlo. It is the shill
ing given to the man run over by my
lord's automobile.
In a better system he would not have
been run over. He would not have
lost his money in a vile resort, lie
would not have needed an outside
pittance to carry him through old age.
Host Workers Died in War
The old-age pension exists in Eng
land as a convenient balm for inequal
ity and injustice. The best of her
workers have died in her wars/ leav
ing a weaker stock to breed from.
These have grown' up unskilled, in de
fault of the shools that make men
strong. They have grown up in the
atmosphere of the public house, sod
den with lust and beer and whisky.
They have lost the opportiiniy tljat
should be theirs, and at the end their
jfellows must be taxed to feed tliem.
The tragedy of the East End of Lon
don is no normal part of the tragedy
of Life. It is no part of the normal
America. It is no part of a nation
which has given opportunity.
Brit'in America a' new country, fresh,
unspoiled, full of life and hope, it is
possible to hctt'd' government" to its
rigid purpose, to develop opportunity
by the elimination of privilege, teacfy,.
men to lean' not on' government but
on themselves, and to aid by'fraternal '
giving those who have fallen in. tbg
prang 1 ; not "to weaken by unearned
public money those who are falling but
who can be made to stand, 'tfie wav
Up it i '">• vtc.
t)t the transgressor is hard and we
not make it eapier'ff we could;
|We' could not if we would'. To. give a..
plkh'a chance to'rise,' i'.s to allow him'
hlfbthe choice t<>Tali:" ' *';•"
1 is ! •?; . " *
foii.fession of Failure , '
■ "Tho old-age pension" .is, so- far as 1
it goes, a confession of failure of de- ■
jnocracy,. Except as a measure of'"
e |1 £r-fie.pcy, l Jts real purpose in Eng
land, it has no justification in good '
government. Clean up the. social at
mosphere, restore to the people, what ■
is rightfully theirs, and they will care, 1
rare accidents .excepted, for their own
old age.
in America tlie struggle, between '
labor and capital can never assume
the form it has in Europe. In a gov
ei nment which stands for justice, and
which is in no way occupied with
making money for its people, nor from
its People, nor in supporting exploiting
intei ests in other lauds, there is uo
visable necessity for universal col
lective ownership. Where classes do
not leally exist there is no pertinence
in the artificial distinctions of aristoc
racy, proletariat and bourgeoisie
which have been so laboriously
brought over from Europe. If these*
distinctions exist, most of us in Amer
ica belong to one single class, that of
the bourgeoisie.
There exist in America as elsewhere,
vast fortunes, disproportionate to the
ability or the efforts of those who con
trol them. But their history has been
of short duration. They are not leg
acies from an unjust past. Their or
igin belongs to the present. It is
mainly individual. Great luck, great
skill or ingeniously managed privilege
stands behind each of them. By the
same means as in Europe, by co
operation through interlocking direc
torates, these great fortunes have
been made to stand together and thus
by a process of financial suction to
build up fortunes still greater. But
one most important difference exists.
The national government, in theory
and for the most in fact, stands aloof
from these combinations. The con
trol of public affairs, even of financial
matters is beyond their permanent
reach. Their influence on foreign
diplomacy is limited because no secret
influence can control, and the power
of money for evil is mostly lost in
publicity.
Property May Rule
In all their operations, they are sur
rounded by an alert and in the long
run victorious opposition of democ
racy. In America property may rule,
but only for a time. In the earlier
•centuries of Europe, the period of
Absolutism, when monarchy was a
political power not a function of so
ciety, it was, of course, true that prop
erty ruled. But it was the ruler who
had the property. It was his by force
of position. Not until the money lend
ers of the last century secured the
strangle hold on the nations of
Europe was this condition brought to
an end.
Then again, property ruled, but it
was not that the King and the nobles
held the property. Property held
them, and in Europe today it is money
that rules, and it rules King and
peasant alike, for everything el3e
hinges on the Imperial Explotation of
foreign lands.
In America, this is true in a degree,
but the rule of money has its visible
limits. For the United States belongs
to its people.
"Dollar Diplomacy"
While Europe generally, the alliance
between financial interests and the
government is open and avowed, such
•connections in America have proved
fatal to political leaders and to polit
ical parties. The methods by which
the "powers of Europe" through their
foreign offices bolster up adventures
in foreign lands, could not be used in
America. The diplomacy of persua
sion, threats or force of arms in the
interest of private ventures would be
impossible here. The people might
consent to "Dollar Diplomacy" but
•only for a time and until its nature
is understood. The recent, repudia
tion of our relation to the "Six Power
Loan' to China will serve as a case in
point.
And here again we must admit that
out democratic conception of govern
ment has to struggle for acceptance
in America. The protective tariff in
theory and in practice is a flat viola
tion of its principles. Tt is a flat
violation of the spirit of the American
■constitution. It is privilege pure and
simple granted to the few by the
many, in the belief that in the long
run the many would profit by it. Its

purpose was to diversify industries by
letting the farmer help pay the ex
penses of the manufacturer. It has
just that effect, and the farmer and
laborer are becoming increasingly
discontented with its burdens and the
inequalities before the law which are
part and parcel of its operations.
In America, the army and navy,
though the latter has grown beyound
all reason through the rivalry from
England and Germany, still represent
a democratic ideal. We still hold to
the thought that our officers are not
rulers but servants of the people.
Our military element stands near
the parting of the ways, for all offi
cialism tends to aggrandize itself,
most of all that which is associated
with pomp and with patriotism. Mili
tarism for its own sake belongs to the
state in whoch property rules. "It
furnishes," says John A. Hobson, "a
profitable support to certain strong
vested interests. It is a decorative
element in social life and above all, it
is necessary to keep down the
pressure of the forces of internal
reform."
>o Room for Militarism
The ideals of Militarism and Democ
racy can never coexist. And this na
tion is too far given over to democ
racy ever to do more than dally with
the military ideal. In a nation that
knows no caste, and has no aristioc
racy other than temporary and self
selected, no military traditions will
ever be permanent. There can never
be a warrior caste holding special
privilege or special authority.
As a people, we of the United States
are too rich in resources of wealth, of
education and of intelligence to be
controlled by influences of militarism.
And thus and for the same reasons, in
the republic of America, the state ex
ists for the man, not the man for the
state. This is the fundamental differ
ence between the Eighteenth Century
and Twentieth. And let us speed the
day when it may be said not only that
"America means Opportunity" but
that the same hopeful word may be
spoken of Germany and England and
France and Russia and of all the na
tions in the sisterhood of civilization.
Lord Acton thus sums up the move
ment of the history of civilization:
"It is by the combined efforts of the
weak made under compulsion to re
sist the reign of force and constant
wrong that in the rapid change but
slow progress of four hundred years
liberty has been preserved and se
cured and extended and finally under
stood."
And as America comes to under
stand her own message of democracy,
internationalism and peace, she will
carry this understanding back to the
motherland of Europe.
Within the last two months Presi
dent Wilson and Mr. Bryan have
planned a most practical and effective
means of bringing American influence
to bear on the problems of World
peace.
The end in view is to relegate war
to a position of last resort in times
of international difference, to place
soldiers and dreadnaughts in the
background—not in the front of na
tional movement.
The essence of this American policy
is that in case of friction between
nations, the matter be placed for six
months in the hands of a joint high
Commission of investigation, chosen
in part from the contending nations,
the majority from friendly neutrals.
These- for six months shall study the
question at issue, neither nation in the

meantime demonstrating, mobilizing
or increasing the armament, until the
final report is made. After this each
nation is free to choose conciliation,
concession, compromise, arbitration
or war. And with six months to think
it over there will be no war. Wars are
waged for greed, for politics, or be
cause the mob has been stirred by
senseless speech or reckless journal
ism. And in many cases this reckless
journalism has been carefully cal :u
--lated and fully paid for by those in
terested in the sale of the accessories
of war.
The treaty of arbitration will natur
ally follow on the treaty for investi
gation. Courts will naturally supple
ment results of friendly offices. But
the agreement for friendly conference
comes first and is for the present the
more important. The Treaty of Arbi
tration is most valuable, — not as
preventing war, for a nation bent on
war, if there is such a case, will not
stop to agree to arbitrate. The world
is finally ruled by public opinion. Ar
bitration treaties clinch public opinion
and hold it to its duty.
The present decade has been char
acterized by needless, costly and
brutal wars, the result not of actual
conditions of today, but of blunders
and crimes committed in the past.
Wars do not spring up afresh in our
civilization. They spring from old
wars whose seeds were not destroyed
by peace.
Rut, however, dark the present out
look may seem with half the coined
money of the world spent each year
on war and war's accessories, the far
outlook is most promising. The cruel
horror of the Balkan war, the waste of
armed peace and frustrate war
throughout the civilized world, — all
these make powerfully for peace, for
real peace — the Peace of Law and
Trust, and not the Peace of Force.
And just now is the time when
American influence can be most defi
nitely crystallized and made effective.
And we are thankful that we have in
the seats of Authority at Washington
men who definitely work for peace
and whom war and war's fripperies
do not dazzle nor attract.
Two hundred and seven students were awarded the Bachelor of
Arts Degree by President David Stu rr Jordan in the Assembly Hull tills
morning. Two were granted the Bachelor of Laws Degree, while
thirty-five were given the Master of Arts Degree. In addition to these
the Academic Council also awarded three Engineer, thirteen .luris Doc
tor of Philosophy Degrees. The Co miuencemnet address preceded the
presenting of the sheepskins, *Th e Conquest of Europe by America,"
wsis the subject of the strong address delivered by Doctor Jordan.

I wish this morning to say a serious
word to you as citizens of the great
republic and as future leaders in its
thought and action. I wish you to
think earnestly of the part American
influence must play in the world his
tory of our century. It is for us to
help cure the accumulated evils of
the older civilization. Those men in
Europe who look furthest into the
future hope for the salvation of
Europe through ideals brought back
from practical service in America.
One of these. Senator La Fontaine of
Brussels, has given me my title as the
expression of the hope of his life,
"The Conquest of Europe by America."
I hasten to say that 1 do not mean
conquest by force of arms, for 1 have
no interest in such conquests and no
belief that victories thus won result in
any permanent good to any nation.
Nor do I mean financial conquests,
the floating of imperial loans or the
permeation of any part of European
business by financiers from the New
World. Still less do I celebrate a
shoppers' contest on the Place de
I'Opera or among the dazzling bar
gains of the Hon Marche. Nor does
the trail of American tourists who
cross with gold the palms of Europe's
servitors, all the way from Piccadilly
to the Pyramids awaken in me any
pride of nation or of race. The only
permanent conquest is that of ideas.
America stands, has always stood, for
two ideals from which she cannot
escape, for they are fundamental in
her origin and in her growth. These
are internationalism and democracy,
and these ideals being invincible
must conquer America, and through
her, reconquer Europe. And as both
are incompatible with war, their final
triumph marks the end of spoliation,
of and of that relation be
tween nations which breeds suspicion
and hatred. The conquest of the
world by the ideals of International
ism and Democracy marks the coming
of universal peace.
In the address at Baltimore in 1911,
Henri La Fontaine of Brussels, the
veteran prophet of International Life,
used these striking words.
"Emigration perhaps more than
war has deprived the old, historic
countries of their most energetic and
fittest ones to build the progressive
and wealthy people you are on this side
of the Atlantic. You are for us
Europeans, the beloved Brotherland,
Do not forget that Europe is always

and will still remain for you the be
loved Motherland. Europe is now for
America what Greece was for Europe.
Europe has liberated (Ireece. Amer
ica has to liberate Europe from its
burdens, its prejudices, its hatreds.
It is your duty, it is your highest duty
to reconcile outside your borders the
people you have reconciled within
your borders. For indeed the Amer
ican people is at present the true
international people. It is the elect
people which alone can further inter
nationalism and can transform all of
the people of the Earth into a family
of nations, a brotherhood of men, an
international people." "For coloniza
tion is not mainly done by men and by
capital, but also by ideas, by example,
by experiment."
Not Always True to Ideals
We may freely admit in the begin
ning that America has not always been
true to her own ideals, and that she
has not always clearly seen her own
future. She has had her own lapses,
moral and social, some of these be
cause of associations with Europe and
through imitation of glories alien to
her history. If she had been true to
herself she would never have known
a single foreign war. She has no part in
those greeds and jealousies of money
or of race which still keep up turmoil
in Europe. Her war with Spain with
its eagerness for exploitation, its
tinsel imperialism and its pride of
participation in "world politics" rep
resents the worst of these lapses, and
its evil effects are long in passing.
But though the inception of this affair
was European in method, its contin
uance has been characteristically
American. Instead of exploitation, we
have brought to the Philippines educa
tion and sanitation. We have expend
ed on them a hundred times what we
have received, and if ever imperilism
can be respectable we have made it so.
Another false movement has been
in the building of warships and forts
in America. This lacks the motive
for similar extravagances in Europe,
because the peace of the new world is
no where threatened. But with us as
everjwhere the military spirit grows
with the money spent on it. The more
mouths fed by the State the greater
the clamor for the feeding of still
more. We have also to reckon with
the desire for giant decoration, for
big navies for sheer bigness' sake, the
feeling that this is the richest and'
most progressive nation on the globe,

and that as such she can beat old
Europe at her own game even though
that game be not worth the candle.
But with all lapses and delinquin
cies the fact of internationalism and
the ideal of democracy have been and
must always remain with the United
States, and from the United States
these ideals will react with greater
and greater force on the thoughts and
deeds of Europe.
Internationalism is the heritage of
America, not of choice at first, but cf
necessity. She has perforce grown
up with this ideal, because no other
was possible. She became the cosmo
politan nation of the world because
of her complex origin and with this
origin she could be nothing else. In
a new civilization, in the struggles of
the frontier each man is rated for
what he is worth. Under these condi
tions no one cares for the petty pre
cedences of rank or race. What a
man can do in the next twenty-four
hours outvalues any question as to
who were his ancestors.
All Hate Dies
On a railway train not long ago
some one was overheard to say: "This
is the land where all hate dies. My
father was German; my mother was
French. What do I care for all that?
I am an American. The old hatreds
and rivalries are nothing to me."
America was English, first. In lang
uage, in spirit, in conscience and in
government it is England which domi
nates. For the English race, above
all others, with its adaptation for co
operation and for compromise is the
builder of free states.
It was the chosen among the Eng
lishmen of three centuries ago who
founded the germ colonies of Virginia
and Massachusetts May. In the fol
lowing years it has been the like
minded from their own nation and
from others who have crossed the seas
to enter into their work.
The first who came were the bold,
the free, the self-ruling, the pleasure
scorning element of English life. They
came to escape from the state
church and the church-state, that they
might worship in their own fashion
and according to dictates of their indi
vidual consciences.
They detested the law of primogeni
ture which thrust the spirit of pre
cedence into the bosom of every fam
ily. They abhorred the law of entail
which burdened the land with the
curse of privilege even to unborn gen
erations.
They had caught from France the

spirit of liberty, equality, fraternity,
but as befits the calmer blood of the
north, they gave this spirit a con
structive interpretation, and the idea
of equality was to them especially rich
in practical results. Equality before
the law, equal access to land, to edu
cation, to professions and trades,
. equal access to legislat ion, each of
these conceptions broadened out into
the spirit of democracy.
And after England came to other
nations of Europe, each with its own
part and in its own degree giving its
contingent of free-born men, the ad
| mixture of blood gave strength and
! versatility to the rising nation.
But withal, the dominant note is
English still, with as many diver-
I gences from the England of today as
j from the England of the Stuarts.
In later years other immigration has
come, not alone the bold in search of
adventure, of new homes and new free
doms, but the weak and the oppressed,
"the beaten men of the beaten races,"
who llee from war taxation in search
of living wages and of daily bread.
But all these are cast into the same
melting pot and in most of them there
arises a clear response to the call of
free institutions.
In this melting pot of America, all
the old racial antipathies disappear
and all hereditary hatreds. There is
110 final distinction of British or Ger
j man, of French or Italian, of Spanish
|or Slav, of Dutch or Scandinavian,
!or of Jew or Gentile. The average
| American is as cosmopolitan in origin
j and relationship as is royalty in
Europe, though for a different set of
| reasons. But in America there is 110
[ distinction of common or noble, of
high or low, of aristocracy, bour
j geoisie or proletariat except as these
| are artificially emphasized in the in
dustrial strife we have inherited from
Eu rope.
To the international mind of Amer
ica, there seems 110 need or pertinence
to an Anglo-Saxon alliance as against
any other people. In so far as such
alliance is desirable or humanly pos
sible it exists already in a common
sympathy and a common literature, ft
would lie weakened by a stated agree
ment of the Anglo-Saxon group to
swell each others Meets with dread
naughts. The true bond of Union of
the Greater Britain involves no rup
ture with the Greater Germany, or the
Greater France or the Greater Scandi
navia to which we in America likewise
claim allegiance.
To the American, "Pan-Germanism,"
Pan-Slavism," as lie hears these ex
pounded seem a meaningless return to
ideals of tlie Middle Ages. They re
mind him of the Holy Roman Empire,
which never was, and should never be,
or still more they hark back to Pan-
Islamism the futile dream of the light
ing Turk.
There is nothing in aggrandizement
of race as such which appeals to the
American, the child of all European
races. That such races are ennobled
by conquest of lesser tribes and by
their undigested exploitation he does
not believe. To the American even
England's greatness does not exist on
her Indian Empire, but rather in spite
of it.
Within the last forty years there lias
grown up a new world in Europe and
in the range of civilization. The old
conception of the states of Europe
as opposed to one another and mutu
ally destructive must, pass away in the
broader aspects of civilization.
The growth of International life is
one of the most striking aspects of
this new relation. The extention of
travel, the spread of commerce, the
achievements of science, the exchanges
in education, all these tend to make
a great "melting pot" of the civilized
world. Neither in his business, in his
pleasures, nor in his intellectual pur
suits is the educated man anywhere
limited to any one country. All
rational human interests are con
nected by interlocking bonds of many
kinds, joining one people with another.
The hundreds of international con
gresses held every summer the world
over and covering almost every gen
eral interest of men is the strongest
possible evidence of this Interlocking,
and all this constitutes an inter
national bond not to be lightly severe.!.
A declaration of war between nations
is now little less than an attack on
civilization in all its most cherished
aspects, social, moral, as well as finan
cial. The lines of national policy
taken for granted half a century ago
are fast becoming impossible, their
very suggestion being ruinous.
I'c ideiicj toward < oix'ilintion
The influence of America tends to
wards international conciliation. It
involves the recognition of men as
men, each valued for what he is or
wlnit tie can do. Both of these deter
mined, of course, by bis blood and his
education, but not to be judged in ad
vance by any wholesale distinctions.
This is the spirit of the Interna
tionale, the common life and common
sympathy among civilized people, re
gardless of national boundaries. This
International life constitutes the final
and lasting basis of International
Peace.
As the history of America rests on
internationalism so is her social fab
ric built on democracy. Historically
her democracy has a double origin. Its
theory was French, its practice was
English. The French philosophers
furnished the one, the reaction against
British methods the other.
For inequality before the law is the
foundation of the polity of Great
Britain. Her constitution stands on
privilege. Her social customs rest on
precedence of classes, precedence of
individuals. England chooses her lords
and magnates, her patrons and tyrants
long before they are born. These be
long to her system of privilege by
which cities like Westminster, Shef
field, Davenport, Arundel, were so
long held, virtually tax-free, by men
whose ancestors received their land as
royal gifts or bought tlieni as cow
pastures. The law of favor rises above
the law of justice.

Hut men of the pioneer type, the
Roundhead, the Pilgrim, the Puritan,
the American have hated favor and
privilege and precedence of every
form. The toll of tin 1 rich and the dole
of the poor are alike offensive to them.
And this dislike of overreaching and of
coddling has passed over to their de
scendents. John Hay once said of the
people of the new state of Ohio. "They
looked to no one as their superiors,
and on none as their inferiors. They
knew 110 want they could not them
selves satisfy," and to this Senator
Bayard added the further note, "They
were too self-willed and independent
to allow any to rule over them but
t heniselves."
This in a word is the spirit of de
mocracy, of the democracy of the
pioneer if you like, but America is the
land of pioneers, and this fact still in-

11 uences all her acts unci her insti
tutions. Her people find their polit
ical ideals in an equal start with equal
opportunity, in equality before the
law, in equal access to education, in
equal access to the land, in equal ac
cess to legislation.
The nation is built on individuals
each responsible for himself. The
state is a mutual adjustment for their
collective benefit. The individual in
America does not live for the state, is
not the property of the state, the state
has no control over him except that
which the individual lias delegated. It
is no duty of the state to promote his
prosperity or the prosperity of his
group. The state is rather the umpire
which decides questions of justice, the
servant by which the needs of the
many are met by co-operation in so far
as these needs are general and conson
ant, with ideals of justice.
As the founders of our state were
frontiersmen scattered far and wide,
without cities, without corporations,
without great collective utilities, their
democracy became that of individual
ism. The demands of society, of col

leetive action, of national power were
little considered because such de
mands did not exist, and they have
never existed in the forms in which
hhirope knows them. And for this
reason, if for no other, the native
American lias not been strongly at
tracted to the various doctrines called
socialism in 13uropi. Like conditions
produce like results, and the growth
nl' industrialism with its successes and
its oppressions brings the same re
action as in Furope. But as a matter
of fact, those who take part in these
reactions are for the most part re
cent immigrants, whoso ideals of gov
ernment even in democracy are collec
tive, standing in strong contrast with
tho individualistic democracy native
to the soil.
Fifty year. - , ago, in lsC!, Fdouard
Laboulaye published bis renrirkable

hook "Paris <>n Amerique," (Paris in
America.) Its motive was to show
what a great city might become under
the conditions of freedom which pre
vailed in America. The America was
idealized of course. It, represented
the noblest ideals of free-born men,
rather than the actual America, the
forces of democracy must strive with
all the other forces extant in modern
civilization.
j The influence of this volume was
wide spread and long continued. It
was my fortune to know two men of
power, the one a Dane, the other a
Swiss who were drawn to America by
the charm of Laboulaye and who were
not disappointed. They found what
they sought, and this is a perennial
characteristic of the republic. Who
ever comes to America and with what
ever motive will find what he seeks.
If he remains long enough and has
penetration to look below the surface
I he will find America.
If one seeks religious freedom he
will find it. Our fathers provided for
that. Whatever form or type of re
ligious discipline he seeks he will find

accordingly, I>ut its discipline is vol
untary not enforced by the state. If
one would escape from all religious in
fluence he can do so in America. It is
for him to choose.
If one seeks for class distinction, for
domination of the great over the small,
hereditary or otherwise, he will find it
in personal and local only, not
wrought into the fabric of society. If
one would find privilege enthroned
even as in Europe he will find it in
America, just as powerful as in
Europe, Imi everywhere surrounded
by an equally powerful movement of
insurgency. If one would find greed,
selfishness, lust, vanity, tolerance,
anything which belongs to the dregs
of humanity, he will find it in America,
and it may be embodied in powerful
and defiant institutions. For freedom
guarantees only freedom, and the
meaning of freedom is opportunity.
In Laboulaye's work, the official
Napoleonic view, which "Paris in
America" takes as its point of depar
ture is thus expressed. "A society
without administration, without army,
without police, with the savage liberty
of praying, speaking, writing, acting
each in his fashion would not last a
quarter of an hour. It is the negation
of all these principles, of all the con
ditions of this civilization which
makes the unity of our French nation.
In constituting our administration,
hierarehal and centralized, the wis
dom of our fathers lias long since
raised France to the first rank and
shown to the French people that
Liberty is Obedience, then is our Glory
and our Force."
Ketcrse 01 Napoleon's Ideals
The distinctive character of the
American ideals reverses this. It is
the building up of a society in which
the government stands only for jus
tice. The state does not concern itself
with right, worship or wrong worship,
with right thinking or wrong think
ing, with writing truth or writing
falsehood, with right acts or words or
ceremonies, except as abuse of liberty
may infringe on the liberty of others.
"I'ne societe sans administration,
sans armee, sans gendarmes, avec
la liberie sauvage de prier. de ponser,
de parler, d'ecrire, d'agir. chacun a
sa facon ne durerait pas 1111 quart
d'heure. ("est la negation de tons ces
principcs, de toutes les conditions de
cette civilisation qui fait I'unite dp la
nation francaise. En constituant
notre administration bierarchis.ee et
centralised, la sagesse de 110s peres a
depuis longtemps eleve la France a
premier rang et appris aux Francais
<pie la liberte ("est l'obeissance. C'est
la notre glorie et notre force."
The state is not pious, benevolent,
virtuous, generous, because these per
sonal virtues, cannot be exercised by
officialism leads to their abuse.
Privilege to the poor means privilege
to the rich; privilege to the rich
means privilege to the poor, but al
ways the more powerful arm secures
the greater privilege. The essence of
democracy is that no one. rich or
poor should have a lease on privilege.
The wealth of the republic does not
rest on its great sweep of prairies,
its mines or its commerce. Its primal
source is in its free schools, and its
freedom of choice of trade or profes
sion. The results of this freedom
can be measured in money as well as
in power. Now as ever, "America
means opportunity," opportunity for
each man and woman to prepare for
the work he can do best, opportunity
for each to find his place in life, op


I'IIESIDKXT DAVID KTAitlt .lOUD \ X
portunity for the work that neeils to
be done to find the man who can do it.
It is for each man to plan his own
career, to make his rwn escape "from
status to contract." The democracy
of America can acknowledge no mas
sters save of its own creation and the
power that makes these is adequate
to set them aside.
While every conception In Europe
has its reflex in America, while every
idea of administration from absolut
ism to anarchy finds its earnest advo
cates, none of these seem likely to
displace the fundamental ideal of
democratic individualism developed by
the fathers of the republic. This ideal
was expressed by Lincoln and long be
fore him by Anstolle. It is the function
of the state to establish justice among
men and to perform those acts of com
mon necessity, contributing to the pre
servation and enjoyment of human life
which collective action can accomp
lish better than private effort. Fur
ther than that, democracy which is
simply enforced co-operation should
not go, and by this principle, that no
theory of government should be
pushed beyond the consideration of its
practical results, the republic escapes
the choice of any single one among
the hundreds of remedies for political
ills. There is 110 possibility of the
adoption of anarchism, socialism, col
lectivism or individualism or any
other system as an exclusive and ex
cluding finality. The people of Amer
ica are interested in actual results
rather than any form of logical neces
sity as a ground for political action.
The Test of Solidarity
The test of national solidarity may
be found in its freedom from the need
of force or authority in the conduct of
its affairs. Let us imagine if we can,
a catastrophe which should remove
from the United States every repre
sentative of coercive power, every offi
cial of whatever rank from the Presi
dent to the last notary public, every
representative of army or of navy, or
of church, every policeman, every
authority of whatever kind.
Such a loss might create wied
spread bewilderment or profound
sorrow. It would have no relation to
anarchy. Except among certain un
assimilated foreign populatipns in
large cities it would lead to no
violence, to no riots. The functions
of national life would go on as before.
One by one communities would come
together and provide for the election
of officers. It was said that the death
of Lincoln gave a new proof of how
"republics live, not by a single life
but the right divine of man, the mil
lion trained to be free."
I.ret us apply the same test to other
nations. 111 the France of Napoleon
111, we are assured that without force,
society would not endure "for a quar
ter of an hour." What would be the
result in Germany today? No one can
tell. The German is endlessly patient,
even under needless burdens. What
would he do, if burdens were all sud
denly thrown off, if "Strengstens Ver
boten," the motto of Prussian rule
were suddenly found to have no force
behind it?
The lesson of democracy is therefore
the lesson of the United States. It is
no new lesson. The people of the
United States are merely European
people who have had some additional
experience, have learned some things
in their travels, perhaps forgetting

Patterson Dana Nowell Tulare
Frank Herbert Richey Tipton, Ind.
Edga r Clarence Smith Azusa
Homer Roberts Spence Alameda
GRAPHIC ART
Ethel Ora Qardin Salinas
James Leo Duff Menlo Park
fErnest P»ruce Nelson San Jose
Louise Rider Watsonville
Stella Belle Sankey Clearfield, Pa.
Cordelia Madison Smith Venice
MATHEMATICS
Sydnie Aileen Gardner Orange
Dorothy Marian Hindle Del Mar
Julia R. Johnson Aberdeen, Wash.
Ralph Matthews Noble Galesburg, 111.
Margaret Marion Steele San Jose
Mary Hilda Volkmor Whittier
APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Grace Raymond Helmick Helena, Mont.
CHEMISTRY
George Henry Beurhaus Tacoma, Wash.
Hector Crandall San Francisco
fEdwin Reginald Harding San Bernardino
fPaul Mark Levy San Francisco
Hugh Harold Mosher San Jose
Robert Lindley Murray Palo Alto
+Zeno Ostenberg.. San Jose
Alfred Liles Phillips Santa Cruz
PHYSICS
Herbert Rovell Benham McKittrick
Francis Sitwell Pratt Ontario
Albert John Scholl, Jr Los Angeles
Ruth Sceley Los Gatos
Glen Miller Smyth Salt Lake City-, Utah
Guy Carleton Swan Lawrence, Mass.
Devi Dyal Virmani Bahawalpore, India
Waldo Ralph Waelty Santa Clara
William Irvin Weaver Colorado Springs, Colo.
BOTANY
Taylor Jay Blethen Portland, Ore.
Arthur Dickie Borden Palo Alto
Ollis Willard Newman Santa Barbara
Frank Jason Smiley Fresno
PHYSIOLOGY AND HISTOLOGY
Albert Gordon Bower Salt Lake City, Utah
Roscal Leroy Draper Arroyo Grande
Florence Edetha Dunlop Vale, Ore.
George Stevenson Holcman Riverside
Leonard R. Jenkins Ogden, Utah
Merton James Price San Francisco
Karl Ludwig Schaupp Santa Rosa
John Philip Stricklcr San Diego
fCharles Ernest von Geldern San Francisco
*Carleton Wolsey Washburne Sierra Madre
fClyde T. Wetmore Hollister
Robert William Wilcox Delta, Colo.
fElsa Will Rochester, N. Y.
ZOOLOGY
Clara Crosby Santa Cruz
Mary 1* isk Los Angeles
ENTOMOLOGY AND BIONOMICS
Leroy Childs Redlands
fWarren Locke Smith Ferndale
Verne Genoa Stevens Palo Alto
GEOLOGY AND MINING
Robert Edwin Anderson San Francisco
Harry Mayo Andreen Redwood City
fCarl Hugh Beal Palo Alto
Edward Burke Corbet San Francisco
Waldemar Fenn Dietrich San Francisco
Benjamin Edward Erb Chemainus, B. C.
Andrew Douglas Fyfe Oceanside
fWilliam Conrad Gehrmann Davenport, la.
Mortimer Louis Hall Pasadena
Harold Briggs Hannibal San Jose
Olaf Pitt Jenkins Stanford* University
Grover Berner Lantz Colton
tßernard Harold Lasky San Francisco
*Robcrt James McCann Pacific Grove
fHarvey Wright Parmelee Santa Barbara
*Alonzo William Peake Los Angeles
Arthur E. Remington Watertown, N. Y.
*Edwin John Stewart Los Angeles
CIVIL ENGINEERING
Charles Edward Beechcr Monrovia
Edwin Prcscott Bly Los Angeles
I von Clay Briggs San Francisco

some others equally important. In
like manner the choicest thoughts and
worthiest ideals of America are
thoughts and ideals long before treas
ured by the advanced minds of Europe.
Another lesson from America is that
of the effective federation. The United
States is composed of fortliy-eight
self-governing states, each an entity
within itself managing its own affairs,
with its own officials and its own
laws, controlled by the nation in those
interests only which it shares with
its sister states. Some of these states
are as populous and wealthy as the
Kingdom of Europe, but each is a
jurisdiction, not a power. None can
make war alone, either by force of
arms or force of tariffs. While there
is all machinery for settling disputes
between states such disputes never
arise, because no state has the right
to use its force to promote private
business.
Stilts Equality
The states in a federal union meet
as jurisdictions. The small ones have
no fear of the large ones, and those
not touching the sea suffer in no way
from their restricted position. A
"Power" hampered as is the state of
Illinois would chafe against its limita
tions, and its jingoes would talk of
fighting their way to the ocean. But
viewed as a jurisdiction, surrounded by
similar jurisdictions, the people of
Illinois have no consciousness of limi
tation.
And this should be our ultimate con
ception of a nation. Its boundary line
should represent merely the limit of
jurisdiction. That jurisdiction ceases
does not imply need of violence be
tween the people on the two sides nor
require fortification for the purpose
of repelling violence. The Canadian
boundary is an example of this meet
ing of nations not as powers but as
jurisdictions.
This four-thousand-mile line, rang
ing through all kinds of territory and
all sorts of conditions, disputed nearly
all the way "with all the brutal frank
ness common to blood relations," has
for nearly a hundred years not known
a fortress, a soldier, a warship or a
gun. It is a peace boundary, the limit
of the jurisdiction of one self-govern
ing nation, the beginning of that of
another. It lacks but one thing to
make it ideally perfect, the re
moval of the custom-house, the em
blem of national suspicion and greed,
the remnant, of the days when it was
considered good economics for a na
tion to "have its taxes paid by for
eigners."
Europe in Turmoil
Viewed as "great powers" devoted
to the exploitation of the wealth of
other regions the leading nations of
Europe are in constant turmoil. The
German empire for example, is hamp
ered on every side. Her scant sea
coast is split in two by the presence
of Denmark. Her German Rhine dis
charges itself through Holland. The
ports of Amsterdam, Rotterdam, Ant
werp and Ostend, geographically her's,
are occupied by alien people whom she
could crush out in a moment, were it
not. for the physical force of the rest
of Europe and the moral power of the
world. Of Poland, she has too much
or too little. A large part of the Ger
man people live in the alien empire of
Austro-Hungary and in the republic
of Switzerland, while after forty years
of possession, Germany scarcely owns
Alsace or Lorraine. The states are a
thorn in the side of the empire, a bur
den and a weakness, just so long as
their two millions of people are held in
semi-vassalhood by the rule of force.
A free republic of Alasace Lorraine, a
second Swithzerland, half-German,
half-French separating and joining
two great nations would be a strength
and an inspiration to both. The true
gateways of the Rhine held by the
power of blood and iron is a centre
of menace to civilization. For the
wrong done at the Treaty of Frank
fort forty years ago, Europe has had to
pay most dearly for it is around the
question of Alsace-Lorraine that half
the crushing armament of Europe has
been built up. She is hemmed in
everywhere by the scare of old strugg
les, to her perennial discomfort. For
this reason, she suffers from the
"Drang nach Osten," she seeks a road
to the Persian gulf, an empire over
seas, and every form of imperial ex
tension to lands "under the sun,"
which may for the moment seem
plausible or possible.
But Germany as a jurisdiction suf
fers none of these limitations. Her
powers are only those which are
needed for the people's good. They
are merely her public duties. It mat
ters noting that her sway is checked
on almost, every side before it reaches
the sea. Other jurisdictions inter
vene, and each of these looks after
the public needs of man, which are
mostly justice, conservation, educa
tion, sanitation, and peace. As one of
the "Great Powers" of the world, Ger
many (with her fellow states as well)
is a center of friction, injustice and
unrest.
"A Power" is u Menace.
As a jurisdiction Germany is busy
with profitable and constantly ad
vancing industries, with an admir
able system of education and exten
sive provision for all the people's
needs, and no enlargement of boun
daries could in the least increase her
usefulness, her wealth or her happi
ness. As "a power" Germany is a
menace to the well being of civiliza
tion as every other "power" of similar
nature must be in its degree For
the prosperity of every people de
pends on international peace, and
all power-manifestations are either
actual or potential war. War is a
form of world-sickness from which
every function of civilization suffers,
and most of all those bonds of com
mon thought and common interest
sumed up in internationalism. And
to the members of an international
state, German in blood and in sym
pathy as well as English, all these
destructive rivalries of state with
state seem mediaeval and unworthy.
There is, in fact, something primitive,
outworn and unprogressive in the
spectacle of a civilized nation com
posed of millions of clever people
trusting for its defense to forts and
ships. With all the resources of
business, of science, ef education, of
thought, to depend on force seems a
lazy, even cowardly, shirking of the
higher possibilities of national
strength. To be surrounded by armed
guards, "holding the drop" on all
Commercial rivals is not a lofty con
ception of a nations's greatness. This
attitude has been as disastrous to
England's own peace of mind as it has
been menacing to the world's welfare.
To escape from this condition is not
a matter of a day nor a generation. Tt
is not easy for America even to

Revoe Carlisle Briggs Pasadena
fFloyd Cromwell Brown Selma
fEdward James Cullen Gilroy
Harry Bascom Davis Pomona
Wilbur Harvey Doxsee Redwood City
Robert Francis Duryea Palo Alto
fClarence Bernard Goodwin Sunnyvale
fCharles Stewart Grace Rivera
John Stanley Grepe, Jr East Highlands
tNorman Marshall Ilalcombe San Francisco
George William Hawley Portland, Ore.
George Walter Hunt San Jose
Paul Eells Jeffers Los Angeles
William Aiken Laird Lindsay
Alexander Stuart Macdonald San Francisco
tßobert Patchen Miller Los Angeles
Maurice Everard Morrison Morgan Hill
fßoger Wolcott Olmsted Los Angeles
Chauncey Smith Elie, Manitoba, Canada
Thomas Joseph Spellman Colma
fßurroughs Agin Stephenson Los Altos
Harry George Todtmann Chicago, 111.
George Harlan Trask Los Angeles
Charles Ralph Tupper San Jose
Romney Leigh Vaughn San Francisco
Guss Valentine Wallach Boonville
Carlton Levi Wyant Montecito
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING
■fClarence P. Campbell Los Angeles
tWallace Rolland Finney...* Modesto
*Burdette Lord Hostettler Erie, Pa.
Kenneth Irving Marshall Los Angeles
tAugustus Mudge Sanborn Redlands
Cecil Stocker Simon Los Gatos
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
*Edward Niles Adam Melville, Mont.
Frank Edward Anderson Los Angeles
fClarence Cannon Argabrite Ventura
John Watson Fleming Armstrong....Fivemiletown, Tyrone, Ire.
Everett Morse Calderwood Palo Alto
Melville Nathaniel Clark Dayton, Me.
John Francis Cullen Gilroy
Walter Jennings Dodge Los Angeles
Charles Greenlaw Duffin Comas, Wash.
Harry Adolph Fore Campbell
Frank Julius Gleiss Los Angeles
Walter J. Hammond ! Grinncll, la.
Tomiichi Haraguchi Nagasaki, Japan
George Edward Holditch Orange
Edgar Alden Jackson Cupertino
Linford C. Lull, Jr Los Angeles
James Arthur Miller Hanford
Rea Cambridge Newman Santa Barbara
George Washington Poison Menlo Park
Gaylord Kenyon Snyder Los Angeles
fGiistav Wade Naples
George Ireland Wright Pasadena
BACHELOR OF LAWS
Jerome Devereaux Peters San Jose
Granville Numan Wood, Jr Blue Lake
MASTER OF ARTS
LATIN
Flora Anne Bagley Burlingame
fßuth Beard Modesto
Catherine Ida Birch Redlands
fAnna Shipley Cox San Jose
Mabel Harriett Usinger Berkeley
Malcolm Leland Yeary Los Angeles
GERMAN
Edward Vere Brewer Elyria, Ohio
Catharine Morris Cox San Jose
Lydia Lucilc Meyer . Milwaukee, Wis.
Clara Lydia Schaaf Fort Wayne, -Ind.
fElsie Louise Whittemore Alhambra
ENGLISH LITERATURE
Anais Julia Allen Pasadena
Walter Clyde Curry Gray-Court, S. C.
ENGLISH PHILOLOGY
Maude Cleveland Stanford University
EDUCATION
tWilliam Samuel Marten San Jose
Clarence Lucien Phelps Jamestown, Ky.
William Thomas Root, Jr Pasadena
William Roy Tanner Minneapolis, Minn.

emancipate herself from reactionary
influences in Europe. There are many
interests in a wealthy nation who find
an aid or an affinity in militarism.
Debt creates debt, and those inter
ested in spending band together
against reform.
These matters proceed by slow pro
gress, interrupted by reaction; we
are in a period of relapse at present,
when reactionary forces seem to be in
the ascendant. Hut this very fact with
its burdens and horrors may be count
ed on to turn the balance in the other
direction.
Neither will there be a formal fed
eration of nations in this era. In
deed federation in fact will come long
before it comes in name. A single
unified world-government with cen
tralized rule under one set of men at
some one place, is only a dream—and
not a cheerful dream at that. What
the world needs is more self-control,
more local responsibility not more
governmental machinery. Neverthe
less every step in removing injustice,
in eliminating sources of friction, in
extending common interests, as the
postol union, the telegraph union, in
ternational law, international police
duties, international conferences and
congresses, arbitration treaties a nd
other agreements—are steps in the di
rection of the passing of war. To this
end, three great contributing agencies
are: the growth of the popular con
science, the interlocking of personal
interests, and the ruinous expence
which the progress of science has
brought to every branch of the mili
tar art.
All this has its part in the great
movement towards common interna
tional life, "La Vie Internationale" of
the dreams of La Fontaine, a life
which shall make war impossible and
will, in time, do away with exploita
tions, with tariff barriers and with all
the products of that narrow nativism,
which considers only the purposes or
enrichment of the selfish few, the one
in-group against all the out-groups of
the world.
Value of Open Diplomacy
Another lesson which the United
States may teach is the value of open
diplomacy. A secret agreement of
any kind whatever. It was a warning
of Washington that his nation should
beware of Entangling Alliances. A
formal alliance is for the purpose of
making enemies, never of making
friends. Friendship among nations
rests on common interests, on the in
terlocking of minds, the interlocking
of trade.
In the United States a treaty can be
entered into only with the open and
public consent of the Senate. Every
international relation is therefore
open to the world. No minister, no
president, no group of men whatever
can secretly pledge the nation to any
line of action. No president, no cabi
net, no minister, no congress acting
alone can make any declaration of
public policy. For these reasons the
United States must stand outside the
tangled snare of concessions and intri
gues we call world politics. She must
play her games of diplomacy with
open hands. She cannot be the secret
friend of any other nation. She can
not be a secret enemy because all her
acts, friendly or hostile, are known to
all the world.
The secret treaty in the interest of
imperial spoliation is the bane of
Europe. It ties each foreign office to
the service of the most reckless and
greedy of its great exploiting inter
ests. It has reduced the chancelleries
of more than one nation to be nothing
more than the firm name under which
its exploiting corporations compass
their ends in Asia or in Africa.
The secret is a relic of the military
state. The civilzed world is still or
ganized on the mediaeval theory that
war is a natural function to he ex
pected in the normal course of events,
not a hideous inorau, physical;. and
financial catastrophe. la the old
theory as expounded by Machiavelli,
the king has no other business but
war. It is the duty of his ministers
to find weak places in the defenses of
other kings through which war may
be successful, and to find, after the
fact, excuses by which' war can be
justified. The secret treaty, the .con
cession to a friendly power, ithe. arti-.
ficial interference with a rival, —all
these belong to the days' of Ma<?hia
velli. If . all parties concerpe.4 ( |cojJ>ld :
come out.into the open, .Wihsre . t-het
United States is forced to stahd, we
should soon have an end to tneAttgld-
German struggle, of the rivalry be
tween the Triple Entente and the
Triple Alliance.
Outworn ideas ot' national glory, out
worn figures of.speech as tp national
purposes, outworn mediaevalism in
our -conception of the state.—all'these
find expression in the "secret treaty,"
the "entangling alliance," which is a'
chief obstacle in the way of the -con
ciliation of nations. ?>• -
Historically, the influence of Amer
ica has been exerted in opposition to
Imperialism and to infringement of
the great nations on the rights of the
sniall. This is the inception of the
Monroe Doctrine, which in spite of its
perversion and its wrong accentuation r
has protected Latin America from the
fate of Africa. That this should now
be a Pan-American, not njerely an.
American doctrine goes without say
ing. And it must never be allowed i.o
degenerate-into " a Dollar Diplomacy"
which would.reserve Tropical America
as a special "sphere of, .influence-' for
American exploitation,. For the true,
and final form of the Mojiuae.Doctrine
is found, in the Drago .Doctrine,. of the
republics of South Ameripa,, that tiie
forqe of . arms should. be used-ras.
an,instrument iu industiriul spoliation.
This the people of the United States
should adopt as• their-.own. « <
Principle Disregarded '
In a recent deciskm- of- arbitration;
the King 'of Swed'ant'laW down 'this
principle: that a nation "has 110
right to land- troops in .order-to pYe-'
serve the property or the rights of her
nationals.". This''lwinciple. ha,s '-beefr
disregarded in the •strangling of
Persia, the rape of Mongolia and of
Tibet, in the chronic robbery of
China, and in the annexation of Egypt, <
of Korea, uf Morocco and of Tripoli.
But it is for all that a just.-and honor
able principle, and it is disregarded
only when a nation, by virtue of super
ior strength or superior civilization
feels itself justified in taking posses
sion of another for its good, and inci
dentally for the commercial advant
age of its own exploitating interests.
It is true that the smaller nations of
the tropics are subject to violent
political disturbances. They have not
learned the value of liberty as regu
lated hjy law. Yet it is highly prob
able that not one in ten of these
periodical/ revolutions I's of spontan- 1
eous native origin. of them are
started for purposes of spoliation by

autside adventurer's and a large ma
jority are paid for by adventurers
'State. The Public School exists
everywhere at the public expense, and
belonging to one or more of the great
epinniarqia'ruatrojis tit', fheiear'th.. When."
'the"fi v nal' iriitli'Ts"known'"of unhappy
Mexico the responsibility for hfei' dis
(Mfer'sl will rest nht on'her martyred
president, ridr "on the' sol
"diers'of fortune by whose hands he
•fell, but on the men in New York or
in London perhaps,' whose nioiWy has
kept iliese revolutions going. Mexico,
with fatal riches of oil and gold, is not
tlie first nation to Ite torn asunder by
'conflicting ."sphere's of influence."
The. influence of the republic has
been always thrown against another
form of imperialism involved in the
phrase "Control of the Sea." America
has never claimed any such control
nor has she admitted the right to
others. It is a mediaeval idea going
back foiir hundred years to the time
when the great seas were divided be
tween Spain and Portugal. America
has stood for the open sea, the restric
tion of national jurisdiction to the
three-mile limit, the extermination of
piracy, and in iater years for the most
important doctrine of the immunity of
war. To make the high seas an open

HI STORY
Ella Wissie Beaver ...T. .Tulare
fEmrria Howse Kuno Palo Alto
George Lutes Righter '.Campbell
Francis Marion Russell .Los Angeles
MATHEMATICS
Rose Margaret Bennett »....San Diego
Amanda Westhold ..Quincy, 111:
CHEMISTRY
Alicje. .Ruth Bergcr San Jose
Elton Marion Hogg. v Saratoga
Charles Kirkton McWilliams San Joss
tWilliam John Van Sicklen Castle-ton, Ontario,,Canada
BOTANY
Charlotte Elliott Del Rapids, S. D.
BACTERIOLOGY
Frank Maltaner .Cincinnati, O.
ZOOLOGY
Josephine Louise Dows Randall Stanford University
ENTOMOLOGY
F rankie Willard Galexioo
GEOLOGY
Theodore Chapin., Los Angeles
Joseph Stanley Hook jjPerris ■
ENGINEER
CHEMICAL ENGINEERING
. Louis Wjlliam Pingree.-. ; Ogden-, Utah
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING
fDexter Simpson Kimball N. Y.
Lyman Stevenson King Oakland .
r *• . V <
JURIS DOCTOR
George Armand Ditz Stockton f-1
Maurice Timothy Dooling • Hollistter ,
fEmmet Ross Fertig Nobl.esvjlle, Ind.
fFrank Louis Guerena rs .. „Spnora
George Juan Hatfield ...Oakland-,
Frank Howard Hilton ; Portland, Ore.
Grant Holcomb San Bernardino^
Ignatius Martin Peckham tV| . San . Jose
Edmund Wright Pugh Los. (Angeles..
Alfred'Worcester Robertson Saflt? Ba,rbru:a ..
Chester Harvey Warlow : . r ., . ( Fresno,
Herbert Eustace White Saotamento^.
tFrederick feertram Wood i. . Alto.
* September 6, 1912
fjanuary 10, 1013 "O '?t it

highway-to be tr.a.ver?ed , ( afc ( anytime,-
in absolute--safety, by any, vessel what
ever would-gp/t'ar away
witji international..waff,.-and iSitill ftWH
ther in ren^.vi!),£..tlve- and dnv<-
gerous burden of naval protectioni»'l£;
all military operations.- at. sea couidibe
confined to the <oa,nnon shot.
from the. shore, the- original motive
of the three-mile limit of. jurisdiction,
it would represent one of ,the most
practical triumphs of civilization.- Ttfe
nations should join to make the ocean
safe, not to fill it with floating fort
resses designed t tp. protect merchant
ships from robbery by the very per
sons with whom they trade.
Still another lesson from. America is
one in which, we all agree; the divorce
of religion from political control and
therefore from the,domain of politics.
Absolute religions freedom exists .in
America because the state assumes
no relation of any kind to religious
corporations as such, So long as these
do not interfere with the freedom of
soul or body of men not. belonging to
them, their acts do not concern the
state. And on no, one policy is there
more firm agreement.in America* than
in the absolute separation of Church
nowhere can any sect or gpoup of seets
claim any dominating relation in re

gard to It. To the average American
the strife over Church properties and
Church interests so real in Europe
seem incomprehensible. The Church,
any church, is in every way better oif
for separation from the government.
Whatever achievement; whatever pro
gress it may make is its own, and this
progress is solid because it involves,
no ulterior political end.
Connected with the freedom of the
church is the freedom of the people
from other forms of paternalism. The
state becomes benevolent only when it
lias failed to be just. It allows special
opportunities to individuals only
where it has denied opportunity to
men at large.
The "old-age pension" is a conven
ient'illustration,.'lt has been justly
compared to- the. free pass homeward
granted to the human wrecks who
have lost their all in the. gambling
rooms of-Monte Carlo. It is the shill
ing given to the man run over by my
lord's automobile.
In a better system he would not have
been run over. He would not have
lost his money in a vile resort, lie
would not have needed an outside
pittance to carry him through old age.
Host Workers Died in War
The old-age pension exists in Eng
land as a convenient balm for inequal
ity and injustice. The best of her
workers have died in her wars/ leav
ing a weaker stock to breed from.
These have grown' up unskilled, in de
fault of the shools that make men
strong. They have grown up in the
atmosphere of the public house, sod
den with lust and beer and whisky.
They have lost the opportiiniy tljat
should be theirs, and at the end their
jfellows must be taxed to feed tliem.
The tragedy of the East End of Lon
don is no normal part of the tragedy
of Life. It is no part of the normal
America. It is no part of a nation
which has given opportunity.
Brit'in America a' new country, fresh,
unspoiled, full of life and hope, it is
possible to hctt'd' government" to its
rigid purpose, to develop opportunity
by the elimination of privilege, teacfy,.
men to lean' not on' government but
on themselves, and to aid by'fraternal '
giving those who have fallen in. tbg
prang 1 ; not "to weaken by unearned
public money those who are falling but
who can be made to stand, 'tfie wav
Up it i '">• vtc.
t)t the transgressor is hard and we
not make it eapier'ff we could;
|We' could not if we would'. To. give a..
plkh'a chance to'rise,' i'.s to allow him'
hlfbthe choice t<>Tali:" ' *';•"
1 is ! •?; . " *
foii.fession of Failure , '
■ "Tho old-age pension" .is, so- far as 1
it goes, a confession of failure of de- ■
jnocracy,. Except as a measure of'"
e |1 £r-fie.pcy, l Jts real purpose in Eng
land, it has no justification in good '
government. Clean up the. social at
mosphere, restore to the people, what ■
is rightfully theirs, and they will care, 1
rare accidents .excepted, for their own
old age.
in America tlie struggle, between '
labor and capital can never assume
the form it has in Europe. In a gov
ei nment which stands for justice, and
which is in no way occupied with
making money for its people, nor from
its People, nor in supporting exploiting
intei ests in other lauds, there is uo
visable necessity for universal col
lective ownership. Where classes do
not leally exist there is no pertinence
in the artificial distinctions of aristoc
racy, proletariat and bourgeoisie
which have been so laboriously
brought over from Europe. If these*
distinctions exist, most of us in Amer
ica belong to one single class, that of
the bourgeoisie.
There exist in America as elsewhere,
vast fortunes, disproportionate to the
ability or the efforts of those who con
trol them. But their history has been
of short duration. They are not leg
acies from an unjust past. Their or
igin belongs to the present. It is
mainly individual. Great luck, great
skill or ingeniously managed privilege
stands behind each of them. By the
same means as in Europe, by co
operation through interlocking direc
torates, these great fortunes have
been made to stand together and thus
by a process of financial suction to
build up fortunes still greater. But
one most important difference exists.
The national government, in theory
and for the most in fact, stands aloof
from these combinations. The con
trol of public affairs, even of financial
matters is beyond their permanent
reach. Their influence on foreign
diplomacy is limited because no secret
influence can control, and the power
of money for evil is mostly lost in
publicity.
Property May Rule
In all their operations, they are sur
rounded by an alert and in the long
run victorious opposition of democ
racy. In America property may rule,
but only for a time. In the earlier
•centuries of Europe, the period of
Absolutism, when monarchy was a
political power not a function of so
ciety, it was, of course, true that prop
erty ruled. But it was the ruler who
had the property. It was his by force
of position. Not until the money lend
ers of the last century secured the
strangle hold on the nations of
Europe was this condition brought to
an end.
Then again, property ruled, but it
was not that the King and the nobles
held the property. Property held
them, and in Europe today it is money
that rules, and it rules King and
peasant alike, for everything el3e
hinges on the Imperial Explotation of
foreign lands.
In America, this is true in a degree,
but the rule of money has its visible
limits. For the United States belongs
to its people.
"Dollar Diplomacy"
While Europe generally, the alliance
between financial interests and the
government is open and avowed, such
•connections in America have proved
fatal to political leaders and to polit
ical parties. The methods by which
the "powers of Europe" through their
foreign offices bolster up adventures
in foreign lands, could not be used in
America. The diplomacy of persua
sion, threats or force of arms in the
interest of private ventures would be
impossible here. The people might
consent to "Dollar Diplomacy" but
•only for a time and until its nature
is understood. The recent, repudia
tion of our relation to the "Six Power
Loan' to China will serve as a case in
point.
And here again we must admit that
out democratic conception of govern
ment has to struggle for acceptance
in America. The protective tariff in
theory and in practice is a flat viola
tion of its principles. Tt is a flat
violation of the spirit of the American
■constitution. It is privilege pure and
simple granted to the few by the
many, in the belief that in the long
run the many would profit by it. Its

purpose was to diversify industries by
letting the farmer help pay the ex
penses of the manufacturer. It has
just that effect, and the farmer and
laborer are becoming increasingly
discontented with its burdens and the
inequalities before the law which are
part and parcel of its operations.
In America, the army and navy,
though the latter has grown beyound
all reason through the rivalry from
England and Germany, still represent
a democratic ideal. We still hold to
the thought that our officers are not
rulers but servants of the people.
Our military element stands near
the parting of the ways, for all offi
cialism tends to aggrandize itself,
most of all that which is associated
with pomp and with patriotism. Mili
tarism for its own sake belongs to the
state in whoch property rules. "It
furnishes," says John A. Hobson, "a
profitable support to certain strong
vested interests. It is a decorative
element in social life and above all, it
is necessary to keep down the
pressure of the forces of internal
reform."
>o Room for Militarism
The ideals of Militarism and Democ
racy can never coexist. And this na
tion is too far given over to democ
racy ever to do more than dally with
the military ideal. In a nation that
knows no caste, and has no aristioc
racy other than temporary and self
selected, no military traditions will
ever be permanent. There can never
be a warrior caste holding special
privilege or special authority.
As a people, we of the United States
are too rich in resources of wealth, of
education and of intelligence to be
controlled by influences of militarism.
And thus and for the same reasons, in
the republic of America, the state ex
ists for the man, not the man for the
state. This is the fundamental differ
ence between the Eighteenth Century
and Twentieth. And let us speed the
day when it may be said not only that
"America means Opportunity" but
that the same hopeful word may be
spoken of Germany and England and
France and Russia and of all the na
tions in the sisterhood of civilization.
Lord Acton thus sums up the move
ment of the history of civilization:
"It is by the combined efforts of the
weak made under compulsion to re
sist the reign of force and constant
wrong that in the rapid change but
slow progress of four hundred years
liberty has been preserved and se
cured and extended and finally under
stood."
And as America comes to under
stand her own message of democracy,
internationalism and peace, she will
carry this understanding back to the
motherland of Europe.
Within the last two months Presi
dent Wilson and Mr. Bryan have
planned a most practical and effective
means of bringing American influence
to bear on the problems of World
peace.
The end in view is to relegate war
to a position of last resort in times
of international difference, to place
soldiers and dreadnaughts in the
background—not in the front of na
tional movement.
The essence of this American policy
is that in case of friction between
nations, the matter be placed for six
months in the hands of a joint high
Commission of investigation, chosen
in part from the contending nations,
the majority from friendly neutrals.
These- for six months shall study the
question at issue, neither nation in the

meantime demonstrating, mobilizing
or increasing the armament, until the
final report is made. After this each
nation is free to choose conciliation,
concession, compromise, arbitration
or war. And with six months to think
it over there will be no war. Wars are
waged for greed, for politics, or be
cause the mob has been stirred by
senseless speech or reckless journal
ism. And in many cases this reckless
journalism has been carefully cal :u
--lated and fully paid for by those in
terested in the sale of the accessories
of war.
The treaty of arbitration will natur
ally follow on the treaty for investi
gation. Courts will naturally supple
ment results of friendly offices. But
the agreement for friendly conference
comes first and is for the present the
more important. The Treaty of Arbi
tration is most valuable, — not as
preventing war, for a nation bent on
war, if there is such a case, will not
stop to agree to arbitrate. The world
is finally ruled by public opinion. Ar
bitration treaties clinch public opinion
and hold it to its duty.
The present decade has been char
acterized by needless, costly and
brutal wars, the result not of actual
conditions of today, but of blunders
and crimes committed in the past.
Wars do not spring up afresh in our
civilization. They spring from old
wars whose seeds were not destroyed
by peace.
Rut, however, dark the present out
look may seem with half the coined
money of the world spent each year
on war and war's accessories, the far
outlook is most promising. The cruel
horror of the Balkan war, the waste of
armed peace and frustrate war
throughout the civilized world, — all
these make powerfully for peace, for
real peace — the Peace of Law and
Trust, and not the Peace of Force.
And just now is the time when
American influence can be most defi
nitely crystallized and made effective.
And we are thankful that we have in
the seats of Authority at Washington
men who definitely work for peace
and whom war and war's fripperies
do not dazzle nor attract.
Two hundred and seven students were awarded the Bachelor of
Arts Degree by President David Stu rr Jordan in the Assembly Hull tills
morning. Two were granted the Bachelor of Laws Degree, while
thirty-five were given the Master of Arts Degree. In addition to these
the Academic Council also awarded three Engineer, thirteen .luris Doc
tor of Philosophy Degrees. The Co miuencemnet address preceded the
presenting of the sheepskins, *Th e Conquest of Europe by America,"
wsis the subject of the strong address delivered by Doctor Jordan.

I wish this morning to say a serious
word to you as citizens of the great
republic and as future leaders in its
thought and action. I wish you to
think earnestly of the part American
influence must play in the world his
tory of our century. It is for us to
help cure the accumulated evils of
the older civilization. Those men in
Europe who look furthest into the
future hope for the salvation of
Europe through ideals brought back
from practical service in America.
One of these. Senator La Fontaine of
Brussels, has given me my title as the
expression of the hope of his life,
"The Conquest of Europe by America."
I hasten to say that 1 do not mean
conquest by force of arms, for 1 have
no interest in such conquests and no
belief that victories thus won result in
any permanent good to any nation.
Nor do I mean financial conquests,
the floating of imperial loans or the
permeation of any part of European
business by financiers from the New
World. Still less do I celebrate a
shoppers' contest on the Place de
I'Opera or among the dazzling bar
gains of the Hon Marche. Nor does
the trail of American tourists who
cross with gold the palms of Europe's
servitors, all the way from Piccadilly
to the Pyramids awaken in me any
pride of nation or of race. The only
permanent conquest is that of ideas.
America stands, has always stood, for
two ideals from which she cannot
escape, for they are fundamental in
her origin and in her growth. These
are internationalism and democracy,
and these ideals being invincible
must conquer America, and through
her, reconquer Europe. And as both
are incompatible with war, their final
triumph marks the end of spoliation,
of and of that relation be
tween nations which breeds suspicion
and hatred. The conquest of the
world by the ideals of International
ism and Democracy marks the coming
of universal peace.
In the address at Baltimore in 1911,
Henri La Fontaine of Brussels, the
veteran prophet of International Life,
used these striking words.
"Emigration perhaps more than
war has deprived the old, historic
countries of their most energetic and
fittest ones to build the progressive
and wealthy people you are on this side
of the Atlantic. You are for us
Europeans, the beloved Brotherland,
Do not forget that Europe is always

and will still remain for you the be
loved Motherland. Europe is now for
America what Greece was for Europe.
Europe has liberated (Ireece. Amer
ica has to liberate Europe from its
burdens, its prejudices, its hatreds.
It is your duty, it is your highest duty
to reconcile outside your borders the
people you have reconciled within
your borders. For indeed the Amer
ican people is at present the true
international people. It is the elect
people which alone can further inter
nationalism and can transform all of
the people of the Earth into a family
of nations, a brotherhood of men, an
international people." "For coloniza
tion is not mainly done by men and by
capital, but also by ideas, by example,
by experiment."
Not Always True to Ideals
We may freely admit in the begin
ning that America has not always been
true to her own ideals, and that she
has not always clearly seen her own
future. She has had her own lapses,
moral and social, some of these be
cause of associations with Europe and
through imitation of glories alien to
her history. If she had been true to
herself she would never have known
a single foreign war. She has no part in
those greeds and jealousies of money
or of race which still keep up turmoil
in Europe. Her war with Spain with
its eagerness for exploitation, its
tinsel imperialism and its pride of
participation in "world politics" rep
resents the worst of these lapses, and
its evil effects are long in passing.
But though the inception of this affair
was European in method, its contin
uance has been characteristically
American. Instead of exploitation, we
have brought to the Philippines educa
tion and sanitation. We have expend
ed on them a hundred times what we
have received, and if ever imperilism
can be respectable we have made it so.
Another false movement has been
in the building of warships and forts
in America. This lacks the motive
for similar extravagances in Europe,
because the peace of the new world is
no where threatened. But with us as
everjwhere the military spirit grows
with the money spent on it. The more
mouths fed by the State the greater
the clamor for the feeding of still
more. We have also to reckon with
the desire for giant decoration, for
big navies for sheer bigness' sake, the
feeling that this is the richest and'
most progressive nation on the globe,

and that as such she can beat old
Europe at her own game even though
that game be not worth the candle.
But with all lapses and delinquin
cies the fact of internationalism and
the ideal of democracy have been and
must always remain with the United
States, and from the United States
these ideals will react with greater
and greater force on the thoughts and
deeds of Europe.
Internationalism is the heritage of
America, not of choice at first, but cf
necessity. She has perforce grown
up with this ideal, because no other
was possible. She became the cosmo
politan nation of the world because
of her complex origin and with this
origin she could be nothing else. In
a new civilization, in the struggles of
the frontier each man is rated for
what he is worth. Under these condi
tions no one cares for the petty pre
cedences of rank or race. What a
man can do in the next twenty-four
hours outvalues any question as to
who were his ancestors.
All Hate Dies
On a railway train not long ago
some one was overheard to say: "This
is the land where all hate dies. My
father was German; my mother was
French. What do I care for all that?
I am an American. The old hatreds
and rivalries are nothing to me."
America was English, first. In lang
uage, in spirit, in conscience and in
government it is England which domi
nates. For the English race, above
all others, with its adaptation for co
operation and for compromise is the
builder of free states.
It was the chosen among the Eng
lishmen of three centuries ago who
founded the germ colonies of Virginia
and Massachusetts May. In the fol
lowing years it has been the like
minded from their own nation and
from others who have crossed the seas
to enter into their work.
The first who came were the bold,
the free, the self-ruling, the pleasure
scorning element of English life. They
came to escape from the state
church and the church-state, that they
might worship in their own fashion
and according to dictates of their indi
vidual consciences.
They detested the law of primogeni
ture which thrust the spirit of pre
cedence into the bosom of every fam
ily. They abhorred the law of entail
which burdened the land with the
curse of privilege even to unborn gen
erations.
They had caught from France the

spirit of liberty, equality, fraternity,
but as befits the calmer blood of the
north, they gave this spirit a con
structive interpretation, and the idea
of equality was to them especially rich
in practical results. Equality before
the law, equal access to land, to edu
cation, to professions and trades,
. equal access to legislat ion, each of
these conceptions broadened out into
the spirit of democracy.
And after England came to other
nations of Europe, each with its own
part and in its own degree giving its
contingent of free-born men, the ad
| mixture of blood gave strength and
! versatility to the rising nation.
But withal, the dominant note is
English still, with as many diver-
I gences from the England of today as
j from the England of the Stuarts.
In later years other immigration has
come, not alone the bold in search of
adventure, of new homes and new free
doms, but the weak and the oppressed,
"the beaten men of the beaten races,"
who llee from war taxation in search
of living wages and of daily bread.
But all these are cast into the same
melting pot and in most of them there
arises a clear response to the call of
free institutions.
In this melting pot of America, all
the old racial antipathies disappear
and all hereditary hatreds. There is
110 final distinction of British or Ger
j man, of French or Italian, of Spanish
|or Slav, of Dutch or Scandinavian,
!or of Jew or Gentile. The average
| American is as cosmopolitan in origin
j and relationship as is royalty in
Europe, though for a different set of
| reasons. But in America there is 110
[ distinction of common or noble, of
high or low, of aristocracy, bour
j geoisie or proletariat except as these
| are artificially emphasized in the in
dustrial strife we have inherited from
Eu rope.
To the international mind of Amer
ica, there seems 110 need or pertinence
to an Anglo-Saxon alliance as against
any other people. In so far as such
alliance is desirable or humanly pos
sible it exists already in a common
sympathy and a common literature, ft
would lie weakened by a stated agree
ment of the Anglo-Saxon group to
swell each others Meets with dread
naughts. The true bond of Union of
the Greater Britain involves no rup
ture with the Greater Germany, or the
Greater France or the Greater Scandi
navia to which we in America likewise
claim allegiance.
To the American, "Pan-Germanism,"
Pan-Slavism," as lie hears these ex
pounded seem a meaningless return to
ideals of tlie Middle Ages. They re
mind him of the Holy Roman Empire,
which never was, and should never be,
or still more they hark back to Pan-
Islamism the futile dream of the light
ing Turk.
There is nothing in aggrandizement
of race as such which appeals to the
American, the child of all European
races. That such races are ennobled
by conquest of lesser tribes and by
their undigested exploitation he does
not believe. To the American even
England's greatness does not exist on
her Indian Empire, but rather in spite
of it.
Within the last forty years there lias
grown up a new world in Europe and
in the range of civilization. The old
conception of the states of Europe
as opposed to one another and mutu
ally destructive must, pass away in the
broader aspects of civilization.
The growth of International life is
one of the most striking aspects of
this new relation. The extention of
travel, the spread of commerce, the
achievements of science, the exchanges
in education, all these tend to make
a great "melting pot" of the civilized
world. Neither in his business, in his
pleasures, nor in his intellectual pur
suits is the educated man anywhere
limited to any one country. All
rational human interests are con
nected by interlocking bonds of many
kinds, joining one people with another.
The hundreds of international con
gresses held every summer the world
over and covering almost every gen
eral interest of men is the strongest
possible evidence of this Interlocking,
and all this constitutes an inter
national bond not to be lightly severe.!.
A declaration of war between nations
is now little less than an attack on
civilization in all its most cherished
aspects, social, moral, as well as finan
cial. The lines of national policy
taken for granted half a century ago
are fast becoming impossible, their
very suggestion being ruinous.
I'c ideiicj toward < oix'ilintion
The influence of America tends to
wards international conciliation. It
involves the recognition of men as
men, each valued for what he is or
wlnit tie can do. Both of these deter
mined, of course, by bis blood and his
education, but not to be judged in ad
vance by any wholesale distinctions.
This is the spirit of the Interna
tionale, the common life and common
sympathy among civilized people, re
gardless of national boundaries. This
International life constitutes the final
and lasting basis of International
Peace.
As the history of America rests on
internationalism so is her social fab
ric built on democracy. Historically
her democracy has a double origin. Its
theory was French, its practice was
English. The French philosophers
furnished the one, the reaction against
British methods the other.
For inequality before the law is the
foundation of the polity of Great
Britain. Her constitution stands on
privilege. Her social customs rest on
precedence of classes, precedence of
individuals. England chooses her lords
and magnates, her patrons and tyrants
long before they are born. These be
long to her system of privilege by
which cities like Westminster, Shef
field, Davenport, Arundel, were so
long held, virtually tax-free, by men
whose ancestors received their land as
royal gifts or bought tlieni as cow
pastures. The law of favor rises above
the law of justice.

Hut men of the pioneer type, the
Roundhead, the Pilgrim, the Puritan,
the American have hated favor and
privilege and precedence of every
form. The toll of tin 1 rich and the dole
of the poor are alike offensive to them.
And this dislike of overreaching and of
coddling has passed over to their de
scendents. John Hay once said of the
people of the new state of Ohio. "They
looked to no one as their superiors,
and on none as their inferiors. They
knew 110 want they could not them
selves satisfy," and to this Senator
Bayard added the further note, "They
were too self-willed and independent
to allow any to rule over them but
t heniselves."
This in a word is the spirit of de
mocracy, of the democracy of the
pioneer if you like, but America is the
land of pioneers, and this fact still in-

11 uences all her acts unci her insti
tutions. Her people find their polit
ical ideals in an equal start with equal
opportunity, in equality before the
law, in equal access to education, in
equal access to the land, in equal ac
cess to legislation.
The nation is built on individuals
each responsible for himself. The
state is a mutual adjustment for their
collective benefit. The individual in
America does not live for the state, is
not the property of the state, the state
has no control over him except that
which the individual lias delegated. It
is no duty of the state to promote his
prosperity or the prosperity of his
group. The state is rather the umpire
which decides questions of justice, the
servant by which the needs of the
many are met by co-operation in so far
as these needs are general and conson
ant, with ideals of justice.
As the founders of our state were
frontiersmen scattered far and wide,
without cities, without corporations,
without great collective utilities, their
democracy became that of individual
ism. The demands of society, of col

leetive action, of national power were
little considered because such de
mands did not exist, and they have
never existed in the forms in which
hhirope knows them. And for this
reason, if for no other, the native
American lias not been strongly at
tracted to the various doctrines called
socialism in 13uropi. Like conditions
produce like results, and the growth
nl' industrialism with its successes and
its oppressions brings the same re
action as in Furope. But as a matter
of fact, those who take part in these
reactions are for the most part re
cent immigrants, whoso ideals of gov
ernment even in democracy are collec
tive, standing in strong contrast with
tho individualistic democracy native
to the soil.
Fifty year. - , ago, in lsC!, Fdouard
Laboulaye published bis renrirkable

hook "Paris <>n Amerique," (Paris in
America.) Its motive was to show
what a great city might become under
the conditions of freedom which pre
vailed in America. The America was
idealized of course. It, represented
the noblest ideals of free-born men,
rather than the actual America, the
forces of democracy must strive with
all the other forces extant in modern
civilization.
j The influence of this volume was
wide spread and long continued. It
was my fortune to know two men of
power, the one a Dane, the other a
Swiss who were drawn to America by
the charm of Laboulaye and who were
not disappointed. They found what
they sought, and this is a perennial
characteristic of the republic. Who
ever comes to America and with what
ever motive will find what he seeks.
If he remains long enough and has
penetration to look below the surface
I he will find America.
If one seeks religious freedom he
will find it. Our fathers provided for
that. Whatever form or type of re
ligious discipline he seeks he will find

accordingly, I>ut its discipline is vol
untary not enforced by the state. If
one would escape from all religious in
fluence he can do so in America. It is
for him to choose.
If one seeks for class distinction, for
domination of the great over the small,
hereditary or otherwise, he will find it
in personal and local only, not
wrought into the fabric of society. If
one would find privilege enthroned
even as in Europe he will find it in
America, just as powerful as in
Europe, Imi everywhere surrounded
by an equally powerful movement of
insurgency. If one would find greed,
selfishness, lust, vanity, tolerance,
anything which belongs to the dregs
of humanity, he will find it in America,
and it may be embodied in powerful
and defiant institutions. For freedom
guarantees only freedom, and the
meaning of freedom is opportunity.
In Laboulaye's work, the official
Napoleonic view, which "Paris in
America" takes as its point of depar
ture is thus expressed. "A society
without administration, without army,
without police, with the savage liberty
of praying, speaking, writing, acting
each in his fashion would not last a
quarter of an hour. It is the negation
of all these principles, of all the con
ditions of this civilization which
makes the unity of our French nation.
In constituting our administration,
hierarehal and centralized, the wis
dom of our fathers lias long since
raised France to the first rank and
shown to the French people that
Liberty is Obedience, then is our Glory
and our Force."
Ketcrse 01 Napoleon's Ideals
The distinctive character of the
American ideals reverses this. It is
the building up of a society in which
the government stands only for jus
tice. The state does not concern itself
with right, worship or wrong worship,
with right thinking or wrong think
ing, with writing truth or writing
falsehood, with right acts or words or
ceremonies, except as abuse of liberty
may infringe on the liberty of others.
"I'ne societe sans administration,
sans armee, sans gendarmes, avec
la liberie sauvage de prier. de ponser,
de parler, d'ecrire, d'agir. chacun a
sa facon ne durerait pas 1111 quart
d'heure. ("est la negation de tons ces
principcs, de toutes les conditions de
cette civilisation qui fait I'unite dp la
nation francaise. En constituant
notre administration bierarchis.ee et
centralised, la sagesse de 110s peres a
depuis longtemps eleve la France a
premier rang et appris aux Francais
<pie la liberte ("est l'obeissance. C'est
la notre glorie et notre force."
The state is not pious, benevolent,
virtuous, generous, because these per
sonal virtues, cannot be exercised by
officialism leads to their abuse.
Privilege to the poor means privilege
to the rich; privilege to the rich
means privilege to the poor, but al
ways the more powerful arm secures
the greater privilege. The essence of
democracy is that no one. rich or
poor should have a lease on privilege.
The wealth of the republic does not
rest on its great sweep of prairies,
its mines or its commerce. Its primal
source is in its free schools, and its
freedom of choice of trade or profes
sion. The results of this freedom
can be measured in money as well as
in power. Now as ever, "America
means opportunity," opportunity for
each man and woman to prepare for
the work he can do best, opportunity
for each to find his place in life, op


I'IIESIDKXT DAVID KTAitlt .lOUD \ X
portunity for the work that neeils to
be done to find the man who can do it.
It is for each man to plan his own
career, to make his rwn escape "from
status to contract." The democracy
of America can acknowledge no mas
sters save of its own creation and the
power that makes these is adequate
to set them aside.
While every conception In Europe
has its reflex in America, while every
idea of administration from absolut
ism to anarchy finds its earnest advo
cates, none of these seem likely to
displace the fundamental ideal of
democratic individualism developed by
the fathers of the republic. This ideal
was expressed by Lincoln and long be
fore him by Anstolle. It is the function
of the state to establish justice among
men and to perform those acts of com
mon necessity, contributing to the pre
servation and enjoyment of human life
which collective action can accomp
lish better than private effort. Fur
ther than that, democracy which is
simply enforced co-operation should
not go, and by this principle, that no
theory of government should be
pushed beyond the consideration of its
practical results, the republic escapes
the choice of any single one among
the hundreds of remedies for political
ills. There is 110 possibility of the
adoption of anarchism, socialism, col
lectivism or individualism or any
other system as an exclusive and ex
cluding finality. The people of Amer
ica are interested in actual results
rather than any form of logical neces
sity as a ground for political action.
The Test of Solidarity
The test of national solidarity may
be found in its freedom from the need
of force or authority in the conduct of
its affairs. Let us imagine if we can,
a catastrophe which should remove
from the United States every repre
sentative of coercive power, every offi
cial of whatever rank from the Presi
dent to the last notary public, every
representative of army or of navy, or
of church, every policeman, every
authority of whatever kind.
Such a loss might create wied
spread bewilderment or profound
sorrow. It would have no relation to
anarchy. Except among certain un
assimilated foreign populatipns in
large cities it would lead to no
violence, to no riots. The functions
of national life would go on as before.
One by one communities would come
together and provide for the election
of officers. It was said that the death
of Lincoln gave a new proof of how
"republics live, not by a single life
but the right divine of man, the mil
lion trained to be free."
I.ret us apply the same test to other
nations. 111 the France of Napoleon
111, we are assured that without force,
society would not endure "for a quar
ter of an hour." What would be the
result in Germany today? No one can
tell. The German is endlessly patient,
even under needless burdens. What
would he do, if burdens were all sud
denly thrown off, if "Strengstens Ver
boten," the motto of Prussian rule
were suddenly found to have no force
behind it?
The lesson of democracy is therefore
the lesson of the United States. It is
no new lesson. The people of the
United States are merely European
people who have had some additional
experience, have learned some things
in their travels, perhaps forgetting

Patterson Dana Nowell Tulare
Frank Herbert Richey Tipton, Ind.
Edga r Clarence Smith Azusa
Homer Roberts Spence Alameda
GRAPHIC ART
Ethel Ora Qardin Salinas
James Leo Duff Menlo Park
fErnest P»ruce Nelson San Jose
Louise Rider Watsonville
Stella Belle Sankey Clearfield, Pa.
Cordelia Madison Smith Venice
MATHEMATICS
Sydnie Aileen Gardner Orange
Dorothy Marian Hindle Del Mar
Julia R. Johnson Aberdeen, Wash.
Ralph Matthews Noble Galesburg, 111.
Margaret Marion Steele San Jose
Mary Hilda Volkmor Whittier
APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Grace Raymond Helmick Helena, Mont.
CHEMISTRY
George Henry Beurhaus Tacoma, Wash.
Hector Crandall San Francisco
fEdwin Reginald Harding San Bernardino
fPaul Mark Levy San Francisco
Hugh Harold Mosher San Jose
Robert Lindley Murray Palo Alto
+Zeno Ostenberg.. San Jose
Alfred Liles Phillips Santa Cruz
PHYSICS
Herbert Rovell Benham McKittrick
Francis Sitwell Pratt Ontario
Albert John Scholl, Jr Los Angeles
Ruth Sceley Los Gatos
Glen Miller Smyth Salt Lake City-, Utah
Guy Carleton Swan Lawrence, Mass.
Devi Dyal Virmani Bahawalpore, India
Waldo Ralph Waelty Santa Clara
William Irvin Weaver Colorado Springs, Colo.
BOTANY
Taylor Jay Blethen Portland, Ore.
Arthur Dickie Borden Palo Alto
Ollis Willard Newman Santa Barbara
Frank Jason Smiley Fresno
PHYSIOLOGY AND HISTOLOGY
Albert Gordon Bower Salt Lake City, Utah
Roscal Leroy Draper Arroyo Grande
Florence Edetha Dunlop Vale, Ore.
George Stevenson Holcman Riverside
Leonard R. Jenkins Ogden, Utah
Merton James Price San Francisco
Karl Ludwig Schaupp Santa Rosa
John Philip Stricklcr San Diego
fCharles Ernest von Geldern San Francisco
*Carleton Wolsey Washburne Sierra Madre
fClyde T. Wetmore Hollister
Robert William Wilcox Delta, Colo.
fElsa Will Rochester, N. Y.
ZOOLOGY
Clara Crosby Santa Cruz
Mary 1* isk Los Angeles
ENTOMOLOGY AND BIONOMICS
Leroy Childs Redlands
fWarren Locke Smith Ferndale
Verne Genoa Stevens Palo Alto
GEOLOGY AND MINING
Robert Edwin Anderson San Francisco
Harry Mayo Andreen Redwood City
fCarl Hugh Beal Palo Alto
Edward Burke Corbet San Francisco
Waldemar Fenn Dietrich San Francisco
Benjamin Edward Erb Chemainus, B. C.
Andrew Douglas Fyfe Oceanside
fWilliam Conrad Gehrmann Davenport, la.
Mortimer Louis Hall Pasadena
Harold Briggs Hannibal San Jose
Olaf Pitt Jenkins Stanford* University
Grover Berner Lantz Colton
tßernard Harold Lasky San Francisco
*Robcrt James McCann Pacific Grove
fHarvey Wright Parmelee Santa Barbara
*Alonzo William Peake Los Angeles
Arthur E. Remington Watertown, N. Y.
*Edwin John Stewart Los Angeles
CIVIL ENGINEERING
Charles Edward Beechcr Monrovia
Edwin Prcscott Bly Los Angeles
I von Clay Briggs San Francisco

some others equally important. In
like manner the choicest thoughts and
worthiest ideals of America are
thoughts and ideals long before treas
ured by the advanced minds of Europe.
Another lesson from America is that
of the effective federation. The United
States is composed of fortliy-eight
self-governing states, each an entity
within itself managing its own affairs,
with its own officials and its own
laws, controlled by the nation in those
interests only which it shares with
its sister states. Some of these states
are as populous and wealthy as the
Kingdom of Europe, but each is a
jurisdiction, not a power. None can
make war alone, either by force of
arms or force of tariffs. While there
is all machinery for settling disputes
between states such disputes never
arise, because no state has the right
to use its force to promote private
business.
Stilts Equality
The states in a federal union meet
as jurisdictions. The small ones have
no fear of the large ones, and those
not touching the sea suffer in no way
from their restricted position. A
"Power" hampered as is the state of
Illinois would chafe against its limita
tions, and its jingoes would talk of
fighting their way to the ocean. But
viewed as a jurisdiction, surrounded by
similar jurisdictions, the people of
Illinois have no consciousness of limi
tation.
And this should be our ultimate con
ception of a nation. Its boundary line
should represent merely the limit of
jurisdiction. That jurisdiction ceases
does not imply need of violence be
tween the people on the two sides nor
require fortification for the purpose
of repelling violence. The Canadian
boundary is an example of this meet
ing of nations not as powers but as
jurisdictions.
This four-thousand-mile line, rang
ing through all kinds of territory and
all sorts of conditions, disputed nearly
all the way "with all the brutal frank
ness common to blood relations," has
for nearly a hundred years not known
a fortress, a soldier, a warship or a
gun. It is a peace boundary, the limit
of the jurisdiction of one self-govern
ing nation, the beginning of that of
another. It lacks but one thing to
make it ideally perfect, the re
moval of the custom-house, the em
blem of national suspicion and greed,
the remnant, of the days when it was
considered good economics for a na
tion to "have its taxes paid by for
eigners."
Europe in Turmoil
Viewed as "great powers" devoted
to the exploitation of the wealth of
other regions the leading nations of
Europe are in constant turmoil. The
German empire for example, is hamp
ered on every side. Her scant sea
coast is split in two by the presence
of Denmark. Her German Rhine dis
charges itself through Holland. The
ports of Amsterdam, Rotterdam, Ant
werp and Ostend, geographically her's,
are occupied by alien people whom she
could crush out in a moment, were it
not. for the physical force of the rest
of Europe and the moral power of the
world. Of Poland, she has too much
or too little. A large part of the Ger
man people live in the alien empire of
Austro-Hungary and in the republic
of Switzerland, while after forty years
of possession, Germany scarcely owns
Alsace or Lorraine. The states are a
thorn in the side of the empire, a bur
den and a weakness, just so long as
their two millions of people are held in
semi-vassalhood by the rule of force.
A free republic of Alasace Lorraine, a
second Swithzerland, half-German,
half-French separating and joining
two great nations would be a strength
and an inspiration to both. The true
gateways of the Rhine held by the
power of blood and iron is a centre
of menace to civilization. For the
wrong done at the Treaty of Frank
fort forty years ago, Europe has had to
pay most dearly for it is around the
question of Alsace-Lorraine that half
the crushing armament of Europe has
been built up. She is hemmed in
everywhere by the scare of old strugg
les, to her perennial discomfort. For
this reason, she suffers from the
"Drang nach Osten," she seeks a road
to the Persian gulf, an empire over
seas, and every form of imperial ex
tension to lands "under the sun,"
which may for the moment seem
plausible or possible.
But Germany as a jurisdiction suf
fers none of these limitations. Her
powers are only those which are
needed for the people's good. They
are merely her public duties. It mat
ters noting that her sway is checked
on almost, every side before it reaches
the sea. Other jurisdictions inter
vene, and each of these looks after
the public needs of man, which are
mostly justice, conservation, educa
tion, sanitation, and peace. As one of
the "Great Powers" of the world, Ger
many (with her fellow states as well)
is a center of friction, injustice and
unrest.
"A Power" is u Menace.
As a jurisdiction Germany is busy
with profitable and constantly ad
vancing industries, with an admir
able system of education and exten
sive provision for all the people's
needs, and no enlargement of boun
daries could in the least increase her
usefulness, her wealth or her happi
ness. As "a power" Germany is a
menace to the well being of civiliza
tion as every other "power" of similar
nature must be in its degree For
the prosperity of every people de
pends on international peace, and
all power-manifestations are either
actual or potential war. War is a
form of world-sickness from which
every function of civilization suffers,
and most of all those bonds of com
mon thought and common interest
sumed up in internationalism. And
to the members of an international
state, German in blood and in sym
pathy as well as English, all these
destructive rivalries of state with
state seem mediaeval and unworthy.
There is, in fact, something primitive,
outworn and unprogressive in the
spectacle of a civilized nation com
posed of millions of clever people
trusting for its defense to forts and
ships. With all the resources of
business, of science, ef education, of
thought, to depend on force seems a
lazy, even cowardly, shirking of the
higher possibilities of national
strength. To be surrounded by armed
guards, "holding the drop" on all
Commercial rivals is not a lofty con
ception of a nations's greatness. This
attitude has been as disastrous to
England's own peace of mind as it has
been menacing to the world's welfare.
To escape from this condition is not
a matter of a day nor a generation. Tt
is not easy for America even to

Revoe Carlisle Briggs Pasadena
fFloyd Cromwell Brown Selma
fEdward James Cullen Gilroy
Harry Bascom Davis Pomona
Wilbur Harvey Doxsee Redwood City
Robert Francis Duryea Palo Alto
fClarence Bernard Goodwin Sunnyvale
fCharles Stewart Grace Rivera
John Stanley Grepe, Jr East Highlands
tNorman Marshall Ilalcombe San Francisco
George William Hawley Portland, Ore.
George Walter Hunt San Jose
Paul Eells Jeffers Los Angeles
William Aiken Laird Lindsay
Alexander Stuart Macdonald San Francisco
tßobert Patchen Miller Los Angeles
Maurice Everard Morrison Morgan Hill
fßoger Wolcott Olmsted Los Angeles
Chauncey Smith Elie, Manitoba, Canada
Thomas Joseph Spellman Colma
fßurroughs Agin Stephenson Los Altos
Harry George Todtmann Chicago, 111.
George Harlan Trask Los Angeles
Charles Ralph Tupper San Jose
Romney Leigh Vaughn San Francisco
Guss Valentine Wallach Boonville
Carlton Levi Wyant Montecito
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING
■fClarence P. Campbell Los Angeles
tWallace Rolland Finney...* Modesto
*Burdette Lord Hostettler Erie, Pa.
Kenneth Irving Marshall Los Angeles
tAugustus Mudge Sanborn Redlands
Cecil Stocker Simon Los Gatos
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
*Edward Niles Adam Melville, Mont.
Frank Edward Anderson Los Angeles
fClarence Cannon Argabrite Ventura
John Watson Fleming Armstrong....Fivemiletown, Tyrone, Ire.
Everett Morse Calderwood Palo Alto
Melville Nathaniel Clark Dayton, Me.
John Francis Cullen Gilroy
Walter Jennings Dodge Los Angeles
Charles Greenlaw Duffin Comas, Wash.
Harry Adolph Fore Campbell
Frank Julius Gleiss Los Angeles
Walter J. Hammond ! Grinncll, la.
Tomiichi Haraguchi Nagasaki, Japan
George Edward Holditch Orange
Edgar Alden Jackson Cupertino
Linford C. Lull, Jr Los Angeles
James Arthur Miller Hanford
Rea Cambridge Newman Santa Barbara
George Washington Poison Menlo Park
Gaylord Kenyon Snyder Los Angeles
fGiistav Wade Naples
George Ireland Wright Pasadena
BACHELOR OF LAWS
Jerome Devereaux Peters San Jose
Granville Numan Wood, Jr Blue Lake
MASTER OF ARTS
LATIN
Flora Anne Bagley Burlingame
fßuth Beard Modesto
Catherine Ida Birch Redlands
fAnna Shipley Cox San Jose
Mabel Harriett Usinger Berkeley
Malcolm Leland Yeary Los Angeles
GERMAN
Edward Vere Brewer Elyria, Ohio
Catharine Morris Cox San Jose
Lydia Lucilc Meyer . Milwaukee, Wis.
Clara Lydia Schaaf Fort Wayne, -Ind.
fElsie Louise Whittemore Alhambra
ENGLISH LITERATURE
Anais Julia Allen Pasadena
Walter Clyde Curry Gray-Court, S. C.
ENGLISH PHILOLOGY
Maude Cleveland Stanford University
EDUCATION
tWilliam Samuel Marten San Jose
Clarence Lucien Phelps Jamestown, Ky.
William Thomas Root, Jr Pasadena
William Roy Tanner Minneapolis, Minn.

emancipate herself from reactionary
influences in Europe. There are many
interests in a wealthy nation who find
an aid or an affinity in militarism.
Debt creates debt, and those inter
ested in spending band together
against reform.
These matters proceed by slow pro
gress, interrupted by reaction; we
are in a period of relapse at present,
when reactionary forces seem to be in
the ascendant. Hut this very fact with
its burdens and horrors may be count
ed on to turn the balance in the other
direction.
Neither will there be a formal fed
eration of nations in this era. In
deed federation in fact will come long
before it comes in name. A single
unified world-government with cen
tralized rule under one set of men at
some one place, is only a dream—and
not a cheerful dream at that. What
the world needs is more self-control,
more local responsibility not more
governmental machinery. Neverthe
less every step in removing injustice,
in eliminating sources of friction, in
extending common interests, as the
postol union, the telegraph union, in
ternational law, international police
duties, international conferences and
congresses, arbitration treaties a nd
other agreements—are steps in the di
rection of the passing of war. To this
end, three great contributing agencies
are: the growth of the popular con
science, the interlocking of personal
interests, and the ruinous expence
which the progress of science has
brought to every branch of the mili
tar art.
All this has its part in the great
movement towards common interna
tional life, "La Vie Internationale" of
the dreams of La Fontaine, a life
which shall make war impossible and
will, in time, do away with exploita
tions, with tariff barriers and with all
the products of that narrow nativism,
which considers only the purposes or
enrichment of the selfish few, the one
in-group against all the out-groups of
the world.
Value of Open Diplomacy
Another lesson which the United
States may teach is the value of open
diplomacy. A secret agreement of
any kind whatever. It was a warning
of Washington that his nation should
beware of Entangling Alliances. A
formal alliance is for the purpose of
making enemies, never of making
friends. Friendship among nations
rests on common interests, on the in
terlocking of minds, the interlocking
of trade.
In the United States a treaty can be
entered into only with the open and
public consent of the Senate. Every
international relation is therefore
open to the world. No minister, no
president, no group of men whatever
can secretly pledge the nation to any
line of action. No president, no cabi
net, no minister, no congress acting
alone can make any declaration of
public policy. For these reasons the
United States must stand outside the
tangled snare of concessions and intri
gues we call world politics. She must
play her games of diplomacy with
open hands. She cannot be the secret
friend of any other nation. She can
not be a secret enemy because all her
acts, friendly or hostile, are known to
all the world.
The secret treaty in the interest of
imperial spoliation is the bane of
Europe. It ties each foreign office to
the service of the most reckless and
greedy of its great exploiting inter
ests. It has reduced the chancelleries
of more than one nation to be nothing
more than the firm name under which
its exploiting corporations compass
their ends in Asia or in Africa.
The secret is a relic of the military
state. The civilzed world is still or
ganized on the mediaeval theory that
war is a natural function to he ex
pected in the normal course of events,
not a hideous inorau, physical;. and
financial catastrophe. la the old
theory as expounded by Machiavelli,
the king has no other business but
war. It is the duty of his ministers
to find weak places in the defenses of
other kings through which war may
be successful, and to find, after the
fact, excuses by which' war can be
justified. The secret treaty, the .con
cession to a friendly power, ithe. arti-.
ficial interference with a rival, —all
these belong to the days' of Ma<?hia
velli. If . all parties concerpe.4 ( |cojJ>ld :
come out.into the open, .Wihsre . t-het
United States is forced to stahd, we
should soon have an end to tneAttgld-
German struggle, of the rivalry be
tween the Triple Entente and the
Triple Alliance.
Outworn ideas ot' national glory, out
worn figures of.speech as tp national
purposes, outworn mediaevalism in
our -conception of the state.—all'these
find expression in the "secret treaty,"
the "entangling alliance," which is a'
chief obstacle in the way of the -con
ciliation of nations. ?>• -
Historically, the influence of Amer
ica has been exerted in opposition to
Imperialism and to infringement of
the great nations on the rights of the
sniall. This is the inception of the
Monroe Doctrine, which in spite of its
perversion and its wrong accentuation r
has protected Latin America from the
fate of Africa. That this should now
be a Pan-American, not njerely an.
American doctrine goes without say
ing. And it must never be allowed i.o
degenerate-into " a Dollar Diplomacy"
which would.reserve Tropical America
as a special "sphere of, .influence-' for
American exploitation,. For the true,
and final form of the Mojiuae.Doctrine
is found, in the Drago .Doctrine,. of the
republics of South Ameripa,, that tiie
forqe of . arms should. be used-ras.
an,instrument iu industiriul spoliation.
This the people of the United States
should adopt as• their-.own. « <
Principle Disregarded '
In a recent deciskm- of- arbitration;
the King 'of Swed'ant'laW down 'this
principle: that a nation "has 110
right to land- troops in .order-to pYe-'
serve the property or the rights of her
nationals.". This''lwinciple. ha,s '-beefr
disregarded in the •strangling of
Persia, the rape of Mongolia and of
Tibet, in the chronic robbery of
China, and in the annexation of Egypt, <
of Korea, uf Morocco and of Tripoli.
But it is for all that a just.-and honor
able principle, and it is disregarded
only when a nation, by virtue of super
ior strength or superior civilization
feels itself justified in taking posses
sion of another for its good, and inci
dentally for the commercial advant
age of its own exploitating interests.
It is true that the smaller nations of
the tropics are subject to violent
political disturbances. They have not
learned the value of liberty as regu
lated hjy law. Yet it is highly prob
able that not one in ten of these
periodical/ revolutions I's of spontan- 1
eous native origin. of them are
started for purposes of spoliation by

autside adventurer's and a large ma
jority are paid for by adventurers
'State. The Public School exists
everywhere at the public expense, and
belonging to one or more of the great
epinniarqia'ruatrojis tit', fheiear'th.. When."
'the"fi v nal' iriitli'Ts"known'"of unhappy
Mexico the responsibility for hfei' dis
(Mfer'sl will rest nht on'her martyred
president, ridr "on the' sol
"diers'of fortune by whose hands he
•fell, but on the men in New York or
in London perhaps,' whose nioiWy has
kept iliese revolutions going. Mexico,
with fatal riches of oil and gold, is not
tlie first nation to Ite torn asunder by
'conflicting ."sphere's of influence."
The. influence of the republic has
been always thrown against another
form of imperialism involved in the
phrase "Control of the Sea." America
has never claimed any such control
nor has she admitted the right to
others. It is a mediaeval idea going
back foiir hundred years to the time
when the great seas were divided be
tween Spain and Portugal. America
has stood for the open sea, the restric
tion of national jurisdiction to the
three-mile limit, the extermination of
piracy, and in iater years for the most
important doctrine of the immunity of
war. To make the high seas an open

HI STORY
Ella Wissie Beaver ...T. .Tulare
fEmrria Howse Kuno Palo Alto
George Lutes Righter '.Campbell
Francis Marion Russell .Los Angeles
MATHEMATICS
Rose Margaret Bennett »....San Diego
Amanda Westhold ..Quincy, 111:
CHEMISTRY
Alicje. .Ruth Bergcr San Jose
Elton Marion Hogg. v Saratoga
Charles Kirkton McWilliams San Joss
tWilliam John Van Sicklen Castle-ton, Ontario,,Canada
BOTANY
Charlotte Elliott Del Rapids, S. D.
BACTERIOLOGY
Frank Maltaner .Cincinnati, O.
ZOOLOGY
Josephine Louise Dows Randall Stanford University
ENTOMOLOGY
F rankie Willard Galexioo
GEOLOGY
Theodore Chapin., Los Angeles
Joseph Stanley Hook jjPerris ■
ENGINEER
CHEMICAL ENGINEERING
. Louis Wjlliam Pingree.-. ; Ogden-, Utah
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING
fDexter Simpson Kimball N. Y.
Lyman Stevenson King Oakland .
r *• . V <
JURIS DOCTOR
George Armand Ditz Stockton f-1
Maurice Timothy Dooling • Hollistter ,
fEmmet Ross Fertig Nobl.esvjlle, Ind.
fFrank Louis Guerena rs .. „Spnora
George Juan Hatfield ...Oakland-,
Frank Howard Hilton ; Portland, Ore.
Grant Holcomb San Bernardino^
Ignatius Martin Peckham tV| . San . Jose
Edmund Wright Pugh Los. (Angeles..
Alfred'Worcester Robertson Saflt? Ba,rbru:a ..
Chester Harvey Warlow : . r ., . ( Fresno,
Herbert Eustace White Saotamento^.
tFrederick feertram Wood i. . Alto.
* September 6, 1912
fjanuary 10, 1013 "O '?t it

highway-to be tr.a.ver?ed , ( afc ( anytime,-
in absolute--safety, by any, vessel what
ever would-gp/t'ar away
witji international..waff,.-and iSitill ftWH
ther in ren^.vi!),£..tlve- and dnv<-
gerous burden of naval protectioni»'l£;
all military operations.- at. sea couidibe
confined to the <oa,nnon shot.
from the. shore, the- original motive
of the three-mile limit of. jurisdiction,
it would represent one of ,the most
practical triumphs of civilization.- Ttfe
nations should join to make the ocean
safe, not to fill it with floating fort
resses designed t tp. protect merchant
ships from robbery by the very per
sons with whom they trade.
Still another lesson from. America is
one in which, we all agree; the divorce
of religion from political control and
therefore from the,domain of politics.
Absolute religions freedom exists .in
America because the state assumes
no relation of any kind to religious
corporations as such, So long as these
do not interfere with the freedom of
soul or body of men not. belonging to
them, their acts do not concern the
state. And on no, one policy is there
more firm agreement.in America* than
in the absolute separation of Church
nowhere can any sect or gpoup of seets
claim any dominating relation in re

gard to It. To the average American
the strife over Church properties and
Church interests so real in Europe
seem incomprehensible. The Church,
any church, is in every way better oif
for separation from the government.
Whatever achievement; whatever pro
gress it may make is its own, and this
progress is solid because it involves,
no ulterior political end.
Connected with the freedom of the
church is the freedom of the people
from other forms of paternalism. The
state becomes benevolent only when it
lias failed to be just. It allows special
opportunities to individuals only
where it has denied opportunity to
men at large.
The "old-age pension" is a conven
ient'illustration,.'lt has been justly
compared to- the. free pass homeward
granted to the human wrecks who
have lost their all in the. gambling
rooms of-Monte Carlo. It is the shill
ing given to the man run over by my
lord's automobile.
In a better system he would not have
been run over. He would not have
lost his money in a vile resort, lie
would not have needed an outside
pittance to carry him through old age.
Host Workers Died in War
The old-age pension exists in Eng
land as a convenient balm for inequal
ity and injustice. The best of her
workers have died in her wars/ leav
ing a weaker stock to breed from.
These have grown' up unskilled, in de
fault of the shools that make men
strong. They have grown up in the
atmosphere of the public house, sod
den with lust and beer and whisky.
They have lost the opportiiniy tljat
should be theirs, and at the end their
jfellows must be taxed to feed tliem.
The tragedy of the East End of Lon
don is no normal part of the tragedy
of Life. It is no part of the normal
America. It is no part of a nation
which has given opportunity.
Brit'in America a' new country, fresh,
unspoiled, full of life and hope, it is
possible to hctt'd' government" to its
rigid purpose, to develop opportunity
by the elimination of privilege, teacfy,.
men to lean' not on' government but
on themselves, and to aid by'fraternal '
giving those who have fallen in. tbg
prang 1 ; not "to weaken by unearned
public money those who are falling but
who can be made to stand, 'tfie wav
Up it i '">• vtc.
t)t the transgressor is hard and we
not make it eapier'ff we could;
|We' could not if we would'. To. give a..
plkh'a chance to'rise,' i'.s to allow him'
hlfbthe choice t<>Tali:" ' *';•"
1 is ! •?; . " *
foii.fession of Failure , '
■ "Tho old-age pension" .is, so- far as 1
it goes, a confession of failure of de- ■
jnocracy,. Except as a measure of'"
e |1 £r-fie.pcy, l Jts real purpose in Eng
land, it has no justification in good '
government. Clean up the. social at
mosphere, restore to the people, what ■
is rightfully theirs, and they will care, 1
rare accidents .excepted, for their own
old age.
in America tlie struggle, between '
labor and capital can never assume
the form it has in Europe. In a gov
ei nment which stands for justice, and
which is in no way occupied with
making money for its people, nor from
its People, nor in supporting exploiting
intei ests in other lauds, there is uo
visable necessity for universal col
lective ownership. Where classes do
not leally exist there is no pertinence
in the artificial distinctions of aristoc
racy, proletariat and bourgeoisie
which have been so laboriously
brought over from Europe. If these*
distinctions exist, most of us in Amer
ica belong to one single class, that of
the bourgeoisie.
There exist in America as elsewhere,
vast fortunes, disproportionate to the
ability or the efforts of those who con
trol them. But their history has been
of short duration. They are not leg
acies from an unjust past. Their or
igin belongs to the present. It is
mainly individual. Great luck, great
skill or ingeniously managed privilege
stands behind each of them. By the
same means as in Europe, by co
operation through interlocking direc
torates, these great fortunes have
been made to stand together and thus
by a process of financial suction to
build up fortunes still greater. But
one most important difference exists.
The national government, in theory
and for the most in fact, stands aloof
from these combinations. The con
trol of public affairs, even of financial
matters is beyond their permanent
reach. Their influence on foreign
diplomacy is limited because no secret
influence can control, and the power
of money for evil is mostly lost in
publicity.
Property May Rule
In all their operations, they are sur
rounded by an alert and in the long
run victorious opposition of democ
racy. In America property may rule,
but only for a time. In the earlier
•centuries of Europe, the period of
Absolutism, when monarchy was a
political power not a function of so
ciety, it was, of course, true that prop
erty ruled. But it was the ruler who
had the property. It was his by force
of position. Not until the money lend
ers of the last century secured the
strangle hold on the nations of
Europe was this condition brought to
an end.
Then again, property ruled, but it
was not that the King and the nobles
held the property. Property held
them, and in Europe today it is money
that rules, and it rules King and
peasant alike, for everything el3e
hinges on the Imperial Explotation of
foreign lands.
In America, this is true in a degree,
but the rule of money has its visible
limits. For the United States belongs
to its people.
"Dollar Diplomacy"
While Europe generally, the alliance
between financial interests and the
government is open and avowed, such
•connections in America have proved
fatal to political leaders and to polit
ical parties. The methods by which
the "powers of Europe" through their
foreign offices bolster up adventures
in foreign lands, could not be used in
America. The diplomacy of persua
sion, threats or force of arms in the
interest of private ventures would be
impossible here. The people might
consent to "Dollar Diplomacy" but
•only for a time and until its nature
is understood. The recent, repudia
tion of our relation to the "Six Power
Loan' to China will serve as a case in
point.
And here again we must admit that
out democratic conception of govern
ment has to struggle for acceptance
in America. The protective tariff in
theory and in practice is a flat viola
tion of its principles. Tt is a flat
violation of the spirit of the American
■constitution. It is privilege pure and
simple granted to the few by the
many, in the belief that in the long
run the many would profit by it. Its

purpose was to diversify industries by
letting the farmer help pay the ex
penses of the manufacturer. It has
just that effect, and the farmer and
laborer are becoming increasingly
discontented with its burdens and the
inequalities before the law which are
part and parcel of its operations.
In America, the army and navy,
though the latter has grown beyound
all reason through the rivalry from
England and Germany, still represent
a democratic ideal. We still hold to
the thought that our officers are not
rulers but servants of the people.
Our military element stands near
the parting of the ways, for all offi
cialism tends to aggrandize itself,
most of all that which is associated
with pomp and with patriotism. Mili
tarism for its own sake belongs to the
state in whoch property rules. "It
furnishes," says John A. Hobson, "a
profitable support to certain strong
vested interests. It is a decorative
element in social life and above all, it
is necessary to keep down the
pressure of the forces of internal
reform."
>o Room for Militarism
The ideals of Militarism and Democ
racy can never coexist. And this na
tion is too far given over to democ
racy ever to do more than dally with
the military ideal. In a nation that
knows no caste, and has no aristioc
racy other than temporary and self
selected, no military traditions will
ever be permanent. There can never
be a warrior caste holding special
privilege or special authority.
As a people, we of the United States
are too rich in resources of wealth, of
education and of intelligence to be
controlled by influences of militarism.
And thus and for the same reasons, in
the republic of America, the state ex
ists for the man, not the man for the
state. This is the fundamental differ
ence between the Eighteenth Century
and Twentieth. And let us speed the
day when it may be said not only that
"America means Opportunity" but
that the same hopeful word may be
spoken of Germany and England and
France and Russia and of all the na
tions in the sisterhood of civilization.
Lord Acton thus sums up the move
ment of the history of civilization:
"It is by the combined efforts of the
weak made under compulsion to re
sist the reign of force and constant
wrong that in the rapid change but
slow progress of four hundred years
liberty has been preserved and se
cured and extended and finally under
stood."
And as America comes to under
stand her own message of democracy,
internationalism and peace, she will
carry this understanding back to the
motherland of Europe.
Within the last two months Presi
dent Wilson and Mr. Bryan have
planned a most practical and effective
means of bringing American influence
to bear on the problems of World
peace.
The end in view is to relegate war
to a position of last resort in times
of international difference, to place
soldiers and dreadnaughts in the
background—not in the front of na
tional movement.
The essence of this American policy
is that in case of friction between
nations, the matter be placed for six
months in the hands of a joint high
Commission of investigation, chosen
in part from the contending nations,
the majority from friendly neutrals.
These- for six months shall study the
question at issue, neither nation in the

meantime demonstrating, mobilizing
or increasing the armament, until the
final report is made. After this each
nation is free to choose conciliation,
concession, compromise, arbitration
or war. And with six months to think
it over there will be no war. Wars are
waged for greed, for politics, or be
cause the mob has been stirred by
senseless speech or reckless journal
ism. And in many cases this reckless
journalism has been carefully cal :u
--lated and fully paid for by those in
terested in the sale of the accessories
of war.
The treaty of arbitration will natur
ally follow on the treaty for investi
gation. Courts will naturally supple
ment results of friendly offices. But
the agreement for friendly conference
comes first and is for the present the
more important. The Treaty of Arbi
tration is most valuable, — not as
preventing war, for a nation bent on
war, if there is such a case, will not
stop to agree to arbitrate. The world
is finally ruled by public opinion. Ar
bitration treaties clinch public opinion
and hold it to its duty.
The present decade has been char
acterized by needless, costly and
brutal wars, the result not of actual
conditions of today, but of blunders
and crimes committed in the past.
Wars do not spring up afresh in our
civilization. They spring from old
wars whose seeds were not destroyed
by peace.
Rut, however, dark the present out
look may seem with half the coined
money of the world spent each year
on war and war's accessories, the far
outlook is most promising. The cruel
horror of the Balkan war, the waste of
armed peace and frustrate war
throughout the civilized world, — all
these make powerfully for peace, for
real peace — the Peace of Law and
Trust, and not the Peace of Force.
And just now is the time when
American influence can be most defi
nitely crystallized and made effective.
And we are thankful that we have in
the seats of Authority at Washington
men who definitely work for peace
and whom war and war's fripperies
do not dazzle nor attract.
Two hundred and seven students were awarded the Bachelor of
Arts Degree by President David Stu rr Jordan in the Assembly Hull tills
morning. Two were granted the Bachelor of Laws Degree, while
thirty-five were given the Master of Arts Degree. In addition to these
the Academic Council also awarded three Engineer, thirteen .luris Doc
tor of Philosophy Degrees. The Co miuencemnet address preceded the
presenting of the sheepskins, *Th e Conquest of Europe by America,"
wsis the subject of the strong address delivered by Doctor Jordan.

I wish this morning to say a serious
word to you as citizens of the great
republic and as future leaders in its
thought and action. I wish you to
think earnestly of the part American
influence must play in the world his
tory of our century. It is for us to
help cure the accumulated evils of
the older civilization. Those men in
Europe who look furthest into the
future hope for the salvation of
Europe through ideals brought back
from practical service in America.
One of these. Senator La Fontaine of
Brussels, has given me my title as the
expression of the hope of his life,
"The Conquest of Europe by America."
I hasten to say that 1 do not mean
conquest by force of arms, for 1 have
no interest in such conquests and no
belief that victories thus won result in
any permanent good to any nation.
Nor do I mean financial conquests,
the floating of imperial loans or the
permeation of any part of European
business by financiers from the New
World. Still less do I celebrate a
shoppers' contest on the Place de
I'Opera or among the dazzling bar
gains of the Hon Marche. Nor does
the trail of American tourists who
cross with gold the palms of Europe's
servitors, all the way from Piccadilly
to the Pyramids awaken in me any
pride of nation or of race. The only
permanent conquest is that of ideas.
America stands, has always stood, for
two ideals from which she cannot
escape, for they are fundamental in
her origin and in her growth. These
are internationalism and democracy,
and these ideals being invincible
must conquer America, and through
her, reconquer Europe. And as both
are incompatible with war, their final
triumph marks the end of spoliation,
of and of that relation be
tween nations which breeds suspicion
and hatred. The conquest of the
world by the ideals of International
ism and Democracy marks the coming
of universal peace.
In the address at Baltimore in 1911,
Henri La Fontaine of Brussels, the
veteran prophet of International Life,
used these striking words.
"Emigration perhaps more than
war has deprived the old, historic
countries of their most energetic and
fittest ones to build the progressive
and wealthy people you are on this side
of the Atlantic. You are for us
Europeans, the beloved Brotherland,
Do not forget that Europe is always

and will still remain for you the be
loved Motherland. Europe is now for
America what Greece was for Europe.
Europe has liberated (Ireece. Amer
ica has to liberate Europe from its
burdens, its prejudices, its hatreds.
It is your duty, it is your highest duty
to reconcile outside your borders the
people you have reconciled within
your borders. For indeed the Amer
ican people is at present the true
international people. It is the elect
people which alone can further inter
nationalism and can transform all of
the people of the Earth into a family
of nations, a brotherhood of men, an
international people." "For coloniza
tion is not mainly done by men and by
capital, but also by ideas, by example,
by experiment."
Not Always True to Ideals
We may freely admit in the begin
ning that America has not always been
true to her own ideals, and that she
has not always clearly seen her own
future. She has had her own lapses,
moral and social, some of these be
cause of associations with Europe and
through imitation of glories alien to
her history. If she had been true to
herself she would never have known
a single foreign war. She has no part in
those greeds and jealousies of money
or of race which still keep up turmoil
in Europe. Her war with Spain with
its eagerness for exploitation, its
tinsel imperialism and its pride of
participation in "world politics" rep
resents the worst of these lapses, and
its evil effects are long in passing.
But though the inception of this affair
was European in method, its contin
uance has been characteristically
American. Instead of exploitation, we
have brought to the Philippines educa
tion and sanitation. We have expend
ed on them a hundred times what we
have received, and if ever imperilism
can be respectable we have made it so.
Another false movement has been
in the building of warships and forts
in America. This lacks the motive
for similar extravagances in Europe,
because the peace of the new world is
no where threatened. But with us as
everjwhere the military spirit grows
with the money spent on it. The more
mouths fed by the State the greater
the clamor for the feeding of still
more. We have also to reckon with
the desire for giant decoration, for
big navies for sheer bigness' sake, the
feeling that this is the richest and'
most progressive nation on the globe,

and that as such she can beat old
Europe at her own game even though
that game be not worth the candle.
But with all lapses and delinquin
cies the fact of internationalism and
the ideal of democracy have been and
must always remain with the United
States, and from the United States
these ideals will react with greater
and greater force on the thoughts and
deeds of Europe.
Internationalism is the heritage of
America, not of choice at first, but cf
necessity. She has perforce grown
up with this ideal, because no other
was possible. She became the cosmo
politan nation of the world because
of her complex origin and with this
origin she could be nothing else. In
a new civilization, in the struggles of
the frontier each man is rated for
what he is worth. Under these condi
tions no one cares for the petty pre
cedences of rank or race. What a
man can do in the next twenty-four
hours outvalues any question as to
who were his ancestors.
All Hate Dies
On a railway train not long ago
some one was overheard to say: "This
is the land where all hate dies. My
father was German; my mother was
French. What do I care for all that?
I am an American. The old hatreds
and rivalries are nothing to me."
America was English, first. In lang
uage, in spirit, in conscience and in
government it is England which domi
nates. For the English race, above
all others, with its adaptation for co
operation and for compromise is the
builder of free states.
It was the chosen among the Eng
lishmen of three centuries ago who
founded the germ colonies of Virginia
and Massachusetts May. In the fol
lowing years it has been the like
minded from their own nation and
from others who have crossed the seas
to enter into their work.
The first who came were the bold,
the free, the self-ruling, the pleasure
scorning element of English life. They
came to escape from the state
church and the church-state, that they
might worship in their own fashion
and according to dictates of their indi
vidual consciences.
They detested the law of primogeni
ture which thrust the spirit of pre
cedence into the bosom of every fam
ily. They abhorred the law of entail
which burdened the land with the
curse of privilege even to unborn gen
erations.
They had caught from France the

spirit of liberty, equality, fraternity,
but as befits the calmer blood of the
north, they gave this spirit a con
structive interpretation, and the idea
of equality was to them especially rich
in practical results. Equality before
the law, equal access to land, to edu
cation, to professions and trades,
. equal access to legislat ion, each of
these conceptions broadened out into
the spirit of democracy.
And after England came to other
nations of Europe, each with its own
part and in its own degree giving its
contingent of free-born men, the ad
| mixture of blood gave strength and
! versatility to the rising nation.
But withal, the dominant note is
English still, with as many diver-
I gences from the England of today as
j from the England of the Stuarts.
In later years other immigration has
come, not alone the bold in search of
adventure, of new homes and new free
doms, but the weak and the oppressed,
"the beaten men of the beaten races,"
who llee from war taxation in search
of living wages and of daily bread.
But all these are cast into the same
melting pot and in most of them there
arises a clear response to the call of
free institutions.
In this melting pot of America, all
the old racial antipathies disappear
and all hereditary hatreds. There is
110 final distinction of British or Ger
j man, of French or Italian, of Spanish
|or Slav, of Dutch or Scandinavian,
!or of Jew or Gentile. The average
| American is as cosmopolitan in origin
j and relationship as is royalty in
Europe, though for a different set of
| reasons. But in America there is 110
[ distinction of common or noble, of
high or low, of aristocracy, bour
j geoisie or proletariat except as these
| are artificially emphasized in the in
dustrial strife we have inherited from
Eu rope.
To the international mind of Amer
ica, there seems 110 need or pertinence
to an Anglo-Saxon alliance as against
any other people. In so far as such
alliance is desirable or humanly pos
sible it exists already in a common
sympathy and a common literature, ft
would lie weakened by a stated agree
ment of the Anglo-Saxon group to
swell each others Meets with dread
naughts. The true bond of Union of
the Greater Britain involves no rup
ture with the Greater Germany, or the
Greater France or the Greater Scandi
navia to which we in America likewise
claim allegiance.
To the American, "Pan-Germanism,"
Pan-Slavism," as lie hears these ex
pounded seem a meaningless return to
ideals of tlie Middle Ages. They re
mind him of the Holy Roman Empire,
which never was, and should never be,
or still more they hark back to Pan-
Islamism the futile dream of the light
ing Turk.
There is nothing in aggrandizement
of race as such which appeals to the
American, the child of all European
races. That such races are ennobled
by conquest of lesser tribes and by
their undigested exploitation he does
not believe. To the American even
England's greatness does not exist on
her Indian Empire, but rather in spite
of it.
Within the last forty years there lias
grown up a new world in Europe and
in the range of civilization. The old
conception of the states of Europe
as opposed to one another and mutu
ally destructive must, pass away in the
broader aspects of civilization.
The growth of International life is
one of the most striking aspects of
this new relation. The extention of
travel, the spread of commerce, the
achievements of science, the exchanges
in education, all these tend to make
a great "melting pot" of the civilized
world. Neither in his business, in his
pleasures, nor in his intellectual pur
suits is the educated man anywhere
limited to any one country. All
rational human interests are con
nected by interlocking bonds of many
kinds, joining one people with another.
The hundreds of international con
gresses held every summer the world
over and covering almost every gen
eral interest of men is the strongest
possible evidence of this Interlocking,
and all this constitutes an inter
national bond not to be lightly severe.!.
A declaration of war between nations
is now little less than an attack on
civilization in all its most cherished
aspects, social, moral, as well as finan
cial. The lines of national policy
taken for granted half a century ago
are fast becoming impossible, their
very suggestion being ruinous.
I'c ideiicj toward < oix'ilintion
The influence of America tends to
wards international conciliation. It
involves the recognition of men as
men, each valued for what he is or
wlnit tie can do. Both of these deter
mined, of course, by bis blood and his
education, but not to be judged in ad
vance by any wholesale distinctions.
This is the spirit of the Interna
tionale, the common life and common
sympathy among civilized people, re
gardless of national boundaries. This
International life constitutes the final
and lasting basis of International
Peace.
As the history of America rests on
internationalism so is her social fab
ric built on democracy. Historically
her democracy has a double origin. Its
theory was French, its practice was
English. The French philosophers
furnished the one, the reaction against
British methods the other.
For inequality before the law is the
foundation of the polity of Great
Britain. Her constitution stands on
privilege. Her social customs rest on
precedence of classes, precedence of
individuals. England chooses her lords
and magnates, her patrons and tyrants
long before they are born. These be
long to her system of privilege by
which cities like Westminster, Shef
field, Davenport, Arundel, were so
long held, virtually tax-free, by men
whose ancestors received their land as
royal gifts or bought tlieni as cow
pastures. The law of favor rises above
the law of justice.

Hut men of the pioneer type, the
Roundhead, the Pilgrim, the Puritan,
the American have hated favor and
privilege and precedence of every
form. The toll of tin 1 rich and the dole
of the poor are alike offensive to them.
And this dislike of overreaching and of
coddling has passed over to their de
scendents. John Hay once said of the
people of the new state of Ohio. "They
looked to no one as their superiors,
and on none as their inferiors. They
knew 110 want they could not them
selves satisfy," and to this Senator
Bayard added the further note, "They
were too self-willed and independent
to allow any to rule over them but
t heniselves."
This in a word is the spirit of de
mocracy, of the democracy of the
pioneer if you like, but America is the
land of pioneers, and this fact still in-

11 uences all her acts unci her insti
tutions. Her people find their polit
ical ideals in an equal start with equal
opportunity, in equality before the
law, in equal access to education, in
equal access to the land, in equal ac
cess to legislation.
The nation is built on individuals
each responsible for himself. The
state is a mutual adjustment for their
collective benefit. The individual in
America does not live for the state, is
not the property of the state, the state
has no control over him except that
which the individual lias delegated. It
is no duty of the state to promote his
prosperity or the prosperity of his
group. The state is rather the umpire
which decides questions of justice, the
servant by which the needs of the
many are met by co-operation in so far
as these needs are general and conson
ant, with ideals of justice.
As the founders of our state were
frontiersmen scattered far and wide,
without cities, without corporations,
without great collective utilities, their
democracy became that of individual
ism. The demands of society, of col

leetive action, of national power were
little considered because such de
mands did not exist, and they have
never existed in the forms in which
hhirope knows them. And for this
reason, if for no other, the native
American lias not been strongly at
tracted to the various doctrines called
socialism in 13uropi. Like conditions
produce like results, and the growth
nl' industrialism with its successes and
its oppressions brings the same re
action as in Furope. But as a matter
of fact, those who take part in these
reactions are for the most part re
cent immigrants, whoso ideals of gov
ernment even in democracy are collec
tive, standing in strong contrast with
tho individualistic democracy native
to the soil.
Fifty year. - , ago, in lsC!, Fdouard
Laboulaye published bis renrirkable

hook "Paris <>n Amerique," (Paris in
America.) Its motive was to show
what a great city might become under
the conditions of freedom which pre
vailed in America. The America was
idealized of course. It, represented
the noblest ideals of free-born men,
rather than the actual America, the
forces of democracy must strive with
all the other forces extant in modern
civilization.
j The influence of this volume was
wide spread and long continued. It
was my fortune to know two men of
power, the one a Dane, the other a
Swiss who were drawn to America by
the charm of Laboulaye and who were
not disappointed. They found what
they sought, and this is a perennial
characteristic of the republic. Who
ever comes to America and with what
ever motive will find what he seeks.
If he remains long enough and has
penetration to look below the surface
I he will find America.
If one seeks religious freedom he
will find it. Our fathers provided for
that. Whatever form or type of re
ligious discipline he seeks he will find

accordingly, I>ut its discipline is vol
untary not enforced by the state. If
one would escape from all religious in
fluence he can do so in America. It is
for him to choose.
If one seeks for class distinction, for
domination of the great over the small,
hereditary or otherwise, he will find it
in personal and local only, not
wrought into the fabric of society. If
one would find privilege enthroned
even as in Europe he will find it in
America, just as powerful as in
Europe, Imi everywhere surrounded
by an equally powerful movement of
insurgency. If one would find greed,
selfishness, lust, vanity, tolerance,
anything which belongs to the dregs
of humanity, he will find it in America,
and it may be embodied in powerful
and defiant institutions. For freedom
guarantees only freedom, and the
meaning of freedom is opportunity.
In Laboulaye's work, the official
Napoleonic view, which "Paris in
America" takes as its point of depar
ture is thus expressed. "A society
without administration, without army,
without police, with the savage liberty
of praying, speaking, writing, acting
each in his fashion would not last a
quarter of an hour. It is the negation
of all these principles, of all the con
ditions of this civilization which
makes the unity of our French nation.
In constituting our administration,
hierarehal and centralized, the wis
dom of our fathers lias long since
raised France to the first rank and
shown to the French people that
Liberty is Obedience, then is our Glory
and our Force."
Ketcrse 01 Napoleon's Ideals
The distinctive character of the
American ideals reverses this. It is
the building up of a society in which
the government stands only for jus
tice. The state does not concern itself
with right, worship or wrong worship,
with right thinking or wrong think
ing, with writing truth or writing
falsehood, with right acts or words or
ceremonies, except as abuse of liberty
may infringe on the liberty of others.
"I'ne societe sans administration,
sans armee, sans gendarmes, avec
la liberie sauvage de prier. de ponser,
de parler, d'ecrire, d'agir. chacun a
sa facon ne durerait pas 1111 quart
d'heure. ("est la negation de tons ces
principcs, de toutes les conditions de
cette civilisation qui fait I'unite dp la
nation francaise. En constituant
notre administration bierarchis.ee et
centralised, la sagesse de 110s peres a
depuis longtemps eleve la France a
premier rang et appris aux Francais
<pie la liberte ("est l'obeissance. C'est
la notre glorie et notre force."
The state is not pious, benevolent,
virtuous, generous, because these per
sonal virtues, cannot be exercised by
officialism leads to their abuse.
Privilege to the poor means privilege
to the rich; privilege to the rich
means privilege to the poor, but al
ways the more powerful arm secures
the greater privilege. The essence of
democracy is that no one. rich or
poor should have a lease on privilege.
The wealth of the republic does not
rest on its great sweep of prairies,
its mines or its commerce. Its primal
source is in its free schools, and its
freedom of choice of trade or profes
sion. The results of this freedom
can be measured in money as well as
in power. Now as ever, "America
means opportunity," opportunity for
each man and woman to prepare for
the work he can do best, opportunity
for each to find his place in life, op


I'IIESIDKXT DAVID KTAitlt .lOUD \ X
portunity for the work that neeils to
be done to find the man who can do it.
It is for each man to plan his own
career, to make his rwn escape "from
status to contract." The democracy
of America can acknowledge no mas
sters save of its own creation and the
power that makes these is adequate
to set them aside.
While every conception In Europe
has its reflex in America, while every
idea of administration from absolut
ism to anarchy finds its earnest advo
cates, none of these seem likely to
displace the fundamental ideal of
democratic individualism developed by
the fathers of the republic. This ideal
was expressed by Lincoln and long be
fore him by Anstolle. It is the function
of the state to establish justice among
men and to perform those acts of com
mon necessity, contributing to the pre
servation and enjoyment of human life
which collective action can accomp
lish better than private effort. Fur
ther than that, democracy which is
simply enforced co-operation should
not go, and by this principle, that no
theory of government should be
pushed beyond the consideration of its
practical results, the republic escapes
the choice of any single one among
the hundreds of remedies for political
ills. There is 110 possibility of the
adoption of anarchism, socialism, col
lectivism or individualism or any
other system as an exclusive and ex
cluding finality. The people of Amer
ica are interested in actual results
rather than any form of logical neces
sity as a ground for political action.
The Test of Solidarity
The test of national solidarity may
be found in its freedom from the need
of force or authority in the conduct of
its affairs. Let us imagine if we can,
a catastrophe which should remove
from the United States every repre
sentative of coercive power, every offi
cial of whatever rank from the Presi
dent to the last notary public, every
representative of army or of navy, or
of church, every policeman, every
authority of whatever kind.
Such a loss might create wied
spread bewilderment or profound
sorrow. It would have no relation to
anarchy. Except among certain un
assimilated foreign populatipns in
large cities it would lead to no
violence, to no riots. The functions
of national life would go on as before.
One by one communities would come
together and provide for the election
of officers. It was said that the death
of Lincoln gave a new proof of how
"republics live, not by a single life
but the right divine of man, the mil
lion trained to be free."
I.ret us apply the same test to other
nations. 111 the France of Napoleon
111, we are assured that without force,
society would not endure "for a quar
ter of an hour." What would be the
result in Germany today? No one can
tell. The German is endlessly patient,
even under needless burdens. What
would he do, if burdens were all sud
denly thrown off, if "Strengstens Ver
boten," the motto of Prussian rule
were suddenly found to have no force
behind it?
The lesson of democracy is therefore
the lesson of the United States. It is
no new lesson. The people of the
United States are merely European
people who have had some additional
experience, have learned some things
in their travels, perhaps forgetting

Patterson Dana Nowell Tulare
Frank Herbert Richey Tipton, Ind.
Edga r Clarence Smith Azusa
Homer Roberts Spence Alameda
GRAPHIC ART
Ethel Ora Qardin Salinas
James Leo Duff Menlo Park
fErnest P»ruce Nelson San Jose
Louise Rider Watsonville
Stella Belle Sankey Clearfield, Pa.
Cordelia Madison Smith Venice
MATHEMATICS
Sydnie Aileen Gardner Orange
Dorothy Marian Hindle Del Mar
Julia R. Johnson Aberdeen, Wash.
Ralph Matthews Noble Galesburg, 111.
Margaret Marion Steele San Jose
Mary Hilda Volkmor Whittier
APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Grace Raymond Helmick Helena, Mont.
CHEMISTRY
George Henry Beurhaus Tacoma, Wash.
Hector Crandall San Francisco
fEdwin Reginald Harding San Bernardino
fPaul Mark Levy San Francisco
Hugh Harold Mosher San Jose
Robert Lindley Murray Palo Alto
+Zeno Ostenberg.. San Jose
Alfred Liles Phillips Santa Cruz
PHYSICS
Herbert Rovell Benham McKittrick
Francis Sitwell Pratt Ontario
Albert John Scholl, Jr Los Angeles
Ruth Sceley Los Gatos
Glen Miller Smyth Salt Lake City-, Utah
Guy Carleton Swan Lawrence, Mass.
Devi Dyal Virmani Bahawalpore, India
Waldo Ralph Waelty Santa Clara
William Irvin Weaver Colorado Springs, Colo.
BOTANY
Taylor Jay Blethen Portland, Ore.
Arthur Dickie Borden Palo Alto
Ollis Willard Newman Santa Barbara
Frank Jason Smiley Fresno
PHYSIOLOGY AND HISTOLOGY
Albert Gordon Bower Salt Lake City, Utah
Roscal Leroy Draper Arroyo Grande
Florence Edetha Dunlop Vale, Ore.
George Stevenson Holcman Riverside
Leonard R. Jenkins Ogden, Utah
Merton James Price San Francisco
Karl Ludwig Schaupp Santa Rosa
John Philip Stricklcr San Diego
fCharles Ernest von Geldern San Francisco
*Carleton Wolsey Washburne Sierra Madre
fClyde T. Wetmore Hollister
Robert William Wilcox Delta, Colo.
fElsa Will Rochester, N. Y.
ZOOLOGY
Clara Crosby Santa Cruz
Mary 1* isk Los Angeles
ENTOMOLOGY AND BIONOMICS
Leroy Childs Redlands
fWarren Locke Smith Ferndale
Verne Genoa Stevens Palo Alto
GEOLOGY AND MINING
Robert Edwin Anderson San Francisco
Harry Mayo Andreen Redwood City
fCarl Hugh Beal Palo Alto
Edward Burke Corbet San Francisco
Waldemar Fenn Dietrich San Francisco
Benjamin Edward Erb Chemainus, B. C.
Andrew Douglas Fyfe Oceanside
fWilliam Conrad Gehrmann Davenport, la.
Mortimer Louis Hall Pasadena
Harold Briggs Hannibal San Jose
Olaf Pitt Jenkins Stanford* University
Grover Berner Lantz Colton
tßernard Harold Lasky San Francisco
*Robcrt James McCann Pacific Grove
fHarvey Wright Parmelee Santa Barbara
*Alonzo William Peake Los Angeles
Arthur E. Remington Watertown, N. Y.
*Edwin John Stewart Los Angeles
CIVIL ENGINEERING
Charles Edward Beechcr Monrovia
Edwin Prcscott Bly Los Angeles
I von Clay Briggs San Francisco

some others equally important. In
like manner the choicest thoughts and
worthiest ideals of America are
thoughts and ideals long before treas
ured by the advanced minds of Europe.
Another lesson from America is that
of the effective federation. The United
States is composed of fortliy-eight
self-governing states, each an entity
within itself managing its own affairs,
with its own officials and its own
laws, controlled by the nation in those
interests only which it shares with
its sister states. Some of these states
are as populous and wealthy as the
Kingdom of Europe, but each is a
jurisdiction, not a power. None can
make war alone, either by force of
arms or force of tariffs. While there
is all machinery for settling disputes
between states such disputes never
arise, because no state has the right
to use its force to promote private
business.
Stilts Equality
The states in a federal union meet
as jurisdictions. The small ones have
no fear of the large ones, and those
not touching the sea suffer in no way
from their restricted position. A
"Power" hampered as is the state of
Illinois would chafe against its limita
tions, and its jingoes would talk of
fighting their way to the ocean. But
viewed as a jurisdiction, surrounded by
similar jurisdictions, the people of
Illinois have no consciousness of limi
tation.
And this should be our ultimate con
ception of a nation. Its boundary line
should represent merely the limit of
jurisdiction. That jurisdiction ceases
does not imply need of violence be
tween the people on the two sides nor
require fortification for the purpose
of repelling violence. The Canadian
boundary is an example of this meet
ing of nations not as powers but as
jurisdictions.
This four-thousand-mile line, rang
ing through all kinds of territory and
all sorts of conditions, disputed nearly
all the way "with all the brutal frank
ness common to blood relations," has
for nearly a hundred years not known
a fortress, a soldier, a warship or a
gun. It is a peace boundary, the limit
of the jurisdiction of one self-govern
ing nation, the beginning of that of
another. It lacks but one thing to
make it ideally perfect, the re
moval of the custom-house, the em
blem of national suspicion and greed,
the remnant, of the days when it was
considered good economics for a na
tion to "have its taxes paid by for
eigners."
Europe in Turmoil
Viewed as "great powers" devoted
to the exploitation of the wealth of
other regions the leading nations of
Europe are in constant turmoil. The
German empire for example, is hamp
ered on every side. Her scant sea
coast is split in two by the presence
of Denmark. Her German Rhine dis
charges itself through Holland. The
ports of Amsterdam, Rotterdam, Ant
werp and Ostend, geographically her's,
are occupied by alien people whom she
could crush out in a moment, were it
not. for the physical force of the rest
of Europe and the moral power of the
world. Of Poland, she has too much
or too little. A large part of the Ger
man people live in the alien empire of
Austro-Hungary and in the republic
of Switzerland, while after forty years
of possession, Germany scarcely owns
Alsace or Lorraine. The states are a
thorn in the side of the empire, a bur
den and a weakness, just so long as
their two millions of people are held in
semi-vassalhood by the rule of force.
A free republic of Alasace Lorraine, a
second Swithzerland, half-German,
half-French separating and joining
two great nations would be a strength
and an inspiration to both. The true
gateways of the Rhine held by the
power of blood and iron is a centre
of menace to civilization. For the
wrong done at the Treaty of Frank
fort forty years ago, Europe has had to
pay most dearly for it is around the
question of Alsace-Lorraine that half
the crushing armament of Europe has
been built up. She is hemmed in
everywhere by the scare of old strugg
les, to her perennial discomfort. For
this reason, she suffers from the
"Drang nach Osten," she seeks a road
to the Persian gulf, an empire over
seas, and every form of imperial ex
tension to lands "under the sun,"
which may for the moment seem
plausible or possible.
But Germany as a jurisdiction suf
fers none of these limitations. Her
powers are only those which are
needed for the people's good. They
are merely her public duties. It mat
ters noting that her sway is checked
on almost, every side before it reaches
the sea. Other jurisdictions inter
vene, and each of these looks after
the public needs of man, which are
mostly justice, conservation, educa
tion, sanitation, and peace. As one of
the "Great Powers" of the world, Ger
many (with her fellow states as well)
is a center of friction, injustice and
unrest.
"A Power" is u Menace.
As a jurisdiction Germany is busy
with profitable and constantly ad
vancing industries, with an admir
able system of education and exten
sive provision for all the people's
needs, and no enlargement of boun
daries could in the least increase her
usefulness, her wealth or her happi
ness. As "a power" Germany is a
menace to the well being of civiliza
tion as every other "power" of similar
nature must be in its degree For
the prosperity of every people de
pends on international peace, and
all power-manifestations are either
actual or potential war. War is a
form of world-sickness from which
every function of civilization suffers,
and most of all those bonds of com
mon thought and common interest
sumed up in internationalism. And
to the members of an international
state, German in blood and in sym
pathy as well as English, all these
destructive rivalries of state with
state seem mediaeval and unworthy.
There is, in fact, something primitive,
outworn and unprogressive in the
spectacle of a civilized nation com
posed of millions of clever people
trusting for its defense to forts and
ships. With all the resources of
business, of science, ef education, of
thought, to depend on force seems a
lazy, even cowardly, shirking of the
higher possibilities of national
strength. To be surrounded by armed
guards, "holding the drop" on all
Commercial rivals is not a lofty con
ception of a nations's greatness. This
attitude has been as disastrous to
England's own peace of mind as it has
been menacing to the world's welfare.
To escape from this condition is not
a matter of a day nor a generation. Tt
is not easy for America even to

Revoe Carlisle Briggs Pasadena
fFloyd Cromwell Brown Selma
fEdward James Cullen Gilroy
Harry Bascom Davis Pomona
Wilbur Harvey Doxsee Redwood City
Robert Francis Duryea Palo Alto
fClarence Bernard Goodwin Sunnyvale
fCharles Stewart Grace Rivera
John Stanley Grepe, Jr East Highlands
tNorman Marshall Ilalcombe San Francisco
George William Hawley Portland, Ore.
George Walter Hunt San Jose
Paul Eells Jeffers Los Angeles
William Aiken Laird Lindsay
Alexander Stuart Macdonald San Francisco
tßobert Patchen Miller Los Angeles
Maurice Everard Morrison Morgan Hill
fßoger Wolcott Olmsted Los Angeles
Chauncey Smith Elie, Manitoba, Canada
Thomas Joseph Spellman Colma
fßurroughs Agin Stephenson Los Altos
Harry George Todtmann Chicago, 111.
George Harlan Trask Los Angeles
Charles Ralph Tupper San Jose
Romney Leigh Vaughn San Francisco
Guss Valentine Wallach Boonville
Carlton Levi Wyant Montecito
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING
■fClarence P. Campbell Los Angeles
tWallace Rolland Finney...* Modesto
*Burdette Lord Hostettler Erie, Pa.
Kenneth Irving Marshall Los Angeles
tAugustus Mudge Sanborn Redlands
Cecil Stocker Simon Los Gatos
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
*Edward Niles Adam Melville, Mont.
Frank Edward Anderson Los Angeles
fClarence Cannon Argabrite Ventura
John Watson Fleming Armstrong....Fivemiletown, Tyrone, Ire.
Everett Morse Calderwood Palo Alto
Melville Nathaniel Clark Dayton, Me.
John Francis Cullen Gilroy
Walter Jennings Dodge Los Angeles
Charles Greenlaw Duffin Comas, Wash.
Harry Adolph Fore Campbell
Frank Julius Gleiss Los Angeles
Walter J. Hammond ! Grinncll, la.
Tomiichi Haraguchi Nagasaki, Japan
George Edward Holditch Orange
Edgar Alden Jackson Cupertino
Linford C. Lull, Jr Los Angeles
James Arthur Miller Hanford
Rea Cambridge Newman Santa Barbara
George Washington Poison Menlo Park
Gaylord Kenyon Snyder Los Angeles
fGiistav Wade Naples
George Ireland Wright Pasadena
BACHELOR OF LAWS
Jerome Devereaux Peters San Jose
Granville Numan Wood, Jr Blue Lake
MASTER OF ARTS
LATIN
Flora Anne Bagley Burlingame
fßuth Beard Modesto
Catherine Ida Birch Redlands
fAnna Shipley Cox San Jose
Mabel Harriett Usinger Berkeley
Malcolm Leland Yeary Los Angeles
GERMAN
Edward Vere Brewer Elyria, Ohio
Catharine Morris Cox San Jose
Lydia Lucilc Meyer . Milwaukee, Wis.
Clara Lydia Schaaf Fort Wayne, -Ind.
fElsie Louise Whittemore Alhambra
ENGLISH LITERATURE
Anais Julia Allen Pasadena
Walter Clyde Curry Gray-Court, S. C.
ENGLISH PHILOLOGY
Maude Cleveland Stanford University
EDUCATION
tWilliam Samuel Marten San Jose
Clarence Lucien Phelps Jamestown, Ky.
William Thomas Root, Jr Pasadena
William Roy Tanner Minneapolis, Minn.

emancipate herself from reactionary
influences in Europe. There are many
interests in a wealthy nation who find
an aid or an affinity in militarism.
Debt creates debt, and those inter
ested in spending band together
against reform.
These matters proceed by slow pro
gress, interrupted by reaction; we
are in a period of relapse at present,
when reactionary forces seem to be in
the ascendant. Hut this very fact with
its burdens and horrors may be count
ed on to turn the balance in the other
direction.
Neither will there be a formal fed
eration of nations in this era. In
deed federation in fact will come long
before it comes in name. A single
unified world-government with cen
tralized rule under one set of men at
some one place, is only a dream—and
not a cheerful dream at that. What
the world needs is more self-control,
more local responsibility not more
governmental machinery. Neverthe
less every step in removing injustice,
in eliminating sources of friction, in
extending common interests, as the
postol union, the telegraph union, in
ternational law, international police
duties, international conferences and
congresses, arbitration treaties a nd
other agreements—are steps in the di
rection of the passing of war. To this
end, three great contributing agencies
are: the growth of the popular con
science, the interlocking of personal
interests, and the ruinous expence
which the progress of science has
brought to every branch of the mili
tar art.
All this has its part in the great
movement towards common interna
tional life, "La Vie Internationale" of
the dreams of La Fontaine, a life
which shall make war impossible and
will, in time, do away with exploita
tions, with tariff barriers and with all
the products of that narrow nativism,
which considers only the purposes or
enrichment of the selfish few, the one
in-group against all the out-groups of
the world.
Value of Open Diplomacy
Another lesson which the United
States may teach is the value of open
diplomacy. A secret agreement of
any kind whatever. It was a warning
of Washington that his nation should
beware of Entangling Alliances. A
formal alliance is for the purpose of
making enemies, never of making
friends. Friendship among nations
rests on common interests, on the in
terlocking of minds, the interlocking
of trade.
In the United States a treaty can be
entered into only with the open and
public consent of the Senate. Every
international relation is therefore
open to the world. No minister, no
president, no group of men whatever
can secretly pledge the nation to any
line of action. No president, no cabi
net, no minister, no congress acting
alone can make any declaration of
public policy. For these reasons the
United States must stand outside the
tangled snare of concessions and intri
gues we call world politics. She must
play her games of diplomacy with
open hands. She cannot be the secret
friend of any other nation. She can
not be a secret enemy because all her
acts, friendly or hostile, are known to
all the world.
The secret treaty in the interest of
imperial spoliation is the bane of
Europe. It ties each foreign office to
the service of the most reckless and
greedy of its great exploiting inter
ests. It has reduced the chancelleries
of more than one nation to be nothing
more than the firm name under which
its exploiting corporations compass
their ends in Asia or in Africa.
The secret is a relic of the military
state. The civilzed world is still or
ganized on the mediaeval theory that
war is a natural function to he ex
pected in the normal course of events,
not a hideous inorau, physical;. and
financial catastrophe. la the old
theory as expounded by Machiavelli,
the king has no other business but
war. It is the duty of his ministers
to find weak places in the defenses of
other kings through which war may
be successful, and to find, after the
fact, excuses by which' war can be
justified. The secret treaty, the .con
cession to a friendly power, ithe. arti-.
ficial interference with a rival, —all
these belong to the days' of Ma<?hia
velli. If . all parties concerpe.4 ( |cojJ>ld :
come out.into the open, .Wihsre . t-het
United States is forced to stahd, we
should soon have an end to tneAttgld-
German struggle, of the rivalry be
tween the Triple Entente and the
Triple Alliance.
Outworn ideas ot' national glory, out
worn figures of.speech as tp national
purposes, outworn mediaevalism in
our -conception of the state.—all'these
find expression in the "secret treaty,"
the "entangling alliance," which is a'
chief obstacle in the way of the -con
ciliation of nations. ?>• -
Historically, the influence of Amer
ica has been exerted in opposition to
Imperialism and to infringement of
the great nations on the rights of the
sniall. This is the inception of the
Monroe Doctrine, which in spite of its
perversion and its wrong accentuation r
has protected Latin America from the
fate of Africa. That this should now
be a Pan-American, not njerely an.
American doctrine goes without say
ing. And it must never be allowed i.o
degenerate-into " a Dollar Diplomacy"
which would.reserve Tropical America
as a special "sphere of, .influence-' for
American exploitation,. For the true,
and final form of the Mojiuae.Doctrine
is found, in the Drago .Doctrine,. of the
republics of South Ameripa,, that tiie
forqe of . arms should. be used-ras.
an,instrument iu industiriul spoliation.
This the people of the United States
should adopt as• their-.own. « <
Principle Disregarded '
In a recent deciskm- of- arbitration;
the King 'of Swed'ant'laW down 'this
principle: that a nation "has 110
right to land- troops in .order-to pYe-'
serve the property or the rights of her
nationals.". This''lwinciple. ha,s '-beefr
disregarded in the •strangling of
Persia, the rape of Mongolia and of
Tibet, in the chronic robbery of
China, and in the annexation of Egypt, <
of Korea, uf Morocco and of Tripoli.
But it is for all that a just.-and honor
able principle, and it is disregarded
only when a nation, by virtue of super
ior strength or superior civilization
feels itself justified in taking posses
sion of another for its good, and inci
dentally for the commercial advant
age of its own exploitating interests.
It is true that the smaller nations of
the tropics are subject to violent
political disturbances. They have not
learned the value of liberty as regu
lated hjy law. Yet it is highly prob
able that not one in ten of these
periodical/ revolutions I's of spontan- 1
eous native origin. of them are
started for purposes of spoliation by

autside adventurer's and a large ma
jority are paid for by adventurers
'State. The Public School exists
everywhere at the public expense, and
belonging to one or more of the great
epinniarqia'ruatrojis tit', fheiear'th.. When."
'the"fi v nal' iriitli'Ts"known'"of unhappy
Mexico the responsibility for hfei' dis
(Mfer'sl will rest nht on'her martyred
president, ridr "on the' sol
"diers'of fortune by whose hands he
•fell, but on the men in New York or
in London perhaps,' whose nioiWy has
kept iliese revolutions going. Mexico,
with fatal riches of oil and gold, is not
tlie first nation to Ite torn asunder by
'conflicting ."sphere's of influence."
The. influence of the republic has
been always thrown against another
form of imperialism involved in the
phrase "Control of the Sea." America
has never claimed any such control
nor has she admitted the right to
others. It is a mediaeval idea going
back foiir hundred years to the time
when the great seas were divided be
tween Spain and Portugal. America
has stood for the open sea, the restric
tion of national jurisdiction to the
three-mile limit, the extermination of
piracy, and in iater years for the most
important doctrine of the immunity of
war. To make the high seas an open

HI STORY
Ella Wissie Beaver ...T. .Tulare
fEmrria Howse Kuno Palo Alto
George Lutes Righter '.Campbell
Francis Marion Russell .Los Angeles
MATHEMATICS
Rose Margaret Bennett »....San Diego
Amanda Westhold ..Quincy, 111:
CHEMISTRY
Alicje. .Ruth Bergcr San Jose
Elton Marion Hogg. v Saratoga
Charles Kirkton McWilliams San Joss
tWilliam John Van Sicklen Castle-ton, Ontario,,Canada
BOTANY
Charlotte Elliott Del Rapids, S. D.
BACTERIOLOGY
Frank Maltaner .Cincinnati, O.
ZOOLOGY
Josephine Louise Dows Randall Stanford University
ENTOMOLOGY
F rankie Willard Galexioo
GEOLOGY
Theodore Chapin., Los Angeles
Joseph Stanley Hook jjPerris ■
ENGINEER
CHEMICAL ENGINEERING
. Louis Wjlliam Pingree.-. ; Ogden-, Utah
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING
fDexter Simpson Kimball N. Y.
Lyman Stevenson King Oakland .
r *• . V <
JURIS DOCTOR
George Armand Ditz Stockton f-1
Maurice Timothy Dooling • Hollistter ,
fEmmet Ross Fertig Nobl.esvjlle, Ind.
fFrank Louis Guerena rs .. „Spnora
George Juan Hatfield ...Oakland-,
Frank Howard Hilton ; Portland, Ore.
Grant Holcomb San Bernardino^
Ignatius Martin Peckham tV| . San . Jose
Edmund Wright Pugh Los. (Angeles..
Alfred'Worcester Robertson Saflt? Ba,rbru:a ..
Chester Harvey Warlow : . r ., . ( Fresno,
Herbert Eustace White Saotamento^.
tFrederick feertram Wood i. . Alto.
* September 6, 1912
fjanuary 10, 1013 "O '?t it

highway-to be tr.a.ver?ed , ( afc ( anytime,-
in absolute--safety, by any, vessel what
ever would-gp/t'ar away
witji international..waff,.-and iSitill ftWH
ther in ren^.vi!),£..tlve- and dnv<-
gerous burden of naval protectioni»'l£;
all military operations.- at. sea couidibe
confined to the <oa,nnon shot.
from the. shore, the- original motive
of the three-mile limit of. jurisdiction,
it would represent one of ,the most
practical triumphs of civilization.- Ttfe
nations should join to make the ocean
safe, not to fill it with floating fort
resses designed t tp. protect merchant
ships from robbery by the very per
sons with whom they trade.
Still another lesson from. America is
one in which, we all agree; the divorce
of religion from political control and
therefore from the,domain of politics.
Absolute religions freedom exists .in
America because the state assumes
no relation of any kind to religious
corporations as such, So long as these
do not interfere with the freedom of
soul or body of men not. belonging to
them, their acts do not concern the
state. And on no, one policy is there
more firm agreement.in America* than
in the absolute separation of Church
nowhere can any sect or gpoup of seets
claim any dominating relation in re

gard to It. To the average American
the strife over Church properties and
Church interests so real in Europe
seem incomprehensible. The Church,
any church, is in every way better oif
for separation from the government.
Whatever achievement; whatever pro
gress it may make is its own, and this
progress is solid because it involves,
no ulterior political end.
Connected with the freedom of the
church is the freedom of the people
from other forms of paternalism. The
state becomes benevolent only when it
lias failed to be just. It allows special
opportunities to individuals only
where it has denied opportunity to
men at large.
The "old-age pension" is a conven
ient'illustration,.'lt has been justly
compared to- the. free pass homeward
granted to the human wrecks who
have lost their all in the. gambling
rooms of-Monte Carlo. It is the shill
ing given to the man run over by my
lord's automobile.
In a better system he would not have
been run over. He would not have
lost his money in a vile resort, lie
would not have needed an outside
pittance to carry him through old age.
Host Workers Died in War
The old-age pension exists in Eng
land as a convenient balm for inequal
ity and injustice. The best of her
workers have died in her wars/ leav
ing a weaker stock to breed from.
These have grown' up unskilled, in de
fault of the shools that make men
strong. They have grown up in the
atmosphere of the public house, sod
den with lust and beer and whisky.
They have lost the opportiiniy tljat
should be theirs, and at the end their
jfellows must be taxed to feed tliem.
The tragedy of the East End of Lon
don is no normal part of the tragedy
of Life. It is no part of the normal
America. It is no part of a nation
which has given opportunity.
Brit'in America a' new country, fresh,
unspoiled, full of life and hope, it is
possible to hctt'd' government" to its
rigid purpose, to develop opportunity
by the elimination of privilege, teacfy,.
men to lean' not on' government but
on themselves, and to aid by'fraternal '
giving those who have fallen in. tbg
prang 1 ; not "to weaken by unearned
public money those who are falling but
who can be made to stand, 'tfie wav
Up it i '">• vtc.
t)t the transgressor is hard and we
not make it eapier'ff we could;
|We' could not if we would'. To. give a..
plkh'a chance to'rise,' i'.s to allow him'
hlfbthe choice t<>Tali:" ' *';•"
1 is ! •?; . " *
foii.fession of Failure , '
■ "Tho old-age pension" .is, so- far as 1
it goes, a confession of failure of de- ■
jnocracy,. Except as a measure of'"
e |1 £r-fie.pcy, l Jts real purpose in Eng
land, it has no justification in good '
government. Clean up the. social at
mosphere, restore to the people, what ■
is rightfully theirs, and they will care, 1
rare accidents .excepted, for their own
old age.
in America tlie struggle, between '
labor and capital can never assume
the form it has in Europe. In a gov
ei nment which stands for justice, and
which is in no way occupied with
making money for its people, nor from
its People, nor in supporting exploiting
intei ests in other lauds, there is uo
visable necessity for universal col
lective ownership. Where classes do
not leally exist there is no pertinence
in the artificial distinctions of aristoc
racy, proletariat and bourgeoisie
which have been so laboriously
brought over from Europe. If these*
distinctions exist, most of us in Amer
ica belong to one single class, that of
the bourgeoisie.
There exist in America as elsewhere,
vast fortunes, disproportionate to the
ability or the efforts of those who con
trol them. But their history has been
of short duration. They are not leg
acies from an unjust past. Their or
igin belongs to the present. It is
mainly individual. Great luck, great
skill or ingeniously managed privilege
stands behind each of them. By the
same means as in Europe, by co
operation through interlocking direc
torates, these great fortunes have
been made to stand together and thus
by a process of financial suction to
build up fortunes still greater. But
one most important difference exists.
The national government, in theory
and for the most in fact, stands aloof
from these combinations. The con
trol of public affairs, even of financial
matters is beyond their permanent
reach. Their influence on foreign
diplomacy is limited because no secret
influence can control, and the power
of money for evil is mostly lost in
publicity.
Property May Rule
In all their operations, they are sur
rounded by an alert and in the long
run victorious opposition of democ
racy. In America property may rule,
but only for a time. In the earlier
•centuries of Europe, the period of
Absolutism, when monarchy was a
political power not a function of so
ciety, it was, of course, true that prop
erty ruled. But it was the ruler who
had the property. It was his by force
of position. Not until the money lend
ers of the last century secured the
strangle hold on the nations of
Europe was this condition brought to
an end.
Then again, property ruled, but it
was not that the King and the nobles
held the property. Property held
them, and in Europe today it is money
that rules, and it rules King and
peasant alike, for everything el3e
hinges on the Imperial Explotation of
foreign lands.
In America, this is true in a degree,
but the rule of money has its visible
limits. For the United States belongs
to its people.
"Dollar Diplomacy"
While Europe generally, the alliance
between financial interests and the
government is open and avowed, such
•connections in America have proved
fatal to political leaders and to polit
ical parties. The methods by which
the "powers of Europe" through their
foreign offices bolster up adventures
in foreign lands, could not be used in
America. The diplomacy of persua
sion, threats or force of arms in the
interest of private ventures would be
impossible here. The people might
consent to "Dollar Diplomacy" but
•only for a time and until its nature
is understood. The recent, repudia
tion of our relation to the "Six Power
Loan' to China will serve as a case in
point.
And here again we must admit that
out democratic conception of govern
ment has to struggle for acceptance
in America. The protective tariff in
theory and in practice is a flat viola
tion of its principles. Tt is a flat
violation of the spirit of the American
■constitution. It is privilege pure and
simple granted to the few by the
many, in the belief that in the long
run the many would profit by it. Its

purpose was to diversify industries by
letting the farmer help pay the ex
penses of the manufacturer. It has
just that effect, and the farmer and
laborer are becoming increasingly
discontented with its burdens and the
inequalities before the law which are
part and parcel of its operations.
In America, the army and navy,
though the latter has grown beyound
all reason through the rivalry from
England and Germany, still represent
a democratic ideal. We still hold to
the thought that our officers are not
rulers but servants of the people.
Our military element stands near
the parting of the ways, for all offi
cialism tends to aggrandize itself,
most of all that which is associated
with pomp and with patriotism. Mili
tarism for its own sake belongs to the
state in whoch property rules. "It
furnishes," says John A. Hobson, "a
profitable support to certain strong
vested interests. It is a decorative
element in social life and above all, it
is necessary to keep down the
pressure of the forces of internal
reform."
>o Room for Militarism
The ideals of Militarism and Democ
racy can never coexist. And this na
tion is too far given over to democ
racy ever to do more than dally with
the military ideal. In a nation that
knows no caste, and has no aristioc
racy other than temporary and self
selected, no military traditions will
ever be permanent. There can never
be a warrior caste holding special
privilege or special authority.
As a people, we of the United States
are too rich in resources of wealth, of
education and of intelligence to be
controlled by influences of militarism.
And thus and for the same reasons, in
the republic of America, the state ex
ists for the man, not the man for the
state. This is the fundamental differ
ence between the Eighteenth Century
and Twentieth. And let us speed the
day when it may be said not only that
"America means Opportunity" but
that the same hopeful word may be
spoken of Germany and England and
France and Russia and of all the na
tions in the sisterhood of civilization.
Lord Acton thus sums up the move
ment of the history of civilization:
"It is by the combined efforts of the
weak made under compulsion to re
sist the reign of force and constant
wrong that in the rapid change but
slow progress of four hundred years
liberty has been preserved and se
cured and extended and finally under
stood."
And as America comes to under
stand her own message of democracy,
internationalism and peace, she will
carry this understanding back to the
motherland of Europe.
Within the last two months Presi
dent Wilson and Mr. Bryan have
planned a most practical and effective
means of bringing American influence
to bear on the problems of World
peace.
The end in view is to relegate war
to a position of last resort in times
of international difference, to place
soldiers and dreadnaughts in the
background—not in the front of na
tional movement.
The essence of this American policy
is that in case of friction between
nations, the matter be placed for six
months in the hands of a joint high
Commission of investigation, chosen
in part from the contending nations,
the majority from friendly neutrals.
These- for six months shall study the
question at issue, neither nation in the

meantime demonstrating, mobilizing
or increasing the armament, until the
final report is made. After this each
nation is free to choose conciliation,
concession, compromise, arbitration
or war. And with six months to think
it over there will be no war. Wars are
waged for greed, for politics, or be
cause the mob has been stirred by
senseless speech or reckless journal
ism. And in many cases this reckless
journalism has been carefully cal :u
--lated and fully paid for by those in
terested in the sale of the accessories
of war.
The treaty of arbitration will natur
ally follow on the treaty for investi
gation. Courts will naturally supple
ment results of friendly offices. But
the agreement for friendly conference
comes first and is for the present the
more important. The Treaty of Arbi
tration is most valuable, — not as
preventing war, for a nation bent on
war, if there is such a case, will not
stop to agree to arbitrate. The world
is finally ruled by public opinion. Ar
bitration treaties clinch public opinion
and hold it to its duty.
The present decade has been char
acterized by needless, costly and
brutal wars, the result not of actual
conditions of today, but of blunders
and crimes committed in the past.
Wars do not spring up afresh in our
civilization. They spring from old
wars whose seeds were not destroyed
by peace.
Rut, however, dark the present out
look may seem with half the coined
money of the world spent each year
on war and war's accessories, the far
outlook is most promising. The cruel
horror of the Balkan war, the waste of
armed peace and frustrate war
throughout the civilized world, — all
these make powerfully for peace, for
real peace — the Peace of Law and
Trust, and not the Peace of Force.
And just now is the time when
American influence can be most defi
nitely crystallized and made effective.
And we are thankful that we have in
the seats of Authority at Washington
men who definitely work for peace
and whom war and war's fripperies
do not dazzle nor attract.
Two hundred and seven students were awarded the Bachelor of
Arts Degree by President David Stu rr Jordan in the Assembly Hull tills
morning. Two were granted the Bachelor of Laws Degree, while
thirty-five were given the Master of Arts Degree. In addition to these
the Academic Council also awarded three Engineer, thirteen .luris Doc
tor of Philosophy Degrees. The Co miuencemnet address preceded the
presenting of the sheepskins, *Th e Conquest of Europe by America,"
wsis the subject of the strong address delivered by Doctor Jordan.

I wish this morning to say a serious
word to you as citizens of the great
republic and as future leaders in its
thought and action. I wish you to
think earnestly of the part American
influence must play in the world his
tory of our century. It is for us to
help cure the accumulated evils of
the older civilization. Those men in
Europe who look furthest into the
future hope for the salvation of
Europe through ideals brought back
from practical service in America.
One of these. Senator La Fontaine of
Brussels, has given me my title as the
expression of the hope of his life,
"The Conquest of Europe by America."
I hasten to say that 1 do not mean
conquest by force of arms, for 1 have
no interest in such conquests and no
belief that victories thus won result in
any permanent good to any nation.
Nor do I mean financial conquests,
the floating of imperial loans or the
permeation of any part of European
business by financiers from the New
World. Still less do I celebrate a
shoppers' contest on the Place de
I'Opera or among the dazzling bar
gains of the Hon Marche. Nor does
the trail of American tourists who
cross with gold the palms of Europe's
servitors, all the way from Piccadilly
to the Pyramids awaken in me any
pride of nation or of race. The only
permanent conquest is that of ideas.
America stands, has always stood, for
two ideals from which she cannot
escape, for they are fundamental in
her origin and in her growth. These
are internationalism and democracy,
and these ideals being invincible
must conquer America, and through
her, reconquer Europe. And as both
are incompatible with war, their final
triumph marks the end of spoliation,
of and of that relation be
tween nations which breeds suspicion
and hatred. The conquest of the
world by the ideals of International
ism and Democracy marks the coming
of universal peace.
In the address at Baltimore in 1911,
Henri La Fontaine of Brussels, the
veteran prophet of International Life,
used these striking words.
"Emigration perhaps more than
war has deprived the old, historic
countries of their most energetic and
fittest ones to build the progressive
and wealthy people you are on this side
of the Atlantic. You are for us
Europeans, the beloved Brotherland,
Do not forget that Europe is always

and will still remain for you the be
loved Motherland. Europe is now for
America what Greece was for Europe.
Europe has liberated (Ireece. Amer
ica has to liberate Europe from its
burdens, its prejudices, its hatreds.
It is your duty, it is your highest duty
to reconcile outside your borders the
people you have reconciled within
your borders. For indeed the Amer
ican people is at present the true
international people. It is the elect
people which alone can further inter
nationalism and can transform all of
the people of the Earth into a family
of nations, a brotherhood of men, an
international people." "For coloniza
tion is not mainly done by men and by
capital, but also by ideas, by example,
by experiment."
Not Always True to Ideals
We may freely admit in the begin
ning that America has not always been
true to her own ideals, and that she
has not always clearly seen her own
future. She has had her own lapses,
moral and social, some of these be
cause of associations with Europe and
through imitation of glories alien to
her history. If she had been true to
herself she would never have known
a single foreign war. She has no part in
those greeds and jealousies of money
or of race which still keep up turmoil
in Europe. Her war with Spain with
its eagerness for exploitation, its
tinsel imperialism and its pride of
participation in "world politics" rep
resents the worst of these lapses, and
its evil effects are long in passing.
But though the inception of this affair
was European in method, its contin
uance has been characteristically
American. Instead of exploitation, we
have brought to the Philippines educa
tion and sanitation. We have expend
ed on them a hundred times what we
have received, and if ever imperilism
can be respectable we have made it so.
Another false movement has been
in the building of warships and forts
in America. This lacks the motive
for similar extravagances in Europe,
because the peace of the new world is
no where threatened. But with us as
everjwhere the military spirit grows
with the money spent on it. The more
mouths fed by the State the greater
the clamor for the feeding of still
more. We have also to reckon with
the desire for giant decoration, for
big navies for sheer bigness' sake, the
feeling that this is the richest and'
most progressive nation on the globe,

and that as such she can beat old
Europe at her own game even though
that game be not worth the candle.
But with all lapses and delinquin
cies the fact of internationalism and
the ideal of democracy have been and
must always remain with the United
States, and from the United States
these ideals will react with greater
and greater force on the thoughts and
deeds of Europe.
Internationalism is the heritage of
America, not of choice at first, but cf
necessity. She has perforce grown
up with this ideal, because no other
was possible. She became the cosmo
politan nation of the world because
of her complex origin and with this
origin she could be nothing else. In
a new civilization, in the struggles of
the frontier each man is rated for
what he is worth. Under these condi
tions no one cares for the petty pre
cedences of rank or race. What a
man can do in the next twenty-four
hours outvalues any question as to
who were his ancestors.
All Hate Dies
On a railway train not long ago
some one was overheard to say: "This
is the land where all hate dies. My
father was German; my mother was
French. What do I care for all that?
I am an American. The old hatreds
and rivalries are nothing to me."
America was English, first. In lang
uage, in spirit, in conscience and in
government it is England which domi
nates. For the English race, above
all others, with its adaptation for co
operation and for compromise is the
builder of free states.
It was the chosen among the Eng
lishmen of three centuries ago who
founded the germ colonies of Virginia
and Massachusetts May. In the fol
lowing years it has been the like
minded from their own nation and
from others who have crossed the seas
to enter into their work.
The first who came were the bold,
the free, the self-ruling, the pleasure
scorning element of English life. They
came to escape from the state
church and the church-state, that they
might worship in their own fashion
and according to dictates of their indi
vidual consciences.
They detested the law of primogeni
ture which thrust the spirit of pre
cedence into the bosom of every fam
ily. They abhorred the law of entail
which burdened the land with the
curse of privilege even to unborn gen
erations.
They had caught from France the

spirit of liberty, equality, fraternity,
but as befits the calmer blood of the
north, they gave this spirit a con
structive interpretation, and the idea
of equality was to them especially rich
in practical results. Equality before
the law, equal access to land, to edu
cation, to professions and trades,
. equal access to legislat ion, each of
these conceptions broadened out into
the spirit of democracy.
And after England came to other
nations of Europe, each with its own
part and in its own degree giving its
contingent of free-born men, the ad
| mixture of blood gave strength and
! versatility to the rising nation.
But withal, the dominant note is
English still, with as many diver-
I gences from the England of today as
j from the England of the Stuarts.
In later years other immigration has
come, not alone the bold in search of
adventure, of new homes and new free
doms, but the weak and the oppressed,
"the beaten men of the beaten races,"
who llee from war taxation in search
of living wages and of daily bread.
But all these are cast into the same
melting pot and in most of them there
arises a clear response to the call of
free institutions.
In this melting pot of America, all
the old racial antipathies disappear
and all hereditary hatreds. There is
110 final distinction of British or Ger
j man, of French or Italian, of Spanish
|or Slav, of Dutch or Scandinavian,
!or of Jew or Gentile. The average
| American is as cosmopolitan in origin
j and relationship as is royalty in
Europe, though for a different set of
| reasons. But in America there is 110
[ distinction of common or noble, of
high or low, of aristocracy, bour
j geoisie or proletariat except as these
| are artificially emphasized in the in
dustrial strife we have inherited from
Eu rope.
To the international mind of Amer
ica, there seems 110 need or pertinence
to an Anglo-Saxon alliance as against
any other people. In so far as such
alliance is desirable or humanly pos
sible it exists already in a common
sympathy and a common literature, ft
would lie weakened by a stated agree
ment of the Anglo-Saxon group to
swell each others Meets with dread
naughts. The true bond of Union of
the Greater Britain involves no rup
ture with the Greater Germany, or the
Greater France or the Greater Scandi
navia to which we in America likewise
claim allegiance.
To the American, "Pan-Germanism,"
Pan-Slavism," as lie hears these ex
pounded seem a meaningless return to
ideals of tlie Middle Ages. They re
mind him of the Holy Roman Empire,
which never was, and should never be,
or still more they hark back to Pan-
Islamism the futile dream of the light
ing Turk.
There is nothing in aggrandizement
of race as such which appeals to the
American, the child of all European
races. That such races are ennobled
by conquest of lesser tribes and by
their undigested exploitation he does
not believe. To the American even
England's greatness does not exist on
her Indian Empire, but rather in spite
of it.
Within the last forty years there lias
grown up a new world in Europe and
in the range of civilization. The old
conception of the states of Europe
as opposed to one another and mutu
ally destructive must, pass away in the
broader aspects of civilization.
The growth of International life is
one of the most striking aspects of
this new relation. The extention of
travel, the spread of commerce, the
achievements of science, the exchanges
in education, all these tend to make
a great "melting pot" of the civilized
world. Neither in his business, in his
pleasures, nor in his intellectual pur
suits is the educated man anywhere
limited to any one country. All
rational human interests are con
nected by interlocking bonds of many
kinds, joining one people with another.
The hundreds of international con
gresses held every summer the world
over and covering almost every gen
eral interest of men is the strongest
possible evidence of this Interlocking,
and all this constitutes an inter
national bond not to be lightly severe.!.
A declaration of war between nations
is now little less than an attack on
civilization in all its most cherished
aspects, social, moral, as well as finan
cial. The lines of national policy
taken for granted half a century ago
are fast becoming impossible, their
very suggestion being ruinous.
I'c ideiicj toward < oix'ilintion
The influence of America tends to
wards international conciliation. It
involves the recognition of men as
men, each valued for what he is or
wlnit tie can do. Both of these deter
mined, of course, by bis blood and his
education, but not to be judged in ad
vance by any wholesale distinctions.
This is the spirit of the Interna
tionale, the common life and common
sympathy among civilized people, re
gardless of national boundaries. This
International life constitutes the final
and lasting basis of International
Peace.
As the history of America rests on
internationalism so is her social fab
ric built on democracy. Historically
her democracy has a double origin. Its
theory was French, its practice was
English. The French philosophers
furnished the one, the reaction against
British methods the other.
For inequality before the law is the
foundation of the polity of Great
Britain. Her constitution stands on
privilege. Her social customs rest on
precedence of classes, precedence of
individuals. England chooses her lords
and magnates, her patrons and tyrants
long before they are born. These be
long to her system of privilege by
which cities like Westminster, Shef
field, Davenport, Arundel, were so
long held, virtually tax-free, by men
whose ancestors received their land as
royal gifts or bought tlieni as cow
pastures. The law of favor rises above
the law of justice.

Hut men of the pioneer type, the
Roundhead, the Pilgrim, the Puritan,
the American have hated favor and
privilege and precedence of every
form. The toll of tin 1 rich and the dole
of the poor are alike offensive to them.
And this dislike of overreaching and of
coddling has passed over to their de
scendents. John Hay once said of the
people of the new state of Ohio. "They
looked to no one as their superiors,
and on none as their inferiors. They
knew 110 want they could not them
selves satisfy," and to this Senator
Bayard added the further note, "They
were too self-willed and independent
to allow any to rule over them but
t heniselves."
This in a word is the spirit of de
mocracy, of the democracy of the
pioneer if you like, but America is the
land of pioneers, and this fact still in-

11 uences all her acts unci her insti
tutions. Her people find their polit
ical ideals in an equal start with equal
opportunity, in equality before the
law, in equal access to education, in
equal access to the land, in equal ac
cess to legislation.
The nation is built on individuals
each responsible for himself. The
state is a mutual adjustment for their
collective benefit. The individual in
America does not live for the state, is
not the property of the state, the state
has no control over him except that
which the individual lias delegated. It
is no duty of the state to promote his
prosperity or the prosperity of his
group. The state is rather the umpire
which decides questions of justice, the
servant by which the needs of the
many are met by co-operation in so far
as these needs are general and conson
ant, with ideals of justice.
As the founders of our state were
frontiersmen scattered far and wide,
without cities, without corporations,
without great collective utilities, their
democracy became that of individual
ism. The demands of society, of col

leetive action, of national power were
little considered because such de
mands did not exist, and they have
never existed in the forms in which
hhirope knows them. And for this
reason, if for no other, the native
American lias not been strongly at
tracted to the various doctrines called
socialism in 13uropi. Like conditions
produce like results, and the growth
nl' industrialism with its successes and
its oppressions brings the same re
action as in Furope. But as a matter
of fact, those who take part in these
reactions are for the most part re
cent immigrants, whoso ideals of gov
ernment even in democracy are collec
tive, standing in strong contrast with
tho individualistic democracy native
to the soil.
Fifty year. - , ago, in lsC!, Fdouard
Laboulaye published bis renrirkable

hook "Paris <>n Amerique," (Paris in
America.) Its motive was to show
what a great city might become under
the conditions of freedom which pre
vailed in America. The America was
idealized of course. It, represented
the noblest ideals of free-born men,
rather than the actual America, the
forces of democracy must strive with
all the other forces extant in modern
civilization.
j The influence of this volume was
wide spread and long continued. It
was my fortune to know two men of
power, the one a Dane, the other a
Swiss who were drawn to America by
the charm of Laboulaye and who were
not disappointed. They found what
they sought, and this is a perennial
characteristic of the republic. Who
ever comes to America and with what
ever motive will find what he seeks.
If he remains long enough and has
penetration to look below the surface
I he will find America.
If one seeks religious freedom he
will find it. Our fathers provided for
that. Whatever form or type of re
ligious discipline he seeks he will find

accordingly, I>ut its discipline is vol
untary not enforced by the state. If
one would escape from all religious in
fluence he can do so in America. It is
for him to choose.
If one seeks for class distinction, for
domination of the great over the small,
hereditary or otherwise, he will find it
in personal and local only, not
wrought into the fabric of society. If
one would find privilege enthroned
even as in Europe he will find it in
America, just as powerful as in
Europe, Imi everywhere surrounded
by an equally powerful movement of
insurgency. If one would find greed,
selfishness, lust, vanity, tolerance,
anything which belongs to the dregs
of humanity, he will find it in America,
and it may be embodied in powerful
and defiant institutions. For freedom
guarantees only freedom, and the
meaning of freedom is opportunity.
In Laboulaye's work, the official
Napoleonic view, which "Paris in
America" takes as its point of depar
ture is thus expressed. "A society
without administration, without army,
without police, with the savage liberty
of praying, speaking, writing, acting
each in his fashion would not last a
quarter of an hour. It is the negation
of all these principles, of all the con
ditions of this civilization which
makes the unity of our French nation.
In constituting our administration,
hierarehal and centralized, the wis
dom of our fathers lias long since
raised France to the first rank and
shown to the French people that
Liberty is Obedience, then is our Glory
and our Force."
Ketcrse 01 Napoleon's Ideals
The distinctive character of the
American ideals reverses this. It is
the building up of a society in which
the government stands only for jus
tice. The state does not concern itself
with right, worship or wrong worship,
with right thinking or wrong think
ing, with writing truth or writing
falsehood, with right acts or words or
ceremonies, except as abuse of liberty
may infringe on the liberty of others.
"I'ne societe sans administration,
sans armee, sans gendarmes, avec
la liberie sauvage de prier. de ponser,
de parler, d'ecrire, d'agir. chacun a
sa facon ne durerait pas 1111 quart
d'heure. ("est la negation de tons ces
principcs, de toutes les conditions de
cette civilisation qui fait I'unite dp la
nation francaise. En constituant
notre administration bierarchis.ee et
centralised, la sagesse de 110s peres a
depuis longtemps eleve la France a
premier rang et appris aux Francais
<pie la liberte ("est l'obeissance. C'est
la notre glorie et notre force."
The state is not pious, benevolent,
virtuous, generous, because these per
sonal virtues, cannot be exercised by
officialism leads to their abuse.
Privilege to the poor means privilege
to the rich; privilege to the rich
means privilege to the poor, but al
ways the more powerful arm secures
the greater privilege. The essence of
democracy is that no one. rich or
poor should have a lease on privilege.
The wealth of the republic does not
rest on its great sweep of prairies,
its mines or its commerce. Its primal
source is in its free schools, and its
freedom of choice of trade or profes
sion. The results of this freedom
can be measured in money as well as
in power. Now as ever, "America
means opportunity," opportunity for
each man and woman to prepare for
the work he can do best, opportunity
for each to find his place in life, op


I'IIESIDKXT DAVID KTAitlt .lOUD \ X
portunity for the work that neeils to
be done to find the man who can do it.
It is for each man to plan his own
career, to make his rwn escape "from
status to contract." The democracy
of America can acknowledge no mas
sters save of its own creation and the
power that makes these is adequate
to set them aside.
While every conception In Europe
has its reflex in America, while every
idea of administration from absolut
ism to anarchy finds its earnest advo
cates, none of these seem likely to
displace the fundamental ideal of
democratic individualism developed by
the fathers of the republic. This ideal
was expressed by Lincoln and long be
fore him by Anstolle. It is the function
of the state to establish justice among
men and to perform those acts of com
mon necessity, contributing to the pre
servation and enjoyment of human life
which collective action can accomp
lish better than private effort. Fur
ther than that, democracy which is
simply enforced co-operation should
not go, and by this principle, that no
theory of government should be
pushed beyond the consideration of its
practical results, the republic escapes
the choice of any single one among
the hundreds of remedies for political
ills. There is 110 possibility of the
adoption of anarchism, socialism, col
lectivism or individualism or any
other system as an exclusive and ex
cluding finality. The people of Amer
ica are interested in actual results
rather than any form of logical neces
sity as a ground for political action.
The Test of Solidarity
The test of national solidarity may
be found in its freedom from the need
of force or authority in the conduct of
its affairs. Let us imagine if we can,
a catastrophe which should remove
from the United States every repre
sentative of coercive power, every offi
cial of whatever rank from the Presi
dent to the last notary public, every
representative of army or of navy, or
of church, every policeman, every
authority of whatever kind.
Such a loss might create wied
spread bewilderment or profound
sorrow. It would have no relation to
anarchy. Except among certain un
assimilated foreign populatipns in
large cities it would lead to no
violence, to no riots. The functions
of national life would go on as before.
One by one communities would come
together and provide for the election
of officers. It was said that the death
of Lincoln gave a new proof of how
"republics live, not by a single life
but the right divine of man, the mil
lion trained to be free."
I.ret us apply the same test to other
nations. 111 the France of Napoleon
111, we are assured that without force,
society would not endure "for a quar
ter of an hour." What would be the
result in Germany today? No one can
tell. The German is endlessly patient,
even under needless burdens. What
would he do, if burdens were all sud
denly thrown off, if "Strengstens Ver
boten," the motto of Prussian rule
were suddenly found to have no force
behind it?
The lesson of democracy is therefore
the lesson of the United States. It is
no new lesson. The people of the
United States are merely European
people who have had some additional
experience, have learned some things
in their travels, perhaps forgetting

Patterson Dana Nowell Tulare
Frank Herbert Richey Tipton, Ind.
Edga r Clarence Smith Azusa
Homer Roberts Spence Alameda
GRAPHIC ART
Ethel Ora Qardin Salinas
James Leo Duff Menlo Park
fErnest P»ruce Nelson San Jose
Louise Rider Watsonville
Stella Belle Sankey Clearfield, Pa.
Cordelia Madison Smith Venice
MATHEMATICS
Sydnie Aileen Gardner Orange
Dorothy Marian Hindle Del Mar
Julia R. Johnson Aberdeen, Wash.
Ralph Matthews Noble Galesburg, 111.
Margaret Marion Steele San Jose
Mary Hilda Volkmor Whittier
APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Grace Raymond Helmick Helena, Mont.
CHEMISTRY
George Henry Beurhaus Tacoma, Wash.
Hector Crandall San Francisco
fEdwin Reginald Harding San Bernardino
fPaul Mark Levy San Francisco
Hugh Harold Mosher San Jose
Robert Lindley Murray Palo Alto
+Zeno Ostenberg.. San Jose
Alfred Liles Phillips Santa Cruz
PHYSICS
Herbert Rovell Benham McKittrick
Francis Sitwell Pratt Ontario
Albert John Scholl, Jr Los Angeles
Ruth Sceley Los Gatos
Glen Miller Smyth Salt Lake City-, Utah
Guy Carleton Swan Lawrence, Mass.
Devi Dyal Virmani Bahawalpore, India
Waldo Ralph Waelty Santa Clara
William Irvin Weaver Colorado Springs, Colo.
BOTANY
Taylor Jay Blethen Portland, Ore.
Arthur Dickie Borden Palo Alto
Ollis Willard Newman Santa Barbara
Frank Jason Smiley Fresno
PHYSIOLOGY AND HISTOLOGY
Albert Gordon Bower Salt Lake City, Utah
Roscal Leroy Draper Arroyo Grande
Florence Edetha Dunlop Vale, Ore.
George Stevenson Holcman Riverside
Leonard R. Jenkins Ogden, Utah
Merton James Price San Francisco
Karl Ludwig Schaupp Santa Rosa
John Philip Stricklcr San Diego
fCharles Ernest von Geldern San Francisco
*Carleton Wolsey Washburne Sierra Madre
fClyde T. Wetmore Hollister
Robert William Wilcox Delta, Colo.
fElsa Will Rochester, N. Y.
ZOOLOGY
Clara Crosby Santa Cruz
Mary 1* isk Los Angeles
ENTOMOLOGY AND BIONOMICS
Leroy Childs Redlands
fWarren Locke Smith Ferndale
Verne Genoa Stevens Palo Alto
GEOLOGY AND MINING
Robert Edwin Anderson San Francisco
Harry Mayo Andreen Redwood City
fCarl Hugh Beal Palo Alto
Edward Burke Corbet San Francisco
Waldemar Fenn Dietrich San Francisco
Benjamin Edward Erb Chemainus, B. C.
Andrew Douglas Fyfe Oceanside
fWilliam Conrad Gehrmann Davenport, la.
Mortimer Louis Hall Pasadena
Harold Briggs Hannibal San Jose
Olaf Pitt Jenkins Stanford* University
Grover Berner Lantz Colton
tßernard Harold Lasky San Francisco
*Robcrt James McCann Pacific Grove
fHarvey Wright Parmelee Santa Barbara
*Alonzo William Peake Los Angeles
Arthur E. Remington Watertown, N. Y.
*Edwin John Stewart Los Angeles
CIVIL ENGINEERING
Charles Edward Beechcr Monrovia
Edwin Prcscott Bly Los Angeles
I von Clay Briggs San Francisco

some others equally important. In
like manner the choicest thoughts and
worthiest ideals of America are
thoughts and ideals long before treas
ured by the advanced minds of Europe.
Another lesson from America is that
of the effective federation. The United
States is composed of fortliy-eight
self-governing states, each an entity
within itself managing its own affairs,
with its own officials and its own
laws, controlled by the nation in those
interests only which it shares with
its sister states. Some of these states
are as populous and wealthy as the
Kingdom of Europe, but each is a
jurisdiction, not a power. None can
make war alone, either by force of
arms or force of tariffs. While there
is all machinery for settling disputes
between states such disputes never
arise, because no state has the right
to use its force to promote private
business.
Stilts Equality
The states in a federal union meet
as jurisdictions. The small ones have
no fear of the large ones, and those
not touching the sea suffer in no way
from their restricted position. A
"Power" hampered as is the state of
Illinois would chafe against its limita
tions, and its jingoes would talk of
fighting their way to the ocean. But
viewed as a jurisdiction, surrounded by
similar jurisdictions, the people of
Illinois have no consciousness of limi
tation.
And this should be our ultimate con
ception of a nation. Its boundary line
should represent merely the limit of
jurisdiction. That jurisdiction ceases
does not imply need of violence be
tween the people on the two sides nor
require fortification for the purpose
of repelling violence. The Canadian
boundary is an example of this meet
ing of nations not as powers but as
jurisdictions.
This four-thousand-mile line, rang
ing through all kinds of territory and
all sorts of conditions, disputed nearly
all the way "with all the brutal frank
ness common to blood relations," has
for nearly a hundred years not known
a fortress, a soldier, a warship or a
gun. It is a peace boundary, the limit
of the jurisdiction of one self-govern
ing nation, the beginning of that of
another. It lacks but one thing to
make it ideally perfect, the re
moval of the custom-house, the em
blem of national suspicion and greed,
the remnant, of the days when it was
considered good economics for a na
tion to "have its taxes paid by for
eigners."
Europe in Turmoil
Viewed as "great powers" devoted
to the exploitation of the wealth of
other regions the leading nations of
Europe are in constant turmoil. The
German empire for example, is hamp
ered on every side. Her scant sea
coast is split in two by the presence
of Denmark. Her German Rhine dis
charges itself through Holland. The
ports of Amsterdam, Rotterdam, Ant
werp and Ostend, geographically her's,
are occupied by alien people whom she
could crush out in a moment, were it
not. for the physical force of the rest
of Europe and the moral power of the
world. Of Poland, she has too much
or too little. A large part of the Ger
man people live in the alien empire of
Austro-Hungary and in the republic
of Switzerland, while after forty years
of possession, Germany scarcely owns
Alsace or Lorraine. The states are a
thorn in the side of the empire, a bur
den and a weakness, just so long as
their two millions of people are held in
semi-vassalhood by the rule of force.
A free republic of Alasace Lorraine, a
second Swithzerland, half-German,
half-French separating and joining
two great nations would be a strength
and an inspiration to both. The true
gateways of the Rhine held by the
power of blood and iron is a centre
of menace to civilization. For the
wrong done at the Treaty of Frank
fort forty years ago, Europe has had to
pay most dearly for it is around the
question of Alsace-Lorraine that half
the crushing armament of Europe has
been built up. She is hemmed in
everywhere by the scare of old strugg
les, to her perennial discomfort. For
this reason, she suffers from the
"Drang nach Osten," she seeks a road
to the Persian gulf, an empire over
seas, and every form of imperial ex
tension to lands "under the sun,"
which may for the moment seem
plausible or possible.
But Germany as a jurisdiction suf
fers none of these limitations. Her
powers are only those which are
needed for the people's good. They
are merely her public duties. It mat
ters noting that her sway is checked
on almost, every side before it reaches
the sea. Other jurisdictions inter
vene, and each of these looks after
the public needs of man, which are
mostly justice, conservation, educa
tion, sanitation, and peace. As one of
the "Great Powers" of the world, Ger
many (with her fellow states as well)
is a center of friction, injustice and
unrest.
"A Power" is u Menace.
As a jurisdiction Germany is busy
with profitable and constantly ad
vancing industries, with an admir
able system of education and exten
sive provision for all the people's
needs, and no enlargement of boun
daries could in the least increase her
usefulness, her wealth or her happi
ness. As "a power" Germany is a
menace to the well being of civiliza
tion as every other "power" of similar
nature must be in its degree For
the prosperity of every people de
pends on international peace, and
all power-manifestations are either
actual or potential war. War is a
form of world-sickness from which
every function of civilization suffers,
and most of all those bonds of com
mon thought and common interest
sumed up in internationalism. And
to the members of an international
state, German in blood and in sym
pathy as well as English, all these
destructive rivalries of state with
state seem mediaeval and unworthy.
There is, in fact, something primitive,
outworn and unprogressive in the
spectacle of a civilized nation com
posed of millions of clever people
trusting for its defense to forts and
ships. With all the resources of
business, of science, ef education, of
thought, to depend on force seems a
lazy, even cowardly, shirking of the
higher possibilities of national
strength. To be surrounded by armed
guards, "holding the drop" on all
Commercial rivals is not a lofty con
ception of a nations's greatness. This
attitude has been as disastrous to
England's own peace of mind as it has
been menacing to the world's welfare.
To escape from this condition is not
a matter of a day nor a generation. Tt
is not easy for America even to

Revoe Carlisle Briggs Pasadena
fFloyd Cromwell Brown Selma
fEdward James Cullen Gilroy
Harry Bascom Davis Pomona
Wilbur Harvey Doxsee Redwood City
Robert Francis Duryea Palo Alto
fClarence Bernard Goodwin Sunnyvale
fCharles Stewart Grace Rivera
John Stanley Grepe, Jr East Highlands
tNorman Marshall Ilalcombe San Francisco
George William Hawley Portland, Ore.
George Walter Hunt San Jose
Paul Eells Jeffers Los Angeles
William Aiken Laird Lindsay
Alexander Stuart Macdonald San Francisco
tßobert Patchen Miller Los Angeles
Maurice Everard Morrison Morgan Hill
fßoger Wolcott Olmsted Los Angeles
Chauncey Smith Elie, Manitoba, Canada
Thomas Joseph Spellman Colma
fßurroughs Agin Stephenson Los Altos
Harry George Todtmann Chicago, 111.
George Harlan Trask Los Angeles
Charles Ralph Tupper San Jose
Romney Leigh Vaughn San Francisco
Guss Valentine Wallach Boonville
Carlton Levi Wyant Montecito
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING
■fClarence P. Campbell Los Angeles
tWallace Rolland Finney...* Modesto
*Burdette Lord Hostettler Erie, Pa.
Kenneth Irving Marshall Los Angeles
tAugustus Mudge Sanborn Redlands
Cecil Stocker Simon Los Gatos
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
*Edward Niles Adam Melville, Mont.
Frank Edward Anderson Los Angeles
fClarence Cannon Argabrite Ventura
John Watson Fleming Armstrong....Fivemiletown, Tyrone, Ire.
Everett Morse Calderwood Palo Alto
Melville Nathaniel Clark Dayton, Me.
John Francis Cullen Gilroy
Walter Jennings Dodge Los Angeles
Charles Greenlaw Duffin Comas, Wash.
Harry Adolph Fore Campbell
Frank Julius Gleiss Los Angeles
Walter J. Hammond ! Grinncll, la.
Tomiichi Haraguchi Nagasaki, Japan
George Edward Holditch Orange
Edgar Alden Jackson Cupertino
Linford C. Lull, Jr Los Angeles
James Arthur Miller Hanford
Rea Cambridge Newman Santa Barbara
George Washington Poison Menlo Park
Gaylord Kenyon Snyder Los Angeles
fGiistav Wade Naples
George Ireland Wright Pasadena
BACHELOR OF LAWS
Jerome Devereaux Peters San Jose
Granville Numan Wood, Jr Blue Lake
MASTER OF ARTS
LATIN
Flora Anne Bagley Burlingame
fßuth Beard Modesto
Catherine Ida Birch Redlands
fAnna Shipley Cox San Jose
Mabel Harriett Usinger Berkeley
Malcolm Leland Yeary Los Angeles
GERMAN
Edward Vere Brewer Elyria, Ohio
Catharine Morris Cox San Jose
Lydia Lucilc Meyer . Milwaukee, Wis.
Clara Lydia Schaaf Fort Wayne, -Ind.
fElsie Louise Whittemore Alhambra
ENGLISH LITERATURE
Anais Julia Allen Pasadena
Walter Clyde Curry Gray-Court, S. C.
ENGLISH PHILOLOGY
Maude Cleveland Stanford University
EDUCATION
tWilliam Samuel Marten San Jose
Clarence Lucien Phelps Jamestown, Ky.
William Thomas Root, Jr Pasadena
William Roy Tanner Minneapolis, Minn.

emancipate herself from reactionary
influences in Europe. There are many
interests in a wealthy nation who find
an aid or an affinity in militarism.
Debt creates debt, and those inter
ested in spending band together
against reform.
These matters proceed by slow pro
gress, interrupted by reaction; we
are in a period of relapse at present,
when reactionary forces seem to be in
the ascendant. Hut this very fact with
its burdens and horrors may be count
ed on to turn the balance in the other
direction.
Neither will there be a formal fed
eration of nations in this era. In
deed federation in fact will come long
before it comes in name. A single
unified world-government with cen
tralized rule under one set of men at
some one place, is only a dream—and
not a cheerful dream at that. What
the world needs is more self-control,
more local responsibility not more
governmental machinery. Neverthe
less every step in removing injustice,
in eliminating sources of friction, in
extending common interests, as the
postol union, the telegraph union, in
ternational law, international police
duties, international conferences and
congresses, arbitration treaties a nd
other agreements—are steps in the di
rection of the passing of war. To this
end, three great contributing agencies
are: the growth of the popular con
science, the interlocking of personal
interests, and the ruinous expence
which the progress of science has
brought to every branch of the mili
tar art.
All this has its part in the great
movement towards common interna
tional life, "La Vie Internationale" of
the dreams of La Fontaine, a life
which shall make war impossible and
will, in time, do away with exploita
tions, with tariff barriers and with all
the products of that narrow nativism,
which considers only the purposes or
enrichment of the selfish few, the one
in-group against all the out-groups of
the world.
Value of Open Diplomacy
Another lesson which the United
States may teach is the value of open
diplomacy. A secret agreement of
any kind whatever. It was a warning
of Washington that his nation should
beware of Entangling Alliances. A
formal alliance is for the purpose of
making enemies, never of making
friends. Friendship among nations
rests on common interests, on the in
terlocking of minds, the interlocking
of trade.
In the United States a treaty can be
entered into only with the open and
public consent of the Senate. Every
international relation is therefore
open to the world. No minister, no
president, no group of men whatever
can secretly pledge the nation to any
line of action. No president, no cabi
net, no minister, no congress acting
alone can make any declaration of
public policy. For these reasons the
United States must stand outside the
tangled snare of concessions and intri
gues we call world politics. She must
play her games of diplomacy with
open hands. She cannot be the secret
friend of any other nation. She can
not be a secret enemy because all her
acts, friendly or hostile, are known to
all the world.
The secret treaty in the interest of
imperial spoliation is the bane of
Europe. It ties each foreign office to
the service of the most reckless and
greedy of its great exploiting inter
ests. It has reduced the chancelleries
of more than one nation to be nothing
more than the firm name under which
its exploiting corporations compass
their ends in Asia or in Africa.
The secret is a relic of the military
state. The civilzed world is still or
ganized on the mediaeval theory that
war is a natural function to he ex
pected in the normal course of events,
not a hideous inorau, physical;. and
financial catastrophe. la the old
theory as expounded by Machiavelli,
the king has no other business but
war. It is the duty of his ministers
to find weak places in the defenses of
other kings through which war may
be successful, and to find, after the
fact, excuses by which' war can be
justified. The secret treaty, the .con
cession to a friendly power, ithe. arti-.
ficial interference with a rival, —all
these belong to the days' of Ma<?hia
velli. If . all parties concerpe.4 ( |cojJ>ld :
come out.into the open, .Wihsre . t-het
United States is forced to stahd, we
should soon have an end to tneAttgld-
German struggle, of the rivalry be
tween the Triple Entente and the
Triple Alliance.
Outworn ideas ot' national glory, out
worn figures of.speech as tp national
purposes, outworn mediaevalism in
our -conception of the state.—all'these
find expression in the "secret treaty,"
the "entangling alliance," which is a'
chief obstacle in the way of the -con
ciliation of nations. ?>• -
Historically, the influence of Amer
ica has been exerted in opposition to
Imperialism and to infringement of
the great nations on the rights of the
sniall. This is the inception of the
Monroe Doctrine, which in spite of its
perversion and its wrong accentuation r
has protected Latin America from the
fate of Africa. That this should now
be a Pan-American, not njerely an.
American doctrine goes without say
ing. And it must never be allowed i.o
degenerate-into " a Dollar Diplomacy"
which would.reserve Tropical America
as a special "sphere of, .influence-' for
American exploitation,. For the true,
and final form of the Mojiuae.Doctrine
is found, in the Drago .Doctrine,. of the
republics of South Ameripa,, that tiie
forqe of . arms should. be used-ras.
an,instrument iu industiriul spoliation.
This the people of the United States
should adopt as• their-.own. « <
Principle Disregarded '
In a recent deciskm- of- arbitration;
the King 'of Swed'ant'laW down 'this
principle: that a nation "has 110
right to land- troops in .order-to pYe-'
serve the property or the rights of her
nationals.". This''lwinciple. ha,s '-beefr
disregarded in the •strangling of
Persia, the rape of Mongolia and of
Tibet, in the chronic robbery of
China, and in the annexation of Egypt, <
of Korea, uf Morocco and of Tripoli.
But it is for all that a just.-and honor
able principle, and it is disregarded
only when a nation, by virtue of super
ior strength or superior civilization
feels itself justified in taking posses
sion of another for its good, and inci
dentally for the commercial advant
age of its own exploitating interests.
It is true that the smaller nations of
the tropics are subject to violent
political disturbances. They have not
learned the value of liberty as regu
lated hjy law. Yet it is highly prob
able that not one in ten of these
periodical/ revolutions I's of spontan- 1
eous native origin. of them are
started for purposes of spoliation by

autside adventurer's and a large ma
jority are paid for by adventurers
'State. The Public School exists
everywhere at the public expense, and
belonging to one or more of the great
epinniarqia'ruatrojis tit', fheiear'th.. When."
'the"fi v nal' iriitli'Ts"known'"of unhappy
Mexico the responsibility for hfei' dis
(Mfer'sl will rest nht on'her martyred
president, ridr "on the' sol
"diers'of fortune by whose hands he
•fell, but on the men in New York or
in London perhaps,' whose nioiWy has
kept iliese revolutions going. Mexico,
with fatal riches of oil and gold, is not
tlie first nation to Ite torn asunder by
'conflicting ."sphere's of influence."
The. influence of the republic has
been always thrown against another
form of imperialism involved in the
phrase "Control of the Sea." America
has never claimed any such control
nor has she admitted the right to
others. It is a mediaeval idea going
back foiir hundred years to the time
when the great seas were divided be
tween Spain and Portugal. America
has stood for the open sea, the restric
tion of national jurisdiction to the
three-mile limit, the extermination of
piracy, and in iater years for the most
important doctrine of the immunity of
war. To make the high seas an open

HI STORY
Ella Wissie Beaver ...T. .Tulare
fEmrria Howse Kuno Palo Alto
George Lutes Righter '.Campbell
Francis Marion Russell .Los Angeles
MATHEMATICS
Rose Margaret Bennett »....San Diego
Amanda Westhold ..Quincy, 111:
CHEMISTRY
Alicje. .Ruth Bergcr San Jose
Elton Marion Hogg. v Saratoga
Charles Kirkton McWilliams San Joss
tWilliam John Van Sicklen Castle-ton, Ontario,,Canada
BOTANY
Charlotte Elliott Del Rapids, S. D.
BACTERIOLOGY
Frank Maltaner .Cincinnati, O.
ZOOLOGY
Josephine Louise Dows Randall Stanford University
ENTOMOLOGY
F rankie Willard Galexioo
GEOLOGY
Theodore Chapin., Los Angeles
Joseph Stanley Hook jjPerris ■
ENGINEER
CHEMICAL ENGINEERING
. Louis Wjlliam Pingree.-. ; Ogden-, Utah
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING
fDexter Simpson Kimball N. Y.
Lyman Stevenson King Oakland .
r *• . V <
JURIS DOCTOR
George Armand Ditz Stockton f-1
Maurice Timothy Dooling • Hollistter ,
fEmmet Ross Fertig Nobl.esvjlle, Ind.
fFrank Louis Guerena rs .. „Spnora
George Juan Hatfield ...Oakland-,
Frank Howard Hilton ; Portland, Ore.
Grant Holcomb San Bernardino^
Ignatius Martin Peckham tV| . San . Jose
Edmund Wright Pugh Los. (Angeles..
Alfred'Worcester Robertson Saflt? Ba,rbru:a ..
Chester Harvey Warlow : . r ., . ( Fresno,
Herbert Eustace White Saotamento^.
tFrederick feertram Wood i. . Alto.
* September 6, 1912
fjanuary 10, 1013 "O '?t it

highway-to be tr.a.ver?ed , ( afc ( anytime,-
in absolute--safety, by any, vessel what
ever would-gp/t'ar away
witji international..waff,.-and iSitill ftWH
ther in ren^.vi!),£..tlve- and dnv<-
gerous burden of naval protectioni»'l£;
all military operations.- at. sea couidibe
confined to the <oa,nnon shot.
from the. shore, the- original motive
of the three-mile limit of. jurisdiction,
it would represent one of ,the most
practical triumphs of civilization.- Ttfe
nations should join to make the ocean
safe, not to fill it with floating fort
resses designed t tp. protect merchant
ships from robbery by the very per
sons with whom they trade.
Still another lesson from. America is
one in which, we all agree; the divorce
of religion from political control and
therefore from the,domain of politics.
Absolute religions freedom exists .in
America because the state assumes
no relation of any kind to religious
corporations as such, So long as these
do not interfere with the freedom of
soul or body of men not. belonging to
them, their acts do not concern the
state. And on no, one policy is there
more firm agreement.in America* than
in the absolute separation of Church
nowhere can any sect or gpoup of seets
claim any dominating relation in re

gard to It. To the average American
the strife over Church properties and
Church interests so real in Europe
seem incomprehensible. The Church,
any church, is in every way better oif
for separation from the government.
Whatever achievement; whatever pro
gress it may make is its own, and this
progress is solid because it involves,
no ulterior political end.
Connected with the freedom of the
church is the freedom of the people
from other forms of paternalism. The
state becomes benevolent only when it
lias failed to be just. It allows special
opportunities to individuals only
where it has denied opportunity to
men at large.
The "old-age pension" is a conven
ient'illustration,.'lt has been justly
compared to- the. free pass homeward
granted to the human wrecks who
have lost their all in the. gambling
rooms of-Monte Carlo. It is the shill
ing given to the man run over by my
lord's automobile.
In a better system he would not have
been run over. He would not have
lost his money in a vile resort, lie
would not have needed an outside
pittance to carry him through old age.
Host Workers Died in War
The old-age pension exists in Eng
land as a convenient balm for inequal
ity and injustice. The best of her
workers have died in her wars/ leav
ing a weaker stock to breed from.
These have grown' up unskilled, in de
fault of the shools that make men
strong. They have grown up in the
atmosphere of the public house, sod
den with lust and beer and whisky.
They have lost the opportiiniy tljat
should be theirs, and at the end their
jfellows must be taxed to feed tliem.
The tragedy of the East End of Lon
don is no normal part of the tragedy
of Life. It is no part of the normal
America. It is no part of a nation
which has given opportunity.
Brit'in America a' new country, fresh,
unspoiled, full of life and hope, it is
possible to hctt'd' government" to its
rigid purpose, to develop opportunity
by the elimination of privilege, teacfy,.
men to lean' not on' government but
on themselves, and to aid by'fraternal '
giving those who have fallen in. tbg
prang 1 ; not "to weaken by unearned
public money those who are falling but
who can be made to stand, 'tfie wav
Up it i '">• vtc.
t)t the transgressor is hard and we
not make it eapier'ff we could;
|We' could not if we would'. To. give a..
plkh'a chance to'rise,' i'.s to allow him'
hlfbthe choice t<>Tali:" ' *';•"
1 is ! •?; . " *
foii.fession of Failure , '
■ "Tho old-age pension" .is, so- far as 1
it goes, a confession of failure of de- ■
jnocracy,. Except as a measure of'"
e |1 £r-fie.pcy, l Jts real purpose in Eng
land, it has no justification in good '
government. Clean up the. social at
mosphere, restore to the people, what ■
is rightfully theirs, and they will care, 1
rare accidents .excepted, for their own
old age.
in America tlie struggle, between '
labor and capital can never assume
the form it has in Europe. In a gov
ei nment which stands for justice, and
which is in no way occupied with
making money for its people, nor from
its People, nor in supporting exploiting
intei ests in other lauds, there is uo
visable necessity for universal col
lective ownership. Where classes do
not leally exist there is no pertinence
in the artificial distinctions of aristoc
racy, proletariat and bourgeoisie
which have been so laboriously
brought over from Europe. If these*
distinctions exist, most of us in Amer
ica belong to one single class, that of
the bourgeoisie.
There exist in America as elsewhere,
vast fortunes, disproportionate to the
ability or the efforts of those who con
trol them. But their history has been
of short duration. They are not leg
acies from an unjust past. Their or
igin belongs to the present. It is
mainly individual. Great luck, great
skill or ingeniously managed privilege
stands behind each of them. By the
same means as in Europe, by co
operation through interlocking direc
torates, these great fortunes have
been made to stand together and thus
by a process of financial suction to
build up fortunes still greater. But
one most important difference exists.
The national government, in theory
and for the most in fact, stands aloof
from these combinations. The con
trol of public affairs, even of financial
matters is beyond their permanent
reach. Their influence on foreign
diplomacy is limited because no secret
influence can control, and the power
of money for evil is mostly lost in
publicity.
Property May Rule
In all their operations, they are sur
rounded by an alert and in the long
run victorious opposition of democ
racy. In America property may rule,
but only for a time. In the earlier
•centuries of Europe, the period of
Absolutism, when monarchy was a
political power not a function of so
ciety, it was, of course, true that prop
erty ruled. But it was the ruler who
had the property. It was his by force
of position. Not until the money lend
ers of the last century secured the
strangle hold on the nations of
Europe was this condition brought to
an end.
Then again, property ruled, but it
was not that the King and the nobles
held the property. Property held
them, and in Europe today it is money
that rules, and it rules King and
peasant alike, for everything el3e
hinges on the Imperial Explotation of
foreign lands.
In America, this is true in a degree,
but the rule of money has its visible
limits. For the United States belongs
to its people.
"Dollar Diplomacy"
While Europe generally, the alliance
between financial interests and the
government is open and avowed, such
•connections in America have proved
fatal to political leaders and to polit
ical parties. The methods by which
the "powers of Europe" through their
foreign offices bolster up adventures
in foreign lands, could not be used in
America. The diplomacy of persua
sion, threats or force of arms in the
interest of private ventures would be
impossible here. The people might
consent to "Dollar Diplomacy" but
•only for a time and until its nature
is understood. The recent, repudia
tion of our relation to the "Six Power
Loan' to China will serve as a case in
point.
And here again we must admit that
out democratic conception of govern
ment has to struggle for acceptance
in America. The protective tariff in
theory and in practice is a flat viola
tion of its principles. Tt is a flat
violation of the spirit of the American
■constitution. It is privilege pure and
simple granted to the few by the
many, in the belief that in the long
run the many would profit by it. Its

purpose was to diversify industries by
letting the farmer help pay the ex
penses of the manufacturer. It has
just that effect, and the farmer and
laborer are becoming increasingly
discontented with its burdens and the
inequalities before the law which are
part and parcel of its operations.
In America, the army and navy,
though the latter has grown beyound
all reason through the rivalry from
England and Germany, still represent
a democratic ideal. We still hold to
the thought that our officers are not
rulers but servants of the people.
Our military element stands near
the parting of the ways, for all offi
cialism tends to aggrandize itself,
most of all that which is associated
with pomp and with patriotism. Mili
tarism for its own sake belongs to the
state in whoch property rules. "It
furnishes," says John A. Hobson, "a
profitable support to certain strong
vested interests. It is a decorative
element in social life and above all, it
is necessary to keep down the
pressure of the forces of internal
reform."
>o Room for Militarism
The ideals of Militarism and Democ
racy can never coexist. And this na
tion is too far given over to democ
racy ever to do more than dally with
the military ideal. In a nation that
knows no caste, and has no aristioc
racy other than temporary and self
selected, no military traditions will
ever be permanent. There can never
be a warrior caste holding special
privilege or special authority.
As a people, we of the United States
are too rich in resources of wealth, of
education and of intelligence to be
controlled by influences of militarism.
And thus and for the same reasons, in
the republic of America, the state ex
ists for the man, not the man for the
state. This is the fundamental differ
ence between the Eighteenth Century
and Twentieth. And let us speed the
day when it may be said not only that
"America means Opportunity" but
that the same hopeful word may be
spoken of Germany and England and
France and Russia and of all the na
tions in the sisterhood of civilization.
Lord Acton thus sums up the move
ment of the history of civilization:
"It is by the combined efforts of the
weak made under compulsion to re
sist the reign of force and constant
wrong that in the rapid change but
slow progress of four hundred years
liberty has been preserved and se
cured and extended and finally under
stood."
And as America comes to under
stand her own message of democracy,
internationalism and peace, she will
carry this understanding back to the
motherland of Europe.
Within the last two months Presi
dent Wilson and Mr. Bryan have
planned a most practical and effective
means of bringing American influence
to bear on the problems of World
peace.
The end in view is to relegate war
to a position of last resort in times
of international difference, to place
soldiers and dreadnaughts in the
background—not in the front of na
tional movement.
The essence of this American policy
is that in case of friction between
nations, the matter be placed for six
months in the hands of a joint high
Commission of investigation, chosen
in part from the contending nations,
the majority from friendly neutrals.
These- for six months shall study the
question at issue, neither nation in the

meantime demonstrating, mobilizing
or increasing the armament, until the
final report is made. After this each
nation is free to choose conciliation,
concession, compromise, arbitration
or war. And with six months to think
it over there will be no war. Wars are
waged for greed, for politics, or be
cause the mob has been stirred by
senseless speech or reckless journal
ism. And in many cases this reckless
journalism has been carefully cal :u
--lated and fully paid for by those in
terested in the sale of the accessories
of war.
The treaty of arbitration will natur
ally follow on the treaty for investi
gation. Courts will naturally supple
ment results of friendly offices. But
the agreement for friendly conference
comes first and is for the present the
more important. The Treaty of Arbi
tration is most valuable, — not as
preventing war, for a nation bent on
war, if there is such a case, will not
stop to agree to arbitrate. The world
is finally ruled by public opinion. Ar
bitration treaties clinch public opinion
and hold it to its duty.
The present decade has been char
acterized by needless, costly and
brutal wars, the result not of actual
conditions of today, but of blunders
and crimes committed in the past.
Wars do not spring up afresh in our
civilization. They spring from old
wars whose seeds were not destroyed
by peace.
Rut, however, dark the present out
look may seem with half the coined
money of the world spent each year
on war and war's accessories, the far
outlook is most promising. The cruel
horror of the Balkan war, the waste of
armed peace and frustrate war
throughout the civilized world, — all
these make powerfully for peace, for
real peace — the Peace of Law and
Trust, and not the Peace of Force.
And just now is the time when
American influence can be most defi
nitely crystallized and made effective.
And we are thankful that we have in
the seats of Authority at Washington
men who definitely work for peace
and whom war and war's fripperies
do not dazzle nor attract.
Two hundred and seven students were awarded the Bachelor of
Arts Degree by President David Stu rr Jordan in the Assembly Hull tills
morning. Two were granted the Bachelor of Laws Degree, while
thirty-five were given the Master of Arts Degree. In addition to these
the Academic Council also awarded three Engineer, thirteen .luris Doc
tor of Philosophy Degrees. The Co miuencemnet address preceded the
presenting of the sheepskins, *Th e Conquest of Europe by America,"
wsis the subject of the strong address delivered by Doctor Jordan.

I wish this morning to say a serious
word to you as citizens of the great
republic and as future leaders in its
thought and action. I wish you to
think earnestly of the part American
influence must play in the world his
tory of our century. It is for us to
help cure the accumulated evils of
the older civilization. Those men in
Europe who look furthest into the
future hope for the salvation of
Europe through ideals brought back
from practical service in America.
One of these. Senator La Fontaine of
Brussels, has given me my title as the
expression of the hope of his life,
"The Conquest of Europe by America."
I hasten to say that 1 do not mean
conquest by force of arms, for 1 have
no interest in such conquests and no
belief that victories thus won result in
any permanent good to any nation.
Nor do I mean financial conquests,
the floating of imperial loans or the
permeation of any part of European
business by financiers from the New
World. Still less do I celebrate a
shoppers' contest on the Place de
I'Opera or among the dazzling bar
gains of the Hon Marche. Nor does
the trail of American tourists who
cross with gold the palms of Europe's
servitors, all the way from Piccadilly
to the Pyramids awaken in me any
pride of nation or of race. The only
permanent conquest is that of ideas.
America stands, has always stood, for
two ideals from which she cannot
escape, for they are fundamental in
her origin and in her growth. These
are internationalism and democracy,
and these ideals being invincible
must conquer America, and through
her, reconquer Europe. And as both
are incompatible with war, their final
triumph marks the end of spoliation,
of and of that relation be
tween nations which breeds suspicion
and hatred. The conquest of the
world by the ideals of International
ism and Democracy marks the coming
of universal peace.
In the address at Baltimore in 1911,
Henri La Fontaine of Brussels, the
veteran prophet of International Life,
used these striking words.
"Emigration perhaps more than
war has deprived the old, historic
countries of their most energetic and
fittest ones to build the progressive
and wealthy people you are on this side
of the Atlantic. You are for us
Europeans, the beloved Brotherland,
Do not forget that Europe is always

and will still remain for you the be
loved Motherland. Europe is now for
America what Greece was for Europe.
Europe has liberated (Ireece. Amer
ica has to liberate Europe from its
burdens, its prejudices, its hatreds.
It is your duty, it is your highest duty
to reconcile outside your borders the
people you have reconciled within
your borders. For indeed the Amer
ican people is at present the true
international people. It is the elect
people which alone can further inter
nationalism and can transform all of
the people of the Earth into a family
of nations, a brotherhood of men, an
international people." "For coloniza
tion is not mainly done by men and by
capital, but also by ideas, by example,
by experiment."
Not Always True to Ideals
We may freely admit in the begin
ning that America has not always been
true to her own ideals, and that she
has not always clearly seen her own
future. She has had her own lapses,
moral and social, some of these be
cause of associations with Europe and
through imitation of glories alien to
her history. If she had been true to
herself she would never have known
a single foreign war. She has no part in
those greeds and jealousies of money
or of race which still keep up turmoil
in Europe. Her war with Spain with
its eagerness for exploitation, its
tinsel imperialism and its pride of
participation in "world politics" rep
resents the worst of these lapses, and
its evil effects are long in passing.
But though the inception of this affair
was European in method, its contin
uance has been characteristically
American. Instead of exploitation, we
have brought to the Philippines educa
tion and sanitation. We have expend
ed on them a hundred times what we
have received, and if ever imperilism
can be respectable we have made it so.
Another false movement has been
in the building of warships and forts
in America. This lacks the motive
for similar extravagances in Europe,
because the peace of the new world is
no where threatened. But with us as
everjwhere the military spirit grows
with the money spent on it. The more
mouths fed by the State the greater
the clamor for the feeding of still
more. We have also to reckon with
the desire for giant decoration, for
big navies for sheer bigness' sake, the
feeling that this is the richest and'
most progressive nation on the globe,

and that as such she can beat old
Europe at her own game even though
that game be not worth the candle.
But with all lapses and delinquin
cies the fact of internationalism and
the ideal of democracy have been and
must always remain with the United
States, and from the United States
these ideals will react with greater
and greater force on the thoughts and
deeds of Europe.
Internationalism is the heritage of
America, not of choice at first, but cf
necessity. She has perforce grown
up with this ideal, because no other
was possible. She became the cosmo
politan nation of the world because
of her complex origin and with this
origin she could be nothing else. In
a new civilization, in the struggles of
the frontier each man is rated for
what he is worth. Under these condi
tions no one cares for the petty pre
cedences of rank or race. What a
man can do in the next twenty-four
hours outvalues any question as to
who were his ancestors.
All Hate Dies
On a railway train not long ago
some one was overheard to say: "This
is the land where all hate dies. My
father was German; my mother was
French. What do I care for all that?
I am an American. The old hatreds
and rivalries are nothing to me."
America was English, first. In lang
uage, in spirit, in conscience and in
government it is England which domi
nates. For the English race, above
all others, with its adaptation for co
operation and for compromise is the
builder of free states.
It was the chosen among the Eng
lishmen of three centuries ago who
founded the germ colonies of Virginia
and Massachusetts May. In the fol
lowing years it has been the like
minded from their own nation and
from others who have crossed the seas
to enter into their work.
The first who came were the bold,
the free, the self-ruling, the pleasure
scorning element of English life. They
came to escape from the state
church and the church-state, that they
might worship in their own fashion
and according to dictates of their indi
vidual consciences.
They detested the law of primogeni
ture which thrust the spirit of pre
cedence into the bosom of every fam
ily. They abhorred the law of entail
which burdened the land with the
curse of privilege even to unborn gen
erations.
They had caught from France the

spirit of liberty, equality, fraternity,
but as befits the calmer blood of the
north, they gave this spirit a con
structive interpretation, and the idea
of equality was to them especially rich
in practical results. Equality before
the law, equal access to land, to edu
cation, to professions and trades,
. equal access to legislat ion, each of
these conceptions broadened out into
the spirit of democracy.
And after England came to other
nations of Europe, each with its own
part and in its own degree giving its
contingent of free-born men, the ad
| mixture of blood gave strength and
! versatility to the rising nation.
But withal, the dominant note is
English still, with as many diver-
I gences from the England of today as
j from the England of the Stuarts.
In later years other immigration has
come, not alone the bold in search of
adventure, of new homes and new free
doms, but the weak and the oppressed,
"the beaten men of the beaten races,"
who llee from war taxation in search
of living wages and of daily bread.
But all these are cast into the same
melting pot and in most of them there
arises a clear response to the call of
free institutions.
In this melting pot of America, all
the old racial antipathies disappear
and all hereditary hatreds. There is
110 final distinction of British or Ger
j man, of French or Italian, of Spanish
|or Slav, of Dutch or Scandinavian,
!or of Jew or Gentile. The average
| American is as cosmopolitan in origin
j and relationship as is royalty in
Europe, though for a different set of
| reasons. But in America there is 110
[ distinction of common or noble, of
high or low, of aristocracy, bour
j geoisie or proletariat except as these
| are artificially emphasized in the in
dustrial strife we have inherited from
Eu rope.
To the international mind of Amer
ica, there seems 110 need or pertinence
to an Anglo-Saxon alliance as against
any other people. In so far as such
alliance is desirable or humanly pos
sible it exists already in a common
sympathy and a common literature, ft
would lie weakened by a stated agree
ment of the Anglo-Saxon group to
swell each others Meets with dread
naughts. The true bond of Union of
the Greater Britain involves no rup
ture with the Greater Germany, or the
Greater France or the Greater Scandi
navia to which we in America likewise
claim allegiance.
To the American, "Pan-Germanism,"
Pan-Slavism," as lie hears these ex
pounded seem a meaningless return to
ideals of tlie Middle Ages. They re
mind him of the Holy Roman Empire,
which never was, and should never be,
or still more they hark back to Pan-
Islamism the futile dream of the light
ing Turk.
There is nothing in aggrandizement
of race as such which appeals to the
American, the child of all European
races. That such races are ennobled
by conquest of lesser tribes and by
their undigested exploitation he does
not believe. To the American even
England's greatness does not exist on
her Indian Empire, but rather in spite
of it.
Within the last forty years there lias
grown up a new world in Europe and
in the range of civilization. The old
conception of the states of Europe
as opposed to one another and mutu
ally destructive must, pass away in the
broader aspects of civilization.
The growth of International life is
one of the most striking aspects of
this new relation. The extention of
travel, the spread of commerce, the
achievements of science, the exchanges
in education, all these tend to make
a great "melting pot" of the civilized
world. Neither in his business, in his
pleasures, nor in his intellectual pur
suits is the educated man anywhere
limited to any one country. All
rational human interests are con
nected by interlocking bonds of many
kinds, joining one people with another.
The hundreds of international con
gresses held every summer the world
over and covering almost every gen
eral interest of men is the strongest
possible evidence of this Interlocking,
and all this constitutes an inter
national bond not to be lightly severe.!.
A declaration of war between nations
is now little less than an attack on
civilization in all its most cherished
aspects, social, moral, as well as finan
cial. The lines of national policy
taken for granted half a century ago
are fast becoming impossible, their
very suggestion being ruinous.
I'c ideiicj toward < oix'ilintion
The influence of America tends to
wards international conciliation. It
involves the recognition of men as
men, each valued for what he is or
wlnit tie can do. Both of these deter
mined, of course, by bis blood and his
education, but not to be judged in ad
vance by any wholesale distinctions.
This is the spirit of the Interna
tionale, the common life and common
sympathy among civilized people, re
gardless of national boundaries. This
International life constitutes the final
and lasting basis of International
Peace.
As the history of America rests on
internationalism so is her social fab
ric built on democracy. Historically
her democracy has a double origin. Its
theory was French, its practice was
English. The French philosophers
furnished the one, the reaction against
British methods the other.
For inequality before the law is the
foundation of the polity of Great
Britain. Her constitution stands on
privilege. Her social customs rest on
precedence of classes, precedence of
individuals. England chooses her lords
and magnates, her patrons and tyrants
long before they are born. These be
long to her system of privilege by
which cities like Westminster, Shef
field, Davenport, Arundel, were so
long held, virtually tax-free, by men
whose ancestors received their land as
royal gifts or bought tlieni as cow
pastures. The law of favor rises above
the law of justice.

Hut men of the pioneer type, the
Roundhead, the Pilgrim, the Puritan,
the American have hated favor and
privilege and precedence of every
form. The toll of tin 1 rich and the dole
of the poor are alike offensive to them.
And this dislike of overreaching and of
coddling has passed over to their de
scendents. John Hay once said of the
people of the new state of Ohio. "They
looked to no one as their superiors,
and on none as their inferiors. They
knew 110 want they could not them
selves satisfy," and to this Senator
Bayard added the further note, "They
were too self-willed and independent
to allow any to rule over them but
t heniselves."
This in a word is the spirit of de
mocracy, of the democracy of the
pioneer if you like, but America is the
land of pioneers, and this fact still in-

11 uences all her acts unci her insti
tutions. Her people find their polit
ical ideals in an equal start with equal
opportunity, in equality before the
law, in equal access to education, in
equal access to the land, in equal ac
cess to legislation.
The nation is built on individuals
each responsible for himself. The
state is a mutual adjustment for their
collective benefit. The individual in
America does not live for the state, is
not the property of the state, the state
has no control over him except that
which the individual lias delegated. It
is no duty of the state to promote his
prosperity or the prosperity of his
group. The state is rather the umpire
which decides questions of justice, the
servant by which the needs of the
many are met by co-operation in so far
as these needs are general and conson
ant, with ideals of justice.
As the founders of our state were
frontiersmen scattered far and wide,
without cities, without corporations,
without great collective utilities, their
democracy became that of individual
ism. The demands of society, of col

leetive action, of national power were
little considered because such de
mands did not exist, and they have
never existed in the forms in which
hhirope knows them. And for this
reason, if for no other, the native
American lias not been strongly at
tracted to the various doctrines called
socialism in 13uropi. Like conditions
produce like results, and the growth
nl' industrialism with its successes and
its oppressions brings the same re
action as in Furope. But as a matter
of fact, those who take part in these
reactions are for the most part re
cent immigrants, whoso ideals of gov
ernment even in democracy are collec
tive, standing in strong contrast with
tho individualistic democracy native
to the soil.
Fifty year. - , ago, in lsC!, Fdouard
Laboulaye published bis renrirkable

hook "Paris <>n Amerique," (Paris in
America.) Its motive was to show
what a great city might become under
the conditions of freedom which pre
vailed in America. The America was
idealized of course. It, represented
the noblest ideals of free-born men,
rather than the actual America, the
forces of democracy must strive with
all the other forces extant in modern
civilization.
j The influence of this volume was
wide spread and long continued. It
was my fortune to know two men of
power, the one a Dane, the other a
Swiss who were drawn to America by
the charm of Laboulaye and who were
not disappointed. They found what
they sought, and this is a perennial
characteristic of the republic. Who
ever comes to America and with what
ever motive will find what he seeks.
If he remains long enough and has
penetration to look below the surface
I he will find America.
If one seeks religious freedom he
will find it. Our fathers provided for
that. Whatever form or type of re
ligious discipline he seeks he will find

accordingly, I>ut its discipline is vol
untary not enforced by the state. If
one would escape from all religious in
fluence he can do so in America. It is
for him to choose.
If one seeks for class distinction, for
domination of the great over the small,
hereditary or otherwise, he will find it
in personal and local only, not
wrought into the fabric of society. If
one would find privilege enthroned
even as in Europe he will find it in
America, just as powerful as in
Europe, Imi everywhere surrounded
by an equally powerful movement of
insurgency. If one would find greed,
selfishness, lust, vanity, tolerance,
anything which belongs to the dregs
of humanity, he will find it in America,
and it may be embodied in powerful
and defiant institutions. For freedom
guarantees only freedom, and the
meaning of freedom is opportunity.
In Laboulaye's work, the official
Napoleonic view, which "Paris in
America" takes as its point of depar
ture is thus expressed. "A society
without administration, without army,
without police, with the savage liberty
of praying, speaking, writing, acting
each in his fashion would not last a
quarter of an hour. It is the negation
of all these principles, of all the con
ditions of this civilization which
makes the unity of our French nation.
In constituting our administration,
hierarehal and centralized, the wis
dom of our fathers lias long since
raised France to the first rank and
shown to the French people that
Liberty is Obedience, then is our Glory
and our Force."
Ketcrse 01 Napoleon's Ideals
The distinctive character of the
American ideals reverses this. It is
the building up of a society in which
the government stands only for jus
tice. The state does not concern itself
with right, worship or wrong worship,
with right thinking or wrong think
ing, with writing truth or writing
falsehood, with right acts or words or
ceremonies, except as abuse of liberty
may infringe on the liberty of others.
"I'ne societe sans administration,
sans armee, sans gendarmes, avec
la liberie sauvage de prier. de ponser,
de parler, d'ecrire, d'agir. chacun a
sa facon ne durerait pas 1111 quart
d'heure. ("est la negation de tons ces
principcs, de toutes les conditions de
cette civilisation qui fait I'unite dp la
nation francaise. En constituant
notre administration bierarchis.ee et
centralised, la sagesse de 110s peres a
depuis longtemps eleve la France a
premier rang et appris aux Francais
<pie la liberte ("est l'obeissance. C'est
la notre glorie et notre force."
The state is not pious, benevolent,
virtuous, generous, because these per
sonal virtues, cannot be exercised by
officialism leads to their abuse.
Privilege to the poor means privilege
to the rich; privilege to the rich
means privilege to the poor, but al
ways the more powerful arm secures
the greater privilege. The essence of
democracy is that no one. rich or
poor should have a lease on privilege.
The wealth of the republic does not
rest on its great sweep of prairies,
its mines or its commerce. Its primal
source is in its free schools, and its
freedom of choice of trade or profes
sion. The results of this freedom
can be measured in money as well as
in power. Now as ever, "America
means opportunity," opportunity for
each man and woman to prepare for
the work he can do best, opportunity
for each to find his place in life, op


I'IIESIDKXT DAVID KTAitlt .lOUD \ X
portunity for the work that neeils to
be done to find the man who can do it.
It is for each man to plan his own
career, to make his rwn escape "from
status to contract." The democracy
of America can acknowledge no mas
sters save of its own creation and the
power that makes these is adequate
to set them aside.
While every conception In Europe
has its reflex in America, while every
idea of administration from absolut
ism to anarchy finds its earnest advo
cates, none of these seem likely to
displace the fundamental ideal of
democratic individualism developed by
the fathers of the republic. This ideal
was expressed by Lincoln and long be
fore him by Anstolle. It is the function
of the state to establish justice among
men and to perform those acts of com
mon necessity, contributing to the pre
servation and enjoyment of human life
which collective action can accomp
lish better than private effort. Fur
ther than that, democracy which is
simply enforced co-operation should
not go, and by this principle, that no
theory of government should be
pushed beyond the consideration of its
practical results, the republic escapes
the choice of any single one among
the hundreds of remedies for political
ills. There is 110 possibility of the
adoption of anarchism, socialism, col
lectivism or individualism or any
other system as an exclusive and ex
cluding finality. The people of Amer
ica are interested in actual results
rather than any form of logical neces
sity as a ground for political action.
The Test of Solidarity
The test of national solidarity may
be found in its freedom from the need
of force or authority in the conduct of
its affairs. Let us imagine if we can,
a catastrophe which should remove
from the United States every repre
sentative of coercive power, every offi
cial of whatever rank from the Presi
dent to the last notary public, every
representative of army or of navy, or
of church, every policeman, every
authority of whatever kind.
Such a loss might create wied
spread bewilderment or profound
sorrow. It would have no relation to
anarchy. Except among certain un
assimilated foreign populatipns in
large cities it would lead to no
violence, to no riots. The functions
of national life would go on as before.
One by one communities would come
together and provide for the election
of officers. It was said that the death
of Lincoln gave a new proof of how
"republics live, not by a single life
but the right divine of man, the mil
lion trained to be free."
I.ret us apply the same test to other
nations. 111 the France of Napoleon
111, we are assured that without force,
society would not endure "for a quar
ter of an hour." What would be the
result in Germany today? No one can
tell. The German is endlessly patient,
even under needless burdens. What
would he do, if burdens were all sud
denly thrown off, if "Strengstens Ver
boten," the motto of Prussian rule
were suddenly found to have no force
behind it?
The lesson of democracy is therefore
the lesson of the United States. It is
no new lesson. The people of the
United States are merely European
people who have had some additional
experience, have learned some things
in their travels, perhaps forgetting

Patterson Dana Nowell Tulare
Frank Herbert Richey Tipton, Ind.
Edga r Clarence Smith Azusa
Homer Roberts Spence Alameda
GRAPHIC ART
Ethel Ora Qardin Salinas
James Leo Duff Menlo Park
fErnest P»ruce Nelson San Jose
Louise Rider Watsonville
Stella Belle Sankey Clearfield, Pa.
Cordelia Madison Smith Venice
MATHEMATICS
Sydnie Aileen Gardner Orange
Dorothy Marian Hindle Del Mar
Julia R. Johnson Aberdeen, Wash.
Ralph Matthews Noble Galesburg, 111.
Margaret Marion Steele San Jose
Mary Hilda Volkmor Whittier
APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Grace Raymond Helmick Helena, Mont.
CHEMISTRY
George Henry Beurhaus Tacoma, Wash.
Hector Crandall San Francisco
fEdwin Reginald Harding San Bernardino
fPaul Mark Levy San Francisco
Hugh Harold Mosher San Jose
Robert Lindley Murray Palo Alto
+Zeno Ostenberg.. San Jose
Alfred Liles Phillips Santa Cruz
PHYSICS
Herbert Rovell Benham McKittrick
Francis Sitwell Pratt Ontario
Albert John Scholl, Jr Los Angeles
Ruth Sceley Los Gatos
Glen Miller Smyth Salt Lake City-, Utah
Guy Carleton Swan Lawrence, Mass.
Devi Dyal Virmani Bahawalpore, India
Waldo Ralph Waelty Santa Clara
William Irvin Weaver Colorado Springs, Colo.
BOTANY
Taylor Jay Blethen Portland, Ore.
Arthur Dickie Borden Palo Alto
Ollis Willard Newman Santa Barbara
Frank Jason Smiley Fresno
PHYSIOLOGY AND HISTOLOGY
Albert Gordon Bower Salt Lake City, Utah
Roscal Leroy Draper Arroyo Grande
Florence Edetha Dunlop Vale, Ore.
George Stevenson Holcman Riverside
Leonard R. Jenkins Ogden, Utah
Merton James Price San Francisco
Karl Ludwig Schaupp Santa Rosa
John Philip Stricklcr San Diego
fCharles Ernest von Geldern San Francisco
*Carleton Wolsey Washburne Sierra Madre
fClyde T. Wetmore Hollister
Robert William Wilcox Delta, Colo.
fElsa Will Rochester, N. Y.
ZOOLOGY
Clara Crosby Santa Cruz
Mary 1* isk Los Angeles
ENTOMOLOGY AND BIONOMICS
Leroy Childs Redlands
fWarren Locke Smith Ferndale
Verne Genoa Stevens Palo Alto
GEOLOGY AND MINING
Robert Edwin Anderson San Francisco
Harry Mayo Andreen Redwood City
fCarl Hugh Beal Palo Alto
Edward Burke Corbet San Francisco
Waldemar Fenn Dietrich San Francisco
Benjamin Edward Erb Chemainus, B. C.
Andrew Douglas Fyfe Oceanside
fWilliam Conrad Gehrmann Davenport, la.
Mortimer Louis Hall Pasadena
Harold Briggs Hannibal San Jose
Olaf Pitt Jenkins Stanford* University
Grover Berner Lantz Colton
tßernard Harold Lasky San Francisco
*Robcrt James McCann Pacific Grove
fHarvey Wright Parmelee Santa Barbara
*Alonzo William Peake Los Angeles
Arthur E. Remington Watertown, N. Y.
*Edwin John Stewart Los Angeles
CIVIL ENGINEERING
Charles Edward Beechcr Monrovia
Edwin Prcscott Bly Los Angeles
I von Clay Briggs San Francisco

some others equally important. In
like manner the choicest thoughts and
worthiest ideals of America are
thoughts and ideals long before treas
ured by the advanced minds of Europe.
Another lesson from America is that
of the effective federation. The United
States is composed of fortliy-eight
self-governing states, each an entity
within itself managing its own affairs,
with its own officials and its own
laws, controlled by the nation in those
interests only which it shares with
its sister states. Some of these states
are as populous and wealthy as the
Kingdom of Europe, but each is a
jurisdiction, not a power. None can
make war alone, either by force of
arms or force of tariffs. While there
is all machinery for settling disputes
between states such disputes never
arise, because no state has the right
to use its force to promote private
business.
Stilts Equality
The states in a federal union meet
as jurisdictions. The small ones have
no fear of the large ones, and those
not touching the sea suffer in no way
from their restricted position. A
"Power" hampered as is the state of
Illinois would chafe against its limita
tions, and its jingoes would talk of
fighting their way to the ocean. But
viewed as a jurisdiction, surrounded by
similar jurisdictions, the people of
Illinois have no consciousness of limi
tation.
And this should be our ultimate con
ception of a nation. Its boundary line
should represent merely the limit of
jurisdiction. That jurisdiction ceases
does not imply need of violence be
tween the people on the two sides nor
require fortification for the purpose
of repelling violence. The Canadian
boundary is an example of this meet
ing of nations not as powers but as
jurisdictions.
This four-thousand-mile line, rang
ing through all kinds of territory and
all sorts of conditions, disputed nearly
all the way "with all the brutal frank
ness common to blood relations," has
for nearly a hundred years not known
a fortress, a soldier, a warship or a
gun. It is a peace boundary, the limit
of the jurisdiction of one self-govern
ing nation, the beginning of that of
another. It lacks but one thing to
make it ideally perfect, the re
moval of the custom-house, the em
blem of national suspicion and greed,
the remnant, of the days when it was
considered good economics for a na
tion to "have its taxes paid by for
eigners."
Europe in Turmoil
Viewed as "great powers" devoted
to the exploitation of the wealth of
other regions the leading nations of
Europe are in constant turmoil. The
German empire for example, is hamp
ered on every side. Her scant sea
coast is split in two by the presence
of Denmark. Her German Rhine dis
charges itself through Holland. The
ports of Amsterdam, Rotterdam, Ant
werp and Ostend, geographically her's,
are occupied by alien people whom she
could crush out in a moment, were it
not. for the physical force of the rest
of Europe and the moral power of the
world. Of Poland, she has too much
or too little. A large part of the Ger
man people live in the alien empire of
Austro-Hungary and in the republic
of Switzerland, while after forty years
of possession, Germany scarcely owns
Alsace or Lorraine. The states are a
thorn in the side of the empire, a bur
den and a weakness, just so long as
their two millions of people are held in
semi-vassalhood by the rule of force.
A free republic of Alasace Lorraine, a
second Swithzerland, half-German,
half-French separating and joining
two great nations would be a strength
and an inspiration to both. The true
gateways of the Rhine held by the
power of blood and iron is a centre
of menace to civilization. For the
wrong done at the Treaty of Frank
fort forty years ago, Europe has had to
pay most dearly for it is around the
question of Alsace-Lorraine that half
the crushing armament of Europe has
been built up. She is hemmed in
everywhere by the scare of old strugg
les, to her perennial discomfort. For
this reason, she suffers from the
"Drang nach Osten," she seeks a road
to the Persian gulf, an empire over
seas, and every form of imperial ex
tension to lands "under the sun,"
which may for the moment seem
plausible or possible.
But Germany as a jurisdiction suf
fers none of these limitations. Her
powers are only those which are
needed for the people's good. They
are merely her public duties. It mat
ters noting that her sway is checked
on almost, every side before it reaches
the sea. Other jurisdictions inter
vene, and each of these looks after
the public needs of man, which are
mostly justice, conservation, educa
tion, sanitation, and peace. As one of
the "Great Powers" of the world, Ger
many (with her fellow states as well)
is a center of friction, injustice and
unrest.
"A Power" is u Menace.
As a jurisdiction Germany is busy
with profitable and constantly ad
vancing industries, with an admir
able system of education and exten
sive provision for all the people's
needs, and no enlargement of boun
daries could in the least increase her
usefulness, her wealth or her happi
ness. As "a power" Germany is a
menace to the well being of civiliza
tion as every other "power" of similar
nature must be in its degree For
the prosperity of every people de
pends on international peace, and
all power-manifestations are either
actual or potential war. War is a
form of world-sickness from which
every function of civilization suffers,
and most of all those bonds of com
mon thought and common interest
sumed up in internationalism. And
to the members of an international
state, German in blood and in sym
pathy as well as English, all these
destructive rivalries of state with
state seem mediaeval and unworthy.
There is, in fact, something primitive,
outworn and unprogressive in the
spectacle of a civilized nation com
posed of millions of clever people
trusting for its defense to forts and
ships. With all the resources of
business, of science, ef education, of
thought, to depend on force seems a
lazy, even cowardly, shirking of the
higher possibilities of national
strength. To be surrounded by armed
guards, "holding the drop" on all
Commercial rivals is not a lofty con
ception of a nations's greatness. This
attitude has been as disastrous to
England's own peace of mind as it has
been menacing to the world's welfare.
To escape from this condition is not
a matter of a day nor a generation. Tt
is not easy for America even to

Revoe Carlisle Briggs Pasadena
fFloyd Cromwell Brown Selma
fEdward James Cullen Gilroy
Harry Bascom Davis Pomona
Wilbur Harvey Doxsee Redwood City
Robert Francis Duryea Palo Alto
fClarence Bernard Goodwin Sunnyvale
fCharles Stewart Grace Rivera
John Stanley Grepe, Jr East Highlands
tNorman Marshall Ilalcombe San Francisco
George William Hawley Portland, Ore.
George Walter Hunt San Jose
Paul Eells Jeffers Los Angeles
William Aiken Laird Lindsay
Alexander Stuart Macdonald San Francisco
tßobert Patchen Miller Los Angeles
Maurice Everard Morrison Morgan Hill
fßoger Wolcott Olmsted Los Angeles
Chauncey Smith Elie, Manitoba, Canada
Thomas Joseph Spellman Colma
fßurroughs Agin Stephenson Los Altos
Harry George Todtmann Chicago, 111.
George Harlan Trask Los Angeles
Charles Ralph Tupper San Jose
Romney Leigh Vaughn San Francisco
Guss Valentine Wallach Boonville
Carlton Levi Wyant Montecito
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING
■fClarence P. Campbell Los Angeles
tWallace Rolland Finney...* Modesto
*Burdette Lord Hostettler Erie, Pa.
Kenneth Irving Marshall Los Angeles
tAugustus Mudge Sanborn Redlands
Cecil Stocker Simon Los Gatos
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
*Edward Niles Adam Melville, Mont.
Frank Edward Anderson Los Angeles
fClarence Cannon Argabrite Ventura
John Watson Fleming Armstrong....Fivemiletown, Tyrone, Ire.
Everett Morse Calderwood Palo Alto
Melville Nathaniel Clark Dayton, Me.
John Francis Cullen Gilroy
Walter Jennings Dodge Los Angeles
Charles Greenlaw Duffin Comas, Wash.
Harry Adolph Fore Campbell
Frank Julius Gleiss Los Angeles
Walter J. Hammond ! Grinncll, la.
Tomiichi Haraguchi Nagasaki, Japan
George Edward Holditch Orange
Edgar Alden Jackson Cupertino
Linford C. Lull, Jr Los Angeles
James Arthur Miller Hanford
Rea Cambridge Newman Santa Barbara
George Washington Poison Menlo Park
Gaylord Kenyon Snyder Los Angeles
fGiistav Wade Naples
George Ireland Wright Pasadena
BACHELOR OF LAWS
Jerome Devereaux Peters San Jose
Granville Numan Wood, Jr Blue Lake
MASTER OF ARTS
LATIN
Flora Anne Bagley Burlingame
fßuth Beard Modesto
Catherine Ida Birch Redlands
fAnna Shipley Cox San Jose
Mabel Harriett Usinger Berkeley
Malcolm Leland Yeary Los Angeles
GERMAN
Edward Vere Brewer Elyria, Ohio
Catharine Morris Cox San Jose
Lydia Lucilc Meyer . Milwaukee, Wis.
Clara Lydia Schaaf Fort Wayne, -Ind.
fElsie Louise Whittemore Alhambra
ENGLISH LITERATURE
Anais Julia Allen Pasadena
Walter Clyde Curry Gray-Court, S. C.
ENGLISH PHILOLOGY
Maude Cleveland Stanford University
EDUCATION
tWilliam Samuel Marten San Jose
Clarence Lucien Phelps Jamestown, Ky.
William Thomas Root, Jr Pasadena
William Roy Tanner Minneapolis, Minn.

emancipate herself from reactionary
influences in Europe. There are many
interests in a wealthy nation who find
an aid or an affinity in militarism.
Debt creates debt, and those inter
ested in spending band together
against reform.
These matters proceed by slow pro
gress, interrupted by reaction; we
are in a period of relapse at present,
when reactionary forces seem to be in
the ascendant. Hut this very fact with
its burdens and horrors may be count
ed on to turn the balance in the other
direction.
Neither will there be a formal fed
eration of nations in this era. In
deed federation in fact will come long
before it comes in name. A single
unified world-government with cen
tralized rule under one set of men at
some one place, is only a dream—and
not a cheerful dream at that. What
the world needs is more self-control,
more local responsibility not more
governmental machinery. Neverthe
less every step in removing injustice,
in eliminating sources of friction, in
extending common interests, as the
postol union, the telegraph union, in
ternational law, international police
duties, international conferences and
congresses, arbitration treaties a nd
other agreements—are steps in the di
rection of the passing of war. To this
end, three great contributing agencies
are: the growth of the popular con
science, the interlocking of personal
interests, and the ruinous expence
which the progress of science has
brought to every branch of the mili
tar art.
All this has its part in the great
movement towards common interna
tional life, "La Vie Internationale" of
the dreams of La Fontaine, a life
which shall make war impossible and
will, in time, do away with exploita
tions, with tariff barriers and with all
the products of that narrow nativism,
which considers only the purposes or
enrichment of the selfish few, the one
in-group against all the out-groups of
the world.
Value of Open Diplomacy
Another lesson which the United
States may teach is the value of open
diplomacy. A secret agreement of
any kind whatever. It was a warning
of Washington that his nation should
beware of Entangling Alliances. A
formal alliance is for the purpose of
making enemies, never of making
friends. Friendship among nations
rests on common interests, on the in
terlocking of minds, the interlocking
of trade.
In the United States a treaty can be
entered into only with the open and
public consent of the Senate. Every
international relation is therefore
open to the world. No minister, no
president, no group of men whatever
can secretly pledge the nation to any
line of action. No president, no cabi
net, no minister, no congress acting
alone can make any declaration of
public policy. For these reasons the
United States must stand outside the
tangled snare of concessions and intri
gues we call world politics. She must
play her games of diplomacy with
open hands. She cannot be the secret
friend of any other nation. She can
not be a secret enemy because all her
acts, friendly or hostile, are known to
all the world.
The secret treaty in the interest of
imperial spoliation is the bane of
Europe. It ties each foreign office to
the service of the most reckless and
greedy of its great exploiting inter
ests. It has reduced the chancelleries
of more than one nation to be nothing
more than the firm name under which
its exploiting corporations compass
their ends in Asia or in Africa.
The secret is a relic of the military
state. The civilzed world is still or
ganized on the mediaeval theory that
war is a natural function to he ex
pected in the normal course of events,
not a hideous inorau, physical;. and
financial catastrophe. la the old
theory as expounded by Machiavelli,
the king has no other business but
war. It is the duty of his ministers
to find weak places in the defenses of
other kings through which war may
be successful, and to find, after the
fact, excuses by which' war can be
justified. The secret treaty, the .con
cession to a friendly power, ithe. arti-.
ficial interference with a rival, —all
these belong to the days' of Ma<?hia
velli. If . all parties concerpe.4 ( |cojJ>ld :
come out.into the open, .Wihsre . t-het
United States is forced to stahd, we
should soon have an end to tneAttgld-
German struggle, of the rivalry be
tween the Triple Entente and the
Triple Alliance.
Outworn ideas ot' national glory, out
worn figures of.speech as tp national
purposes, outworn mediaevalism in
our -conception of the state.—all'these
find expression in the "secret treaty,"
the "entangling alliance," which is a'
chief obstacle in the way of the -con
ciliation of nations. ?>• -
Historically, the influence of Amer
ica has been exerted in opposition to
Imperialism and to infringement of
the great nations on the rights of the
sniall. This is the inception of the
Monroe Doctrine, which in spite of its
perversion and its wrong accentuation r
has protected Latin America from the
fate of Africa. That this should now
be a Pan-American, not njerely an.
American doctrine goes without say
ing. And it must never be allowed i.o
degenerate-into " a Dollar Diplomacy"
which would.reserve Tropical America
as a special "sphere of, .influence-' for
American exploitation,. For the true,
and final form of the Mojiuae.Doctrine
is found, in the Drago .Doctrine,. of the
republics of South Ameripa,, that tiie
forqe of . arms should. be used-ras.
an,instrument iu industiriul spoliation.
This the people of the United States
should adopt as• their-.own. « <
Principle Disregarded '
In a recent deciskm- of- arbitration;
the King 'of Swed'ant'laW down 'this
principle: that a nation "has 110
right to land- troops in .order-to pYe-'
serve the property or the rights of her
nationals.". This''lwinciple. ha,s '-beefr
disregarded in the •strangling of
Persia, the rape of Mongolia and of
Tibet, in the chronic robbery of
China, and in the annexation of Egypt, <
of Korea, uf Morocco and of Tripoli.
But it is for all that a just.-and honor
able principle, and it is disregarded
only when a nation, by virtue of super
ior strength or superior civilization
feels itself justified in taking posses
sion of another for its good, and inci
dentally for the commercial advant
age of its own exploitating interests.
It is true that the smaller nations of
the tropics are subject to violent
political disturbances. They have not
learned the value of liberty as regu
lated hjy law. Yet it is highly prob
able that not one in ten of these
periodical/ revolutions I's of spontan- 1
eous native origin. of them are
started for purposes of spoliation by

autside adventurer's and a large ma
jority are paid for by adventurers
'State. The Public School exists
everywhere at the public expense, and
belonging to one or more of the great
epinniarqia'ruatrojis tit', fheiear'th.. When."
'the"fi v nal' iriitli'Ts"known'"of unhappy
Mexico the responsibility for hfei' dis
(Mfer'sl will rest nht on'her martyred
president, ridr "on the' sol
"diers'of fortune by whose hands he
•fell, but on the men in New York or
in London perhaps,' whose nioiWy has
kept iliese revolutions going. Mexico,
with fatal riches of oil and gold, is not
tlie first nation to Ite torn asunder by
'conflicting ."sphere's of influence."
The. influence of the republic has
been always thrown against another
form of imperialism involved in the
phrase "Control of the Sea." America
has never claimed any such control
nor has she admitted the right to
others. It is a mediaeval idea going
back foiir hundred years to the time
when the great seas were divided be
tween Spain and Portugal. America
has stood for the open sea, the restric
tion of national jurisdiction to the
three-mile limit, the extermination of
piracy, and in iater years for the most
important doctrine of the immunity of
war. To make the high seas an open

HI STORY
Ella Wissie Beaver ...T. .Tulare
fEmrria Howse Kuno Palo Alto
George Lutes Righter '.Campbell
Francis Marion Russell .Los Angeles
MATHEMATICS
Rose Margaret Bennett »....San Diego
Amanda Westhold ..Quincy, 111:
CHEMISTRY
Alicje. .Ruth Bergcr San Jose
Elton Marion Hogg. v Saratoga
Charles Kirkton McWilliams San Joss
tWilliam John Van Sicklen Castle-ton, Ontario,,Canada
BOTANY
Charlotte Elliott Del Rapids, S. D.
BACTERIOLOGY
Frank Maltaner .Cincinnati, O.
ZOOLOGY
Josephine Louise Dows Randall Stanford University
ENTOMOLOGY
F rankie Willard Galexioo
GEOLOGY
Theodore Chapin., Los Angeles
Joseph Stanley Hook jjPerris ■
ENGINEER
CHEMICAL ENGINEERING
. Louis Wjlliam Pingree.-. ; Ogden-, Utah
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING
fDexter Simpson Kimball N. Y.
Lyman Stevenson King Oakland .
r *• . V <
JURIS DOCTOR
George Armand Ditz Stockton f-1
Maurice Timothy Dooling • Hollistter ,
fEmmet Ross Fertig Nobl.esvjlle, Ind.
fFrank Louis Guerena rs .. „Spnora
George Juan Hatfield ...Oakland-,
Frank Howard Hilton ; Portland, Ore.
Grant Holcomb San Bernardino^
Ignatius Martin Peckham tV| . San . Jose
Edmund Wright Pugh Los. (Angeles..
Alfred'Worcester Robertson Saflt? Ba,rbru:a ..
Chester Harvey Warlow : . r ., . ( Fresno,
Herbert Eustace White Saotamento^.
tFrederick feertram Wood i. . Alto.
* September 6, 1912
fjanuary 10, 1013 "O '?t it

highway-to be tr.a.ver?ed , ( afc ( anytime,-
in absolute--safety, by any, vessel what
ever would-gp/t'ar away
witji international..waff,.-and iSitill ftWH
ther in ren^.vi!),£..tlve- and dnv<-
gerous burden of naval protectioni»'l£;
all military operations.- at. sea couidibe
confined to the <oa,nnon shot.
from the. shore, the- original motive
of the three-mile limit of. jurisdiction,
it would represent one of ,the most
practical triumphs of civilization.- Ttfe
nations should join to make the ocean
safe, not to fill it with floating fort
resses designed t tp. protect merchant
ships from robbery by the very per
sons with whom they trade.
Still another lesson from. America is
one in which, we all agree; the divorce
of religion from political control and
therefore from the,domain of politics.
Absolute religions freedom exists .in
America because the state assumes
no relation of any kind to religious
corporations as such, So long as these
do not interfere with the freedom of
soul or body of men not. belonging to
them, their acts do not concern the
state. And on no, one policy is there
more firm agreement.in America* than
in the absolute separation of Church
nowhere can any sect or gpoup of seets
claim any dominating relation in re

gard to It. To the average American
the strife over Church properties and
Church interests so real in Europe
seem incomprehensible. The Church,
any church, is in every way better oif
for separation from the government.
Whatever achievement; whatever pro
gress it may make is its own, and this
progress is solid because it involves,
no ulterior political end.
Connected with the freedom of the
church is the freedom of the people
from other forms of paternalism. The
state becomes benevolent only when it
lias failed to be just. It allows special
opportunities to individuals only
where it has denied opportunity to
men at large.
The "old-age pension" is a conven
ient'illustration,.'lt has been justly
compared to- the. free pass homeward
granted to the human wrecks who
have lost their all in the. gambling
rooms of-Monte Carlo. It is the shill
ing given to the man run over by my
lord's automobile.
In a better system he would not have
been run over. He would not have
lost his money in a vile resort, lie
would not have needed an outside
pittance to carry him through old age.
Host Workers Died in War
The old-age pension exists in Eng
land as a convenient balm for inequal
ity and injustice. The best of her
workers have died in her wars/ leav
ing a weaker stock to breed from.
These have grown' up unskilled, in de
fault of the shools that make men
strong. They have grown up in the
atmosphere of the public house, sod
den with lust and beer and whisky.
They have lost the opportiiniy tljat
should be theirs, and at the end their
jfellows must be taxed to feed tliem.
The tragedy of the East End of Lon
don is no normal part of the tragedy
of Life. It is no part of the normal
America. It is no part of a nation
which has given opportunity.
Brit'in America a' new country, fresh,
unspoiled, full of life and hope, it is
possible to hctt'd' government" to its
rigid purpose, to develop opportunity
by the elimination of privilege, teacfy,.
men to lean' not on' government but
on themselves, and to aid by'fraternal '
giving those who have fallen in. tbg
prang 1 ; not "to weaken by unearned
public money those who are falling but
who can be made to stand, 'tfie wav
Up it i '">• vtc.
t)t the transgressor is hard and we
not make it eapier'ff we could;
|We' could not if we would'. To. give a..
plkh'a chance to'rise,' i'.s to allow him'
hlfbthe choice t<>Tali:" ' *';•"
1 is ! •?; . " *
foii.fession of Failure , '
■ "Tho old-age pension" .is, so- far as 1
it goes, a confession of failure of de- ■
jnocracy,. Except as a measure of'"
e |1 £r-fie.pcy, l Jts real purpose in Eng
land, it has no justification in good '
government. Clean up the. social at
mosphere, restore to the people, what ■
is rightfully theirs, and they will care, 1
rare accidents .excepted, for their own
old age.
in America tlie struggle, between '
labor and capital can never assume
the form it has in Europe. In a gov
ei nment which stands for justice, and
which is in no way occupied with
making money for its people, nor from
its People, nor in supporting exploiting
intei ests in other lauds, there is uo
visable necessity for universal col
lective ownership. Where classes do
not leally exist there is no pertinence
in the artificial distinctions of aristoc
racy, proletariat and bourgeoisie
which have been so laboriously
brought over from Europe. If these*
distinctions exist, most of us in Amer
ica belong to one single class, that of
the bourgeoisie.
There exist in America as elsewhere,
vast fortunes, disproportionate to the
ability or the efforts of those who con
trol them. But their history has been
of short duration. They are not leg
acies from an unjust past. Their or
igin belongs to the present. It is
mainly individual. Great luck, great
skill or ingeniously managed privilege
stands behind each of them. By the
same means as in Europe, by co
operation through interlocking direc
torates, these great fortunes have
been made to stand together and thus
by a process of financial suction to
build up fortunes still greater. But
one most important difference exists.
The national government, in theory
and for the most in fact, stands aloof
from these combinations. The con
trol of public affairs, even of financial
matters is beyond their permanent
reach. Their influence on foreign
diplomacy is limited because no secret
influence can control, and the power
of money for evil is mostly lost in
publicity.
Property May Rule
In all their operations, they are sur
rounded by an alert and in the long
run victorious opposition of democ
racy. In America property may rule,
but only for a time. In the earlier
•centuries of Europe, the period of
Absolutism, when monarchy was a
political power not a function of so
ciety, it was, of course, true that prop
erty ruled. But it was the ruler who
had the property. It was his by force
of position. Not until the money lend
ers of the last century secured the
strangle hold on the nations of
Europe was this condition brought to
an end.
Then again, property ruled, but it
was not that the King and the nobles
held the property. Property held
them, and in Europe today it is money
that rules, and it rules King and
peasant alike, for everything el3e
hinges on the Imperial Explotation of
foreign lands.
In America, this is true in a degree,
but the rule of money has its visible
limits. For the United States belongs
to its people.
"Dollar Diplomacy"
While Europe generally, the alliance
between financial interests and the
government is open and avowed, such
•connections in America have proved
fatal to political leaders and to polit
ical parties. The methods by which
the "powers of Europe" through their
foreign offices bolster up adventures
in foreign lands, could not be used in
America. The diplomacy of persua
sion, threats or force of arms in the
interest of private ventures would be
impossible here. The people might
consent to "Dollar Diplomacy" but
•only for a time and until its nature
is understood. The recent, repudia
tion of our relation to the "Six Power
Loan' to China will serve as a case in
point.
And here again we must admit that
out democratic conception of govern
ment has to struggle for acceptance
in America. The protective tariff in
theory and in practice is a flat viola
tion of its principles. Tt is a flat
violation of the spirit of the American
■constitution. It is privilege pure and
simple granted to the few by the
many, in the belief that in the long
run the many would profit by it. Its

purpose was to diversify industries by
letting the farmer help pay the ex
penses of the manufacturer. It has
just that effect, and the farmer and
laborer are becoming increasingly
discontented with its burdens and the
inequalities before the law which are
part and parcel of its operations.
In America, the army and navy,
though the latter has grown beyound
all reason through the rivalry from
England and Germany, still represent
a democratic ideal. We still hold to
the thought that our officers are not
rulers but servants of the people.
Our military element stands near
the parting of the ways, for all offi
cialism tends to aggrandize itself,
most of all that which is associated
with pomp and with patriotism. Mili
tarism for its own sake belongs to the
state in whoch property rules. "It
furnishes," says John A. Hobson, "a
profitable support to certain strong
vested interests. It is a decorative
element in social life and above all, it
is necessary to keep down the
pressure of the forces of internal
reform."
>o Room for Militarism
The ideals of Militarism and Democ
racy can never coexist. And this na
tion is too far given over to democ
racy ever to do more than dally with
the military ideal. In a nation that
knows no caste, and has no aristioc
racy other than temporary and self
selected, no military traditions will
ever be permanent. There can never
be a warrior caste holding special
privilege or special authority.
As a people, we of the United States
are too rich in resources of wealth, of
education and of intelligence to be
controlled by influences of militarism.
And thus and for the same reasons, in
the republic of America, the state ex
ists for the man, not the man for the
state. This is the fundamental differ
ence between the Eighteenth Century
and Twentieth. And let us speed the
day when it may be said not only that
"America means Opportunity" but
that the same hopeful word may be
spoken of Germany and England and
France and Russia and of all the na
tions in the sisterhood of civilization.
Lord Acton thus sums up the move
ment of the history of civilization:
"It is by the combined efforts of the
weak made under compulsion to re
sist the reign of force and constant
wrong that in the rapid change but
slow progress of four hundred years
liberty has been preserved and se
cured and extended and finally under
stood."
And as America comes to under
stand her own message of democracy,
internationalism and peace, she will
carry this understanding back to the
motherland of Europe.
Within the last two months Presi
dent Wilson and Mr. Bryan have
planned a most practical and effective
means of bringing American influence
to bear on the problems of World
peace.
The end in view is to relegate war
to a position of last resort in times
of international difference, to place
soldiers and dreadnaughts in the
background—not in the front of na
tional movement.
The essence of this American policy
is that in case of friction between
nations, the matter be placed for six
months in the hands of a joint high
Commission of investigation, chosen
in part from the contending nations,
the majority from friendly neutrals.
These- for six months shall study the
question at issue, neither nation in the

meantime demonstrating, mobilizing
or increasing the armament, until the
final report is made. After this each
nation is free to choose conciliation,
concession, compromise, arbitration
or war. And with six months to think
it over there will be no war. Wars are
waged for greed, for politics, or be
cause the mob has been stirred by
senseless speech or reckless journal
ism. And in many cases this reckless
journalism has been carefully cal :u
--lated and fully paid for by those in
terested in the sale of the accessories
of war.
The treaty of arbitration will natur
ally follow on the treaty for investi
gation. Courts will naturally supple
ment results of friendly offices. But
the agreement for friendly conference
comes first and is for the present the
more important. The Treaty of Arbi
tration is most valuable, — not as
preventing war, for a nation bent on
war, if there is such a case, will not
stop to agree to arbitrate. The world
is finally ruled by public opinion. Ar
bitration treaties clinch public opinion
and hold it to its duty.
The present decade has been char
acterized by needless, costly and
brutal wars, the result not of actual
conditions of today, but of blunders
and crimes committed in the past.
Wars do not spring up afresh in our
civilization. They spring from old
wars whose seeds were not destroyed
by peace.
Rut, however, dark the present out
look may seem with half the coined
money of the world spent each year
on war and war's accessories, the far
outlook is most promising. The cruel
horror of the Balkan war, the waste of
armed peace and frustrate war
throughout the civilized world, — all
these make powerfully for peace, for
real peace — the Peace of Law and
Trust, and not the Peace of Force.
And just now is the time when
American influence can be most defi
nitely crystallized and made effective.
And we are thankful that we have in
the seats of Authority at Washington
men who definitely work for peace
and whom war and war's fripperies
do not dazzle nor attract.
Two hundred and seven students were awarded the Bachelor of
Arts Degree by President David Stu rr Jordan in the Assembly Hull tills
morning. Two were granted the Bachelor of Laws Degree, while
thirty-five were given the Master of Arts Degree. In addition to these
the Academic Council also awarded three Engineer, thirteen .luris Doc
tor of Philosophy Degrees. The Co miuencemnet address preceded the
presenting of the sheepskins, *Th e Conquest of Europe by America,"
wsis the subject of the strong address delivered by Doctor Jordan.

I wish this morning to say a serious
word to you as citizens of the great
republic and as future leaders in its
thought and action. I wish you to
think earnestly of the part American
influence must play in the world his
tory of our century. It is for us to
help cure the accumulated evils of
the older civilization. Those men in
Europe who look furthest into the
future hope for the salvation of
Europe through ideals brought back
from practical service in America.
One of these. Senator La Fontaine of
Brussels, has given me my title as the
expression of the hope of his life,
"The Conquest of Europe by America."
I hasten to say that 1 do not mean
conquest by force of arms, for 1 have
no interest in such conquests and no
belief that victories thus won result in
any permanent good to any nation.
Nor do I mean financial conquests,
the floating of imperial loans or the
permeation of any part of European
business by financiers from the New
World. Still less do I celebrate a
shoppers' contest on the Place de
I'Opera or among the dazzling bar
gains of the Hon Marche. Nor does
the trail of American tourists who
cross with gold the palms of Europe's
servitors, all the way from Piccadilly
to the Pyramids awaken in me any
pride of nation or of race. The only
permanent conquest is that of ideas.
America stands, has always stood, for
two ideals from which she cannot
escape, for they are fundamental in
her origin and in her growth. These
are internationalism and democracy,
and these ideals being invincible
must conquer America, and through
her, reconquer Europe. And as both
are incompatible with war, their final
triumph marks the end of spoliation,
of and of that relation be
tween nations which breeds suspicion
and hatred. The conquest of the
world by the ideals of International
ism and Democracy marks the coming
of universal peace.
In the address at Baltimore in 1911,
Henri La Fontaine of Brussels, the
veteran prophet of International Life,
used these striking words.
"Emigration perhaps more than
war has deprived the old, historic
countries of their most energetic and
fittest ones to build the progressive
and wealthy people you are on this side
of the Atlantic. You are for us
Europeans, the beloved Brotherland,
Do not forget that Europe is always

and will still remain for you the be
loved Motherland. Europe is now for
America what Greece was for Europe.
Europe has liberated (Ireece. Amer
ica has to liberate Europe from its
burdens, its prejudices, its hatreds.
It is your duty, it is your highest duty
to reconcile outside your borders the
people you have reconciled within
your borders. For indeed the Amer
ican people is at present the true
international people. It is the elect
people which alone can further inter
nationalism and can transform all of
the people of the Earth into a family
of nations, a brotherhood of men, an
international people." "For coloniza
tion is not mainly done by men and by
capital, but also by ideas, by example,
by experiment."
Not Always True to Ideals
We may freely admit in the begin
ning that America has not always been
true to her own ideals, and that she
has not always clearly seen her own
future. She has had her own lapses,
moral and social, some of these be
cause of associations with Europe and
through imitation of glories alien to
her history. If she had been true to
herself she would never have known
a single foreign war. She has no part in
those greeds and jealousies of money
or of race which still keep up turmoil
in Europe. Her war with Spain with
its eagerness for exploitation, its
tinsel imperialism and its pride of
participation in "world politics" rep
resents the worst of these lapses, and
its evil effects are long in passing.
But though the inception of this affair
was European in method, its contin
uance has been characteristically
American. Instead of exploitation, we
have brought to the Philippines educa
tion and sanitation. We have expend
ed on them a hundred times what we
have received, and if ever imperilism
can be respectable we have made it so.
Another false movement has been
in the building of warships and forts
in America. This lacks the motive
for similar extravagances in Europe,
because the peace of the new world is
no where threatened. But with us as
everjwhere the military spirit grows
with the money spent on it. The more
mouths fed by the State the greater
the clamor for the feeding of still
more. We have also to reckon with
the desire for giant decoration, for
big navies for sheer bigness' sake, the
feeling that this is the richest and'
most progressive nation on the globe,

and that as such she can beat old
Europe at her own game even though
that game be not worth the candle.
But with all lapses and delinquin
cies the fact of internationalism and
the ideal of democracy have been and
must always remain with the United
States, and from the United States
these ideals will react with greater
and greater force on the thoughts and
deeds of Europe.
Internationalism is the heritage of
America, not of choice at first, but cf
necessity. She has perforce grown
up with this ideal, because no other
was possible. She became the cosmo
politan nation of the world because
of her complex origin and with this
origin she could be nothing else. In
a new civilization, in the struggles of
the frontier each man is rated for
what he is worth. Under these condi
tions no one cares for the petty pre
cedences of rank or race. What a
man can do in the next twenty-four
hours outvalues any question as to
who were his ancestors.
All Hate Dies
On a railway train not long ago
some one was overheard to say: "This
is the land where all hate dies. My
father was German; my mother was
French. What do I care for all that?
I am an American. The old hatreds
and rivalries are nothing to me."
America was English, first. In lang
uage, in spirit, in conscience and in
government it is England which domi
nates. For the English race, above
all others, with its adaptation for co
operation and for compromise is the
builder of free states.
It was the chosen among the Eng
lishmen of three centuries ago who
founded the germ colonies of Virginia
and Massachusetts May. In the fol
lowing years it has been the like
minded from their own nation and
from others who have crossed the seas
to enter into their work.
The first who came were the bold,
the free, the self-ruling, the pleasure
scorning element of English life. They
came to escape from the state
church and the church-state, that they
might worship in their own fashion
and according to dictates of their indi
vidual consciences.
They detested the law of primogeni
ture which thrust the spirit of pre
cedence into the bosom of every fam
ily. They abhorred the law of entail
which burdened the land with the
curse of privilege even to unborn gen
erations.
They had caught from France the

spirit of liberty, equality, fraternity,
but as befits the calmer blood of the
north, they gave this spirit a con
structive interpretation, and the idea
of equality was to them especially rich
in practical results. Equality before
the law, equal access to land, to edu
cation, to professions and trades,
. equal access to legislat ion, each of
these conceptions broadened out into
the spirit of democracy.
And after England came to other
nations of Europe, each with its own
part and in its own degree giving its
contingent of free-born men, the ad
| mixture of blood gave strength and
! versatility to the rising nation.
But withal, the dominant note is
English still, with as many diver-
I gences from the England of today as
j from the England of the Stuarts.
In later years other immigration has
come, not alone the bold in search of
adventure, of new homes and new free
doms, but the weak and the oppressed,
"the beaten men of the beaten races,"
who llee from war taxation in search
of living wages and of daily bread.
But all these are cast into the same
melting pot and in most of them there
arises a clear response to the call of
free institutions.
In this melting pot of America, all
the old racial antipathies disappear
and all hereditary hatreds. There is
110 final distinction of British or Ger
j man, of French or Italian, of Spanish
|or Slav, of Dutch or Scandinavian,
!or of Jew or Gentile. The average
| American is as cosmopolitan in origin
j and relationship as is royalty in
Europe, though for a different set of
| reasons. But in America there is 110
[ distinction of common or noble, of
high or low, of aristocracy, bour
j geoisie or proletariat except as these
| are artificially emphasized in the in
dustrial strife we have inherited from
Eu rope.
To the international mind of Amer
ica, there seems 110 need or pertinence
to an Anglo-Saxon alliance as against
any other people. In so far as such
alliance is desirable or humanly pos
sible it exists already in a common
sympathy and a common literature, ft
would lie weakened by a stated agree
ment of the Anglo-Saxon group to
swell each others Meets with dread
naughts. The true bond of Union of
the Greater Britain involves no rup
ture with the Greater Germany, or the
Greater France or the Greater Scandi
navia to which we in America likewise
claim allegiance.
To the American, "Pan-Germanism,"
Pan-Slavism," as lie hears these ex
pounded seem a meaningless return to
ideals of tlie Middle Ages. They re
mind him of the Holy Roman Empire,
which never was, and should never be,
or still more they hark back to Pan-
Islamism the futile dream of the light
ing Turk.
There is nothing in aggrandizement
of race as such which appeals to the
American, the child of all European
races. That such races are ennobled
by conquest of lesser tribes and by
their undigested exploitation he does
not believe. To the American even
England's greatness does not exist on
her Indian Empire, but rather in spite
of it.
Within the last forty years there lias
grown up a new world in Europe and
in the range of civilization. The old
conception of the states of Europe
as opposed to one another and mutu
ally destructive must, pass away in the
broader aspects of civilization.
The growth of International life is
one of the most striking aspects of
this new relation. The extention of
travel, the spread of commerce, the
achievements of science, the exchanges
in education, all these tend to make
a great "melting pot" of the civilized
world. Neither in his business, in his
pleasures, nor in his intellectual pur
suits is the educated man anywhere
limited to any one country. All
rational human interests are con
nected by interlocking bonds of many
kinds, joining one people with another.
The hundreds of international con
gresses held every summer the world
over and covering almost every gen
eral interest of men is the strongest
possible evidence of this Interlocking,
and all this constitutes an inter
national bond not to be lightly severe.!.
A declaration of war between nations
is now little less than an attack on
civilization in all its most cherished
aspects, social, moral, as well as finan
cial. The lines of national policy
taken for granted half a century ago
are fast becoming impossible, their
very suggestion being ruinous.
I'c ideiicj toward < oix'ilintion
The influence of America tends to
wards international conciliation. It
involves the recognition of men as
men, each valued for what he is or
wlnit tie can do. Both of these deter
mined, of course, by bis blood and his
education, but not to be judged in ad
vance by any wholesale distinctions.
This is the spirit of the Interna
tionale, the common life and common
sympathy among civilized people, re
gardless of national boundaries. This
International life constitutes the final
and lasting basis of International
Peace.
As the history of America rests on
internationalism so is her social fab
ric built on democracy. Historically
her democracy has a double origin. Its
theory was French, its practice was
English. The French philosophers
furnished the one, the reaction against
British methods the other.
For inequality before the law is the
foundation of the polity of Great
Britain. Her constitution stands on
privilege. Her social customs rest on
precedence of classes, precedence of
individuals. England chooses her lords
and magnates, her patrons and tyrants
long before they are born. These be
long to her system of privilege by
which cities like Westminster, Shef
field, Davenport, Arundel, were so
long held, virtually tax-free, by men
whose ancestors received their land as
royal gifts or bought tlieni as cow
pastures. The law of favor rises above
the law of justice.

Hut men of the pioneer type, the
Roundhead, the Pilgrim, the Puritan,
the American have hated favor and
privilege and precedence of every
form. The toll of tin 1 rich and the dole
of the poor are alike offensive to them.
And this dislike of overreaching and of
coddling has passed over to their de
scendents. John Hay once said of the
people of the new state of Ohio. "They
looked to no one as their superiors,
and on none as their inferiors. They
knew 110 want they could not them
selves satisfy," and to this Senator
Bayard added the further note, "They
were too self-willed and independent
to allow any to rule over them but
t heniselves."
This in a word is the spirit of de
mocracy, of the democracy of the
pioneer if you like, but America is the
land of pioneers, and this fact still in-

11 uences all her acts unci her insti
tutions. Her people find their polit
ical ideals in an equal start with equal
opportunity, in equality before the
law, in equal access to education, in
equal access to the land, in equal ac
cess to legislation.
The nation is built on individuals
each responsible for himself. The
state is a mutual adjustment for their
collective benefit. The individual in
America does not live for the state, is
not the property of the state, the state
has no control over him except that
which the individual lias delegated. It
is no duty of the state to promote his
prosperity or the prosperity of his
group. The state is rather the umpire
which decides questions of justice, the
servant by which the needs of the
many are met by co-operation in so far
as these needs are general and conson
ant, with ideals of justice.
As the founders of our state were
frontiersmen scattered far and wide,
without cities, without corporations,
without great collective utilities, their
democracy became that of individual
ism. The demands of society, of col

leetive action, of national power were
little considered because such de
mands did not exist, and they have
never existed in the forms in which
hhirope knows them. And for this
reason, if for no other, the native
American lias not been strongly at
tracted to the various doctrines called
socialism in 13uropi. Like conditions
produce like results, and the growth
nl' industrialism with its successes and
its oppressions brings the same re
action as in Furope. But as a matter
of fact, those who take part in these
reactions are for the most part re
cent immigrants, whoso ideals of gov
ernment even in democracy are collec
tive, standing in strong contrast with
tho individualistic democracy native
to the soil.
Fifty year. - , ago, in lsC!, Fdouard
Laboulaye published bis renrirkable

hook "Paris <>n Amerique," (Paris in
America.) Its motive was to show
what a great city might become under
the conditions of freedom which pre
vailed in America. The America was
idealized of course. It, represented
the noblest ideals of free-born men,
rather than the actual America, the
forces of democracy must strive with
all the other forces extant in modern
civilization.
j The influence of this volume was
wide spread and long continued. It
was my fortune to know two men of
power, the one a Dane, the other a
Swiss who were drawn to America by
the charm of Laboulaye and who were
not disappointed. They found what
they sought, and this is a perennial
characteristic of the republic. Who
ever comes to America and with what
ever motive will find what he seeks.
If he remains long enough and has
penetration to look below the surface
I he will find America.
If one seeks religious freedom he
will find it. Our fathers provided for
that. Whatever form or type of re
ligious discipline he seeks he will find

accordingly, I>ut its discipline is vol
untary not enforced by the state. If
one would escape from all religious in
fluence he can do so in America. It is
for him to choose.
If one seeks for class distinction, for
domination of the great over the small,
hereditary or otherwise, he will find it
in personal and local only, not
wrought into the fabric of society. If
one would find privilege enthroned
even as in Europe he will find it in
America, just as powerful as in
Europe, Imi everywhere surrounded
by an equally powerful movement of
insurgency. If one would find greed,
selfishness, lust, vanity, tolerance,
anything which belongs to the dregs
of humanity, he will find it in America,
and it may be embodied in powerful
and defiant institutions. For freedom
guarantees only freedom, and the
meaning of freedom is opportunity.
In Laboulaye's work, the official
Napoleonic view, which "Paris in
America" takes as its point of depar
ture is thus expressed. "A society
without administration, without army,
without police, with the savage liberty
of praying, speaking, writing, acting
each in his fashion would not last a
quarter of an hour. It is the negation
of all these principles, of all the con
ditions of this civilization which
makes the unity of our French nation.
In constituting our administration,
hierarehal and centralized, the wis
dom of our fathers lias long since
raised France to the first rank and
shown to the French people that
Liberty is Obedience, then is our Glory
and our Force."
Ketcrse 01 Napoleon's Ideals
The distinctive character of the
American ideals reverses this. It is
the building up of a society in which
the government stands only for jus
tice. The state does not concern itself
with right, worship or wrong worship,
with right thinking or wrong think
ing, with writing truth or writing
falsehood, with right acts or words or
ceremonies, except as abuse of liberty
may infringe on the liberty of others.
"I'ne societe sans administration,
sans armee, sans gendarmes, avec
la liberie sauvage de prier. de ponser,
de parler, d'ecrire, d'agir. chacun a
sa facon ne durerait pas 1111 quart
d'heure. ("est la negation de tons ces
principcs, de toutes les conditions de
cette civilisation qui fait I'unite dp la
nation francaise. En constituant
notre administration bierarchis.ee et
centralised, la sagesse de 110s peres a
depuis longtemps eleve la France a
premier rang et appris aux Francais
<pie la liberte ("est l'obeissance. C'est
la notre glorie et notre force."
The state is not pious, benevolent,
virtuous, generous, because these per
sonal virtues, cannot be exercised by
officialism leads to their abuse.
Privilege to the poor means privilege
to the rich; privilege to the rich
means privilege to the poor, but al
ways the more powerful arm secures
the greater privilege. The essence of
democracy is that no one. rich or
poor should have a lease on privilege.
The wealth of the republic does not
rest on its great sweep of prairies,
its mines or its commerce. Its primal
source is in its free schools, and its
freedom of choice of trade or profes
sion. The results of this freedom
can be measured in money as well as
in power. Now as ever, "America
means opportunity," opportunity for
each man and woman to prepare for
the work he can do best, opportunity
for each to find his place in life, op


I'IIESIDKXT DAVID KTAitlt .lOUD \ X
portunity for the work that neeils to
be done to find the man who can do it.
It is for each man to plan his own
career, to make his rwn escape "from
status to contract." The democracy
of America can acknowledge no mas
sters save of its own creation and the
power that makes these is adequate
to set them aside.
While every conception In Europe
has its reflex in America, while every
idea of administration from absolut
ism to anarchy finds its earnest advo
cates, none of these seem likely to
displace the fundamental ideal of
democratic individualism developed by
the fathers of the republic. This ideal
was expressed by Lincoln and long be
fore him by Anstolle. It is the function
of the state to establish justice among
men and to perform those acts of com
mon necessity, contributing to the pre
servation and enjoyment of human life
which collective action can accomp
lish better than private effort. Fur
ther than that, democracy which is
simply enforced co-operation should
not go, and by this principle, that no
theory of government should be
pushed beyond the consideration of its
practical results, the republic escapes
the choice of any single one among
the hundreds of remedies for political
ills. There is 110 possibility of the
adoption of anarchism, socialism, col
lectivism or individualism or any
other system as an exclusive and ex
cluding finality. The people of Amer
ica are interested in actual results
rather than any form of logical neces
sity as a ground for political action.
The Test of Solidarity
The test of national solidarity may
be found in its freedom from the need
of force or authority in the conduct of
its affairs. Let us imagine if we can,
a catastrophe which should remove
from the United States every repre
sentative of coercive power, every offi
cial of whatever rank from the Presi
dent to the last notary public, every
representative of army or of navy, or
of church, every policeman, every
authority of whatever kind.
Such a loss might create wied
spread bewilderment or profound
sorrow. It would have no relation to
anarchy. Except among certain un
assimilated foreign populatipns in
large cities it would lead to no
violence, to no riots. The functions
of national life would go on as before.
One by one communities would come
together and provide for the election
of officers. It was said that the death
of Lincoln gave a new proof of how
"republics live, not by a single life
but the right divine of man, the mil
lion trained to be free."
I.ret us apply the same test to other
nations. 111 the France of Napoleon
111, we are assured that without force,
society would not endure "for a quar
ter of an hour." What would be the
result in Germany today? No one can
tell. The German is endlessly patient,
even under needless burdens. What
would he do, if burdens were all sud
denly thrown off, if "Strengstens Ver
boten," the motto of Prussian rule
were suddenly found to have no force
behind it?
The lesson of democracy is therefore
the lesson of the United States. It is
no new lesson. The people of the
United States are merely European
people who have had some additional
experience, have learned some things
in their travels, perhaps forgetting

Patterson Dana Nowell Tulare
Frank Herbert Richey Tipton, Ind.
Edga r Clarence Smith Azusa
Homer Roberts Spence Alameda
GRAPHIC ART
Ethel Ora Qardin Salinas
James Leo Duff Menlo Park
fErnest P»ruce Nelson San Jose
Louise Rider Watsonville
Stella Belle Sankey Clearfield, Pa.
Cordelia Madison Smith Venice
MATHEMATICS
Sydnie Aileen Gardner Orange
Dorothy Marian Hindle Del Mar
Julia R. Johnson Aberdeen, Wash.
Ralph Matthews Noble Galesburg, 111.
Margaret Marion Steele San Jose
Mary Hilda Volkmor Whittier
APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Grace Raymond Helmick Helena, Mont.
CHEMISTRY
George Henry Beurhaus Tacoma, Wash.
Hector Crandall San Francisco
fEdwin Reginald Harding San Bernardino
fPaul Mark Levy San Francisco
Hugh Harold Mosher San Jose
Robert Lindley Murray Palo Alto
+Zeno Ostenberg.. San Jose
Alfred Liles Phillips Santa Cruz
PHYSICS
Herbert Rovell Benham McKittrick
Francis Sitwell Pratt Ontario
Albert John Scholl, Jr Los Angeles
Ruth Sceley Los Gatos
Glen Miller Smyth Salt Lake City-, Utah
Guy Carleton Swan Lawrence, Mass.
Devi Dyal Virmani Bahawalpore, India
Waldo Ralph Waelty Santa Clara
William Irvin Weaver Colorado Springs, Colo.
BOTANY
Taylor Jay Blethen Portland, Ore.
Arthur Dickie Borden Palo Alto
Ollis Willard Newman Santa Barbara
Frank Jason Smiley Fresno
PHYSIOLOGY AND HISTOLOGY
Albert Gordon Bower Salt Lake City, Utah
Roscal Leroy Draper Arroyo Grande
Florence Edetha Dunlop Vale, Ore.
George Stevenson Holcman Riverside
Leonard R. Jenkins Ogden, Utah
Merton James Price San Francisco
Karl Ludwig Schaupp Santa Rosa
John Philip Stricklcr San Diego
fCharles Ernest von Geldern San Francisco
*Carleton Wolsey Washburne Sierra Madre
fClyde T. Wetmore Hollister
Robert William Wilcox Delta, Colo.
fElsa Will Rochester, N. Y.
ZOOLOGY
Clara Crosby Santa Cruz
Mary 1* isk Los Angeles
ENTOMOLOGY AND BIONOMICS
Leroy Childs Redlands
fWarren Locke Smith Ferndale
Verne Genoa Stevens Palo Alto
GEOLOGY AND MINING
Robert Edwin Anderson San Francisco
Harry Mayo Andreen Redwood City
fCarl Hugh Beal Palo Alto
Edward Burke Corbet San Francisco
Waldemar Fenn Dietrich San Francisco
Benjamin Edward Erb Chemainus, B. C.
Andrew Douglas Fyfe Oceanside
fWilliam Conrad Gehrmann Davenport, la.
Mortimer Louis Hall Pasadena
Harold Briggs Hannibal San Jose
Olaf Pitt Jenkins Stanford* University
Grover Berner Lantz Colton
tßernard Harold Lasky San Francisco
*Robcrt James McCann Pacific Grove
fHarvey Wright Parmelee Santa Barbara
*Alonzo William Peake Los Angeles
Arthur E. Remington Watertown, N. Y.
*Edwin John Stewart Los Angeles
CIVIL ENGINEERING
Charles Edward Beechcr Monrovia
Edwin Prcscott Bly Los Angeles
I von Clay Briggs San Francisco

some others equally important. In
like manner the choicest thoughts and
worthiest ideals of America are
thoughts and ideals long before treas
ured by the advanced minds of Europe.
Another lesson from America is that
of the effective federation. The United
States is composed of fortliy-eight
self-governing states, each an entity
within itself managing its own affairs,
with its own officials and its own
laws, controlled by the nation in those
interests only which it shares with
its sister states. Some of these states
are as populous and wealthy as the
Kingdom of Europe, but each is a
jurisdiction, not a power. None can
make war alone, either by force of
arms or force of tariffs. While there
is all machinery for settling disputes
between states such disputes never
arise, because no state has the right
to use its force to promote private
business.
Stilts Equality
The states in a federal union meet
as jurisdictions. The small ones have
no fear of the large ones, and those
not touching the sea suffer in no way
from their restricted position. A
"Power" hampered as is the state of
Illinois would chafe against its limita
tions, and its jingoes would talk of
fighting their way to the ocean. But
viewed as a jurisdiction, surrounded by
similar jurisdictions, the people of
Illinois have no consciousness of limi
tation.
And this should be our ultimate con
ception of a nation. Its boundary line
should represent merely the limit of
jurisdiction. That jurisdiction ceases
does not imply need of violence be
tween the people on the two sides nor
require fortification for the purpose
of repelling violence. The Canadian
boundary is an example of this meet
ing of nations not as powers but as
jurisdictions.
This four-thousand-mile line, rang
ing through all kinds of territory and
all sorts of conditions, disputed nearly
all the way "with all the brutal frank
ness common to blood relations," has
for nearly a hundred years not known
a fortress, a soldier, a warship or a
gun. It is a peace boundary, the limit
of the jurisdiction of one self-govern
ing nation, the beginning of that of
another. It lacks but one thing to
make it ideally perfect, the re
moval of the custom-house, the em
blem of national suspicion and greed,
the remnant, of the days when it was
considered good economics for a na
tion to "have its taxes paid by for
eigners."
Europe in Turmoil
Viewed as "great powers" devoted
to the exploitation of the wealth of
other regions the leading nations of
Europe are in constant turmoil. The
German empire for example, is hamp
ered on every side. Her scant sea
coast is split in two by the presence
of Denmark. Her German Rhine dis
charges itself through Holland. The
ports of Amsterdam, Rotterdam, Ant
werp and Ostend, geographically her's,
are occupied by alien people whom she
could crush out in a moment, were it
not. for the physical force of the rest
of Europe and the moral power of the
world. Of Poland, she has too much
or too little. A large part of the Ger
man people live in the alien empire of
Austro-Hungary and in the republic
of Switzerland, while after forty years
of possession, Germany scarcely owns
Alsace or Lorraine. The states are a
thorn in the side of the empire, a bur
den and a weakness, just so long as
their two millions of people are held in
semi-vassalhood by the rule of force.
A free republic of Alasace Lorraine, a
second Swithzerland, half-German,
half-French separating and joining
two great nations would be a strength
and an inspiration to both. The true
gateways of the Rhine held by the
power of blood and iron is a centre
of menace to civilization. For the
wrong done at the Treaty of Frank
fort forty years ago, Europe has had to
pay most dearly for it is around the
question of Alsace-Lorraine that half
the crushing armament of Europe has
been built up. She is hemmed in
everywhere by the scare of old strugg
les, to her perennial discomfort. For
this reason, she suffers from the
"Drang nach Osten," she seeks a road
to the Persian gulf, an empire over
seas, and every form of imperial ex
tension to lands "under the sun,"
which may for the moment seem
plausible or possible.
But Germany as a jurisdiction suf
fers none of these limitations. Her
powers are only those which are
needed for the people's good. They
are merely her public duties. It mat
ters noting that her sway is checked
on almost, every side before it reaches
the sea. Other jurisdictions inter
vene, and each of these looks after
the public needs of man, which are
mostly justice, conservation, educa
tion, sanitation, and peace. As one of
the "Great Powers" of the world, Ger
many (with her fellow states as well)
is a center of friction, injustice and
unrest.
"A Power" is u Menace.
As a jurisdiction Germany is busy
with profitable and constantly ad
vancing industries, with an admir
able system of education and exten
sive provision for all the people's
needs, and no enlargement of boun
daries could in the least increase her
usefulness, her wealth or her happi
ness. As "a power" Germany is a
menace to the well being of civiliza
tion as every other "power" of similar
nature must be in its degree For
the prosperity of every people de
pends on international peace, and
all power-manifestations are either
actual or potential war. War is a
form of world-sickness from which
every function of civilization suffers,
and most of all those bonds of com
mon thought and common interest
sumed up in internationalism. And
to the members of an international
state, German in blood and in sym
pathy as well as English, all these
destructive rivalries of state with
state seem mediaeval and unworthy.
There is, in fact, something primitive,
outworn and unprogressive in the
spectacle of a civilized nation com
posed of millions of clever people
trusting for its defense to forts and
ships. With all the resources of
business, of science, ef education, of
thought, to depend on force seems a
lazy, even cowardly, shirking of the
higher possibilities of national
strength. To be surrounded by armed
guards, "holding the drop" on all
Commercial rivals is not a lofty con
ception of a nations's greatness. This
attitude has been as disastrous to
England's own peace of mind as it has
been menacing to the world's welfare.
To escape from this condition is not
a matter of a day nor a generation. Tt
is not easy for America even to

Revoe Carlisle Briggs Pasadena
fFloyd Cromwell Brown Selma
fEdward James Cullen Gilroy
Harry Bascom Davis Pomona
Wilbur Harvey Doxsee Redwood City
Robert Francis Duryea Palo Alto
fClarence Bernard Goodwin Sunnyvale
fCharles Stewart Grace Rivera
John Stanley Grepe, Jr East Highlands
tNorman Marshall Ilalcombe San Francisco
George William Hawley Portland, Ore.
George Walter Hunt San Jose
Paul Eells Jeffers Los Angeles
William Aiken Laird Lindsay
Alexander Stuart Macdonald San Francisco
tßobert Patchen Miller Los Angeles
Maurice Everard Morrison Morgan Hill
fßoger Wolcott Olmsted Los Angeles
Chauncey Smith Elie, Manitoba, Canada
Thomas Joseph Spellman Colma
fßurroughs Agin Stephenson Los Altos
Harry George Todtmann Chicago, 111.
George Harlan Trask Los Angeles
Charles Ralph Tupper San Jose
Romney Leigh Vaughn San Francisco
Guss Valentine Wallach Boonville
Carlton Levi Wyant Montecito
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING
■fClarence P. Campbell Los Angeles
tWallace Rolland Finney...* Modesto
*Burdette Lord Hostettler Erie, Pa.
Kenneth Irving Marshall Los Angeles
tAugustus Mudge Sanborn Redlands
Cecil Stocker Simon Los Gatos
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
*Edward Niles Adam Melville, Mont.
Frank Edward Anderson Los Angeles
fClarence Cannon Argabrite Ventura
John Watson Fleming Armstrong....Fivemiletown, Tyrone, Ire.
Everett Morse Calderwood Palo Alto
Melville Nathaniel Clark Dayton, Me.
John Francis Cullen Gilroy
Walter Jennings Dodge Los Angeles
Charles Greenlaw Duffin Comas, Wash.
Harry Adolph Fore Campbell
Frank Julius Gleiss Los Angeles
Walter J. Hammond ! Grinncll, la.
Tomiichi Haraguchi Nagasaki, Japan
George Edward Holditch Orange
Edgar Alden Jackson Cupertino
Linford C. Lull, Jr Los Angeles
James Arthur Miller Hanford
Rea Cambridge Newman Santa Barbara
George Washington Poison Menlo Park
Gaylord Kenyon Snyder Los Angeles
fGiistav Wade Naples
George Ireland Wright Pasadena
BACHELOR OF LAWS
Jerome Devereaux Peters San Jose
Granville Numan Wood, Jr Blue Lake
MASTER OF ARTS
LATIN
Flora Anne Bagley Burlingame
fßuth Beard Modesto
Catherine Ida Birch Redlands
fAnna Shipley Cox San Jose
Mabel Harriett Usinger Berkeley
Malcolm Leland Yeary Los Angeles
GERMAN
Edward Vere Brewer Elyria, Ohio
Catharine Morris Cox San Jose
Lydia Lucilc Meyer . Milwaukee, Wis.
Clara Lydia Schaaf Fort Wayne, -Ind.
fElsie Louise Whittemore Alhambra
ENGLISH LITERATURE
Anais Julia Allen Pasadena
Walter Clyde Curry Gray-Court, S. C.
ENGLISH PHILOLOGY
Maude Cleveland Stanford University
EDUCATION
tWilliam Samuel Marten San Jose
Clarence Lucien Phelps Jamestown, Ky.
William Thomas Root, Jr Pasadena
William Roy Tanner Minneapolis, Minn.

emancipate herself from reactionary
influences in Europe. There are many
interests in a wealthy nation who find
an aid or an affinity in militarism.
Debt creates debt, and those inter
ested in spending band together
against reform.
These matters proceed by slow pro
gress, interrupted by reaction; we
are in a period of relapse at present,
when reactionary forces seem to be in
the ascendant. Hut this very fact with
its burdens and horrors may be count
ed on to turn the balance in the other
direction.
Neither will there be a formal fed
eration of nations in this era. In
deed federation in fact will come long
before it comes in name. A single
unified world-government with cen
tralized rule under one set of men at
some one place, is only a dream—and
not a cheerful dream at that. What
the world needs is more self-control,
more local responsibility not more
governmental machinery. Neverthe
less every step in removing injustice,
in eliminating sources of friction, in
extending common interests, as the
postol union, the telegraph union, in
ternational law, international police
duties, international conferences and
congresses, arbitration treaties a nd
other agreements—are steps in the di
rection of the passing of war. To this
end, three great contributing agencies
are: the growth of the popular con
science, the interlocking of personal
interests, and the ruinous expence
which the progress of science has
brought to every branch of the mili
tar art.
All this has its part in the great
movement towards common interna
tional life, "La Vie Internationale" of
the dreams of La Fontaine, a life
which shall make war impossible and
will, in time, do away with exploita
tions, with tariff barriers and with all
the products of that narrow nativism,
which considers only the purposes or
enrichment of the selfish few, the one
in-group against all the out-groups of
the world.
Value of Open Diplomacy
Another lesson which the United
States may teach is the value of open
diplomacy. A secret agreement of
any kind whatever. It was a warning
of Washington that his nation should
beware of Entangling Alliances. A
formal alliance is for the purpose of
making enemies, never of making
friends. Friendship among nations
rests on common interests, on the in
terlocking of minds, the interlocking
of trade.
In the United States a treaty can be
entered into only with the open and
public consent of the Senate. Every
international relation is therefore
open to the world. No minister, no
president, no group of men whatever
can secretly pledge the nation to any
line of action. No president, no cabi
net, no minister, no congress acting
alone can make any declaration of
public policy. For these reasons the
United States must stand outside the
tangled snare of concessions and intri
gues we call world politics. She must
play her games of diplomacy with
open hands. She cannot be the secret
friend of any other nation. She can
not be a secret enemy because all her
acts, friendly or hostile, are known to
all the world.
The secret treaty in the interest of
imperial spoliation is the bane of
Europe. It ties each foreign office to
the service of the most reckless and
greedy of its great exploiting inter
ests. It has reduced the chancelleries
of more than one nation to be nothing
more than the firm name under which
its exploiting corporations compass
their ends in Asia or in Africa.
The secret is a relic of the military
state. The civilzed world is still or
ganized on the mediaeval theory that
war is a natural function to he ex
pected in the normal course of events,
not a hideous inorau, physical;. and
financial catastrophe. la the old
theory as expounded by Machiavelli,
the king has no other business but
war. It is the duty of his ministers
to find weak places in the defenses of
other kings through which war may
be successful, and to find, after the
fact, excuses by which' war can be
justified. The secret treaty, the .con
cession to a friendly power, ithe. arti-.
ficial interference with a rival, —all
these belong to the days' of Ma<?hia
velli. If . all parties concerpe.4 ( |cojJ>ld :
come out.into the open, .Wihsre . t-het
United States is forced to stahd, we
should soon have an end to tneAttgld-
German struggle, of the rivalry be
tween the Triple Entente and the
Triple Alliance.
Outworn ideas ot' national glory, out
worn figures of.speech as tp national
purposes, outworn mediaevalism in
our -conception of the state.—all'these
find expression in the "secret treaty,"
the "entangling alliance," which is a'
chief obstacle in the way of the -con
ciliation of nations. ?>• -
Historically, the influence of Amer
ica has been exerted in opposition to
Imperialism and to infringement of
the great nations on the rights of the
sniall. This is the inception of the
Monroe Doctrine, which in spite of its
perversion and its wrong accentuation r
has protected Latin America from the
fate of Africa. That this should now
be a Pan-American, not njerely an.
American doctrine goes without say
ing. And it must never be allowed i.o
degenerate-into " a Dollar Diplomacy"
which would.reserve Tropical America
as a special "sphere of, .influence-' for
American exploitation,. For the true,
and final form of the Mojiuae.Doctrine
is found, in the Drago .Doctrine,. of the
republics of South Ameripa,, that tiie
forqe of . arms should. be used-ras.
an,instrument iu industiriul spoliation.
This the people of the United States
should adopt as• their-.own. « <
Principle Disregarded '
In a recent deciskm- of- arbitration;
the King 'of Swed'ant'laW down 'this
principle: that a nation "has 110
right to land- troops in .order-to pYe-'
serve the property or the rights of her
nationals.". This''lwinciple. ha,s '-beefr
disregarded in the •strangling of
Persia, the rape of Mongolia and of
Tibet, in the chronic robbery of
China, and in the annexation of Egypt, <
of Korea, uf Morocco and of Tripoli.
But it is for all that a just.-and honor
able principle, and it is disregarded
only when a nation, by virtue of super
ior strength or superior civilization
feels itself justified in taking posses
sion of another for its good, and inci
dentally for the commercial advant
age of its own exploitating interests.
It is true that the smaller nations of
the tropics are subject to violent
political disturbances. They have not
learned the value of liberty as regu
lated hjy law. Yet it is highly prob
able that not one in ten of these
periodical/ revolutions I's of spontan- 1
eous native origin. of them are
started for purposes of spoliation by

autside adventurer's and a large ma
jority are paid for by adventurers
'State. The Public School exists
everywhere at the public expense, and
belonging to one or more of the great
epinniarqia'ruatrojis tit', fheiear'th.. When."
'the"fi v nal' iriitli'Ts"known'"of unhappy
Mexico the responsibility for hfei' dis
(Mfer'sl will rest nht on'her martyred
president, ridr "on the' sol
"diers'of fortune by whose hands he
•fell, but on the men in New York or
in London perhaps,' whose nioiWy has
kept iliese revolutions going. Mexico,
with fatal riches of oil and gold, is not
tlie first nation to Ite torn asunder by
'conflicting ."sphere's of influence."
The. influence of the republic has
been always thrown against another
form of imperialism involved in the
phrase "Control of the Sea." America
has never claimed any such control
nor has she admitted the right to
others. It is a mediaeval idea going
back foiir hundred years to the time
when the great seas were divided be
tween Spain and Portugal. America
has stood for the open sea, the restric
tion of national jurisdiction to the
three-mile limit, the extermination of
piracy, and in iater years for the most
important doctrine of the immunity of
war. To make the high seas an open

HI STORY
Ella Wissie Beaver ...T. .Tulare
fEmrria Howse Kuno Palo Alto
George Lutes Righter '.Campbell
Francis Marion Russell .Los Angeles
MATHEMATICS
Rose Margaret Bennett »....San Diego
Amanda Westhold ..Quincy, 111:
CHEMISTRY
Alicje. .Ruth Bergcr San Jose
Elton Marion Hogg. v Saratoga
Charles Kirkton McWilliams San Joss
tWilliam John Van Sicklen Castle-ton, Ontario,,Canada
BOTANY
Charlotte Elliott Del Rapids, S. D.
BACTERIOLOGY
Frank Maltaner .Cincinnati, O.
ZOOLOGY
Josephine Louise Dows Randall Stanford University
ENTOMOLOGY
F rankie Willard Galexioo
GEOLOGY
Theodore Chapin., Los Angeles
Joseph Stanley Hook jjPerris ■
ENGINEER
CHEMICAL ENGINEERING
. Louis Wjlliam Pingree.-. ; Ogden-, Utah
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING
fDexter Simpson Kimball N. Y.
Lyman Stevenson King Oakland .
r *• . V <
JURIS DOCTOR
George Armand Ditz Stockton f-1
Maurice Timothy Dooling • Hollistter ,
fEmmet Ross Fertig Nobl.esvjlle, Ind.
fFrank Louis Guerena rs .. „Spnora
George Juan Hatfield ...Oakland-,
Frank Howard Hilton ; Portland, Ore.
Grant Holcomb San Bernardino^
Ignatius Martin Peckham tV| . San . Jose
Edmund Wright Pugh Los. (Angeles..
Alfred'Worcester Robertson Saflt? Ba,rbru:a ..
Chester Harvey Warlow : . r ., . ( Fresno,
Herbert Eustace White Saotamento^.
tFrederick feertram Wood i. . Alto.
* September 6, 1912
fjanuary 10, 1013 "O '?t it

highway-to be tr.a.ver?ed , ( afc ( anytime,-
in absolute--safety, by any, vessel what
ever would-gp/t'ar away
witji international..waff,.-and iSitill ftWH
ther in ren^.vi!),£..tlve- and dnv<-
gerous burden of naval protectioni»'l£;
all military operations.- at. sea couidibe
confined to the <oa,nnon shot.
from the. shore, the- original motive
of the three-mile limit of. jurisdiction,
it would represent one of ,the most
practical triumphs of civilization.- Ttfe
nations should join to make the ocean
safe, not to fill it with floating fort
resses designed t tp. protect merchant
ships from robbery by the very per
sons with whom they trade.
Still another lesson from. America is
one in which, we all agree; the divorce
of religion from political control and
therefore from the,domain of politics.
Absolute religions freedom exists .in
America because the state assumes
no relation of any kind to religious
corporations as such, So long as these
do not interfere with the freedom of
soul or body of men not. belonging to
them, their acts do not concern the
state. And on no, one policy is there
more firm agreement.in America* than
in the absolute separation of Church
nowhere can any sect or gpoup of seets
claim any dominating relation in re

gard to It. To the average American
the strife over Church properties and
Church interests so real in Europe
seem incomprehensible. The Church,
any church, is in every way better oif
for separation from the government.
Whatever achievement; whatever pro
gress it may make is its own, and this
progress is solid because it involves,
no ulterior political end.
Connected with the freedom of the
church is the freedom of the people
from other forms of paternalism. The
state becomes benevolent only when it
lias failed to be just. It allows special
opportunities to individuals only
where it has denied opportunity to
men at large.
The "old-age pension" is a conven
ient'illustration,.'lt has been justly
compared to- the. free pass homeward
granted to the human wrecks who
have lost their all in the. gambling
rooms of-Monte Carlo. It is the shill
ing given to the man run over by my
lord's automobile.
In a better system he would not have
been run over. He would not have
lost his money in a vile resort, lie
would not have needed an outside
pittance to carry him through old age.
Host Workers Died in War
The old-age pension exists in Eng
land as a convenient balm for inequal
ity and injustice. The best of her
workers have died in her wars/ leav
ing a weaker stock to breed from.
These have grown' up unskilled, in de
fault of the shools that make men
strong. They have grown up in the
atmosphere of the public house, sod
den with lust and beer and whisky.
They have lost the opportiiniy tljat
should be theirs, and at the end their
jfellows must be taxed to feed tliem.
The tragedy of the East End of Lon
don is no normal part of the tragedy
of Life. It is no part of the normal
America. It is no part of a nation
which has given opportunity.
Brit'in America a' new country, fresh,
unspoiled, full of life and hope, it is
possible to hctt'd' government" to its
rigid purpose, to develop opportunity
by the elimination of privilege, teacfy,.
men to lean' not on' government but
on themselves, and to aid by'fraternal '
giving those who have fallen in. tbg
prang 1 ; not "to weaken by unearned
public money those who are falling but
who can be made to stand, 'tfie wav
Up it i '">• vtc.
t)t the transgressor is hard and we
not make it eapier'ff we could;
|We' could not if we would'. To. give a..
plkh'a chance to'rise,' i'.s to allow him'
hlfbthe choice t<>Tali:" ' *';•"
1 is ! •?; . " *
foii.fession of Failure , '
■ "Tho old-age pension" .is, so- far as 1
it goes, a confession of failure of de- ■
jnocracy,. Except as a measure of'"
e |1 £r-fie.pcy, l Jts real purpose in Eng
land, it has no justification in good '
government. Clean up the. social at
mosphere, restore to the people, what ■
is rightfully theirs, and they will care, 1
rare accidents .excepted, for their own
old age.
in America tlie struggle, between '
labor and capital can never assume
the form it has in Europe. In a gov
ei nment which stands for justice, and
which is in no way occupied with
making money for its people, nor from
its People, nor in supporting exploiting
intei ests in other lauds, there is uo
visable necessity for universal col
lective ownership. Where classes do
not leally exist there is no pertinence
in the artificial distinctions of aristoc
racy, proletariat and bourgeoisie
which have been so laboriously
brought over from Europe. If these*
distinctions exist, most of us in Amer
ica belong to one single class, that of
the bourgeoisie.
There exist in America as elsewhere,
vast fortunes, disproportionate to the
ability or the efforts of those who con
trol them. But their history has been
of short duration. They are not leg
acies from an unjust past. Their or
igin belongs to the present. It is
mainly individual. Great luck, great
skill or ingeniously managed privilege
stands behind each of them. By the
same means as in Europe, by co
operation through interlocking direc
torates, these great fortunes have
been made to stand together and thus
by a process of financial suction to
build up fortunes still greater. But
one most important difference exists.
The national government, in theory
and for the most in fact, stands aloof
from these combinations. The con
trol of public affairs, even of financial
matters is beyond their permanent
reach. Their influence on foreign
diplomacy is limited because no secret
influence can control, and the power
of money for evil is mostly lost in
publicity.
Property May Rule
In all their operations, they are sur
rounded by an alert and in the long
run victorious opposition of democ
racy. In America property may rule,
but only for a time. In the earlier
•centuries of Europe, the period of
Absolutism, when monarchy was a
political power not a function of so
ciety, it was, of course, true that prop
erty ruled. But it was the ruler who
had the property. It was his by force
of position. Not until the money lend
ers of the last century secured the
strangle hold on the nations of
Europe was this condition brought to
an end.
Then again, property ruled, but it
was not that the King and the nobles
held the property. Property held
them, and in Europe today it is money
that rules, and it rules King and
peasant alike, for everything el3e
hinges on the Imperial Explotation of
foreign lands.
In America, this is true in a degree,
but the rule of money has its visible
limits. For the United States belongs
to its people.
"Dollar Diplomacy"
While Europe generally, the alliance
between financial interests and the
government is open and avowed, such
•connections in America have proved
fatal to political leaders and to polit
ical parties. The methods by which
the "powers of Europe" through their
foreign offices bolster up adventures
in foreign lands, could not be used in
America. The diplomacy of persua
sion, threats or force of arms in the
interest of private ventures would be
impossible here. The people might
consent to "Dollar Diplomacy" but
•only for a time and until its nature
is understood. The recent, repudia
tion of our relation to the "Six Power
Loan' to China will serve as a case in
point.
And here again we must admit that
out democratic conception of govern
ment has to struggle for acceptance
in America. The protective tariff in
theory and in practice is a flat viola
tion of its principles. Tt is a flat
violation of the spirit of the American
■constitution. It is privilege pure and
simple granted to the few by the
many, in the belief that in the long
run the many would profit by it. Its

purpose was to diversify industries by
letting the farmer help pay the ex
penses of the manufacturer. It has
just that effect, and the farmer and
laborer are becoming increasingly
discontented with its burdens and the
inequalities before the law which are
part and parcel of its operations.
In America, the army and navy,
though the latter has grown beyound
all reason through the rivalry from
England and Germany, still represent
a democratic ideal. We still hold to
the thought that our officers are not
rulers but servants of the people.
Our military element stands near
the parting of the ways, for all offi
cialism tends to aggrandize itself,
most of all that which is associated
with pomp and with patriotism. Mili
tarism for its own sake belongs to the
state in whoch property rules. "It
furnishes," says John A. Hobson, "a
profitable support to certain strong
vested interests. It is a decorative
element in social life and above all, it
is necessary to keep down the
pressure of the forces of internal
reform."
>o Room for Militarism
The ideals of Militarism and Democ
racy can never coexist. And this na
tion is too far given over to democ
racy ever to do more than dally with
the military ideal. In a nation that
knows no caste, and has no aristioc
racy other than temporary and self
selected, no military traditions will
ever be permanent. There can never
be a warrior caste holding special
privilege or special authority.
As a people, we of the United States
are too rich in resources of wealth, of
education and of intelligence to be
controlled by influences of militarism.
And thus and for the same reasons, in
the republic of America, the state ex
ists for the man, not the man for the
state. This is the fundamental differ
ence between the Eighteenth Century
and Twentieth. And let us speed the
day when it may be said not only that
"America means Opportunity" but
that the same hopeful word may be
spoken of Germany and England and
France and Russia and of all the na
tions in the sisterhood of civilization.
Lord Acton thus sums up the move
ment of the history of civilization:
"It is by the combined efforts of the
weak made under compulsion to re
sist the reign of force and constant
wrong that in the rapid change but
slow progress of four hundred years
liberty has been preserved and se
cured and extended and finally under
stood."
And as America comes to under
stand her own message of democracy,
internationalism and peace, she will
carry this understanding back to the
motherland of Europe.
Within the last two months Presi
dent Wilson and Mr. Bryan have
planned a most practical and effective
means of bringing American influence
to bear on the problems of World
peace.
The end in view is to relegate war
to a position of last resort in times
of international difference, to place
soldiers and dreadnaughts in the
background—not in the front of na
tional movement.
The essence of this American policy
is that in case of friction between
nations, the matter be placed for six
months in the hands of a joint high
Commission of investigation, chosen
in part from the contending nations,
the majority from friendly neutrals.
These- for six months shall study the
question at issue, neither nation in the

meantime demonstrating, mobilizing
or increasing the armament, until the
final report is made. After this each
nation is free to choose conciliation,
concession, compromise, arbitration
or war. And with six months to think
it over there will be no war. Wars are
waged for greed, for politics, or be
cause the mob has been stirred by
senseless speech or reckless journal
ism. And in many cases this reckless
journalism has been carefully cal :u
--lated and fully paid for by those in
terested in the sale of the accessories
of war.
The treaty of arbitration will natur
ally follow on the treaty for investi
gation. Courts will naturally supple
ment results of friendly offices. But
the agreement for friendly conference
comes first and is for the present the
more important. The Treaty of Arbi
tration is most valuable, — not as
preventing war, for a nation bent on
war, if there is such a case, will not
stop to agree to arbitrate. The world
is finally ruled by public opinion. Ar
bitration treaties clinch public opinion
and hold it to its duty.
The present decade has been char
acterized by needless, costly and
brutal wars, the result not of actual
conditions of today, but of blunders
and crimes committed in the past.
Wars do not spring up afresh in our
civilization. They spring from old
wars whose seeds were not destroyed
by peace.
Rut, however, dark the present out
look may seem with half the coined
money of the world spent each year
on war and war's accessories, the far
outlook is most promising. The cruel
horror of the Balkan war, the waste of
armed peace and frustrate war
throughout the civilized world, — all
these make powerfully for peace, for
real peace — the Peace of Law and
Trust, and not the Peace of Force.
And just now is the time when
American influence can be most defi
nitely crystallized and made effective.
And we are thankful that we have in
the seats of Authority at Washington
men who definitely work for peace
and whom war and war's fripperies
do not dazzle nor attract.
Two hundred and seven students were awarded the Bachelor of
Arts Degree by President David Stu rr Jordan in the Assembly Hull tills
morning. Two were granted the Bachelor of Laws Degree, while
thirty-five were given the Master of Arts Degree. In addition to these
the Academic Council also awarded three Engineer, thirteen .luris Doc
tor of Philosophy Degrees. The Co miuencemnet address preceded the
presenting of the sheepskins, *Th e Conquest of Europe by America,"
wsis the subject of the strong address delivered by Doctor Jordan.

I wish this morning to say a serious
word to you as citizens of the great
republic and as future leaders in its
thought and action. I wish you to
think earnestly of the part American
influence must play in the world his
tory of our century. It is for us to
help cure the accumulated evils of
the older civilization. Those men in
Europe who look furthest into the
future hope for the salvation of
Europe through ideals brought back
from practical service in America.
One of these. Senator La Fontaine of
Brussels, has given me my title as the
expression of the hope of his life,
"The Conquest of Europe by America."
I hasten to say that 1 do not mean
conquest by force of arms, for 1 have
no interest in such conquests and no
belief that victories thus won result in
any permanent good to any nation.
Nor do I mean financial conquests,
the floating of imperial loans or the
permeation of any part of European
business by financiers from the New
World. Still less do I celebrate a
shoppers' contest on the Place de
I'Opera or among the dazzling bar
gains of the Hon Marche. Nor does
the trail of American tourists who
cross with gold the palms of Europe's
servitors, all the way from Piccadilly
to the Pyramids awaken in me any
pride of nation or of race. The only
permanent conquest is that of ideas.
America stands, has always stood, for
two ideals from which she cannot
escape, for they are fundamental in
her origin and in her growth. These
are internationalism and democracy,
and these ideals being invincible
must conquer America, and through
her, reconquer Europe. And as both
are incompatible with war, their final
triumph marks the end of spoliation,
of and of that relation be
tween nations which breeds suspicion
and hatred. The conquest of the
world by the ideals of International
ism and Democracy marks the coming
of universal peace.
In the address at Baltimore in 1911,
Henri La Fontaine of Brussels, the
veteran prophet of International Life,
used these striking words.
"Emigration perhaps more than
war has deprived the old, historic
countries of their most energetic and
fittest ones to build the progressive
and wealthy people you are on this side
of the Atlantic. You are for us
Europeans, the beloved Brotherland,
Do not forget that Europe is always

and will still remain for you the be
loved Motherland. Europe is now for
America what Greece was for Europe.
Europe has liberated (Ireece. Amer
ica has to liberate Europe from its
burdens, its prejudices, its hatreds.
It is your duty, it is your highest duty
to reconcile outside your borders the
people you have reconciled within
your borders. For indeed the Amer
ican people is at present the true
international people. It is the elect
people which alone can further inter
nationalism and can transform all of
the people of the Earth into a family
of nations, a brotherhood of men, an
international people." "For coloniza
tion is not mainly done by men and by
capital, but also by ideas, by example,
by experiment."
Not Always True to Ideals
We may freely admit in the begin
ning that America has not always been
true to her own ideals, and that she
has not always clearly seen her own
future. She has had her own lapses,
moral and social, some of these be
cause of associations with Europe and
through imitation of glories alien to
her history. If she had been true to
herself she would never have known
a single foreign war. She has no part in
those greeds and jealousies of money
or of race which still keep up turmoil
in Europe. Her war with Spain with
its eagerness for exploitation, its
tinsel imperialism and its pride of
participation in "world politics" rep
resents the worst of these lapses, and
its evil effects are long in passing.
But though the inception of this affair
was European in method, its contin
uance has been characteristically
American. Instead of exploitation, we
have brought to the Philippines educa
tion and sanitation. We have expend
ed on them a hundred times what we
have received, and if ever imperilism
can be respectable we have made it so.
Another false movement has been
in the building of warships and forts
in America. This lacks the motive
for similar extravagances in Europe,
because the peace of the new world is
no where threatened. But with us as
everjwhere the military spirit grows
with the money spent on it. The more
mouths fed by the State the greater
the clamor for the feeding of still
more. We have also to reckon with
the desire for giant decoration, for
big navies for sheer bigness' sake, the
feeling that this is the richest and'
most progressive nation on the globe,

and that as such she can beat old
Europe at her own game even though
that game be not worth the candle.
But with all lapses and delinquin
cies the fact of internationalism and
the ideal of democracy have been and
must always remain with the United
States, and from the United States
these ideals will react with greater
and greater force on the thoughts and
deeds of Europe.
Internationalism is the heritage of
America, not of choice at first, but cf
necessity. She has perforce grown
up with this ideal, because no other
was possible. She became the cosmo
politan nation of the world because
of her complex origin and with this
origin she could be nothing else. In
a new civilization, in the struggles of
the frontier each man is rated for
what he is worth. Under these condi
tions no one cares for the petty pre
cedences of rank or race. What a
man can do in the next twenty-four
hours outvalues any question as to
who were his ancestors.
All Hate Dies
On a railway train not long ago
some one was overheard to say: "This
is the land where all hate dies. My
father was German; my mother was
French. What do I care for all that?
I am an American. The old hatreds
and rivalries are nothing to me."
America was English, first. In lang
uage, in spirit, in conscience and in
government it is England which domi
nates. For the English race, above
all others, with its adaptation for co
operation and for compromise is the
builder of free states.
It was the chosen among the Eng
lishmen of three centuries ago who
founded the germ colonies of Virginia
and Massachusetts May. In the fol
lowing years it has been the like
minded from their own nation and
from others who have crossed the seas
to enter into their work.
The first who came were the bold,
the free, the self-ruling, the pleasure
scorning element of English life. They
came to escape from the state
church and the church-state, that they
might worship in their own fashion
and according to dictates of their indi
vidual consciences.
They detested the law of primogeni
ture which thrust the spirit of pre
cedence into the bosom of every fam
ily. They abhorred the law of entail
which burdened the land with the
curse of privilege even to unborn gen
erations.
They had caught from France the

spirit of liberty, equality, fraternity,
but as befits the calmer blood of the
north, they gave this spirit a con
structive interpretation, and the idea
of equality was to them especially rich
in practical results. Equality before
the law, equal access to land, to edu
cation, to professions and trades,
. equal access to legislat ion, each of
these conceptions broadened out into
the spirit of democracy.
And after England came to other
nations of Europe, each with its own
part and in its own degree giving its
contingent of free-born men, the ad
| mixture of blood gave strength and
! versatility to the rising nation.
But withal, the dominant note is
English still, with as many diver-
I gences from the England of today as
j from the England of the Stuarts.
In later years other immigration has
come, not alone the bold in search of
adventure, of new homes and new free
doms, but the weak and the oppressed,
"the beaten men of the beaten races,"
who llee from war taxation in search
of living wages and of daily bread.
But all these are cast into the same
melting pot and in most of them there
arises a clear response to the call of
free institutions.
In this melting pot of America, all
the old racial antipathies disappear
and all hereditary hatreds. There is
110 final distinction of British or Ger
j man, of French or Italian, of Spanish
|or Slav, of Dutch or Scandinavian,
!or of Jew or Gentile. The average
| American is as cosmopolitan in origin
j and relationship as is royalty in
Europe, though for a different set of
| reasons. But in America there is 110
[ distinction of common or noble, of
high or low, of aristocracy, bour
j geoisie or proletariat except as these
| are artificially emphasized in the in
dustrial strife we have inherited from
Eu rope.
To the international mind of Amer
ica, there seems 110 need or pertinence
to an Anglo-Saxon alliance as against
any other people. In so far as such
alliance is desirable or humanly pos
sible it exists already in a common
sympathy and a common literature, ft
would lie weakened by a stated agree
ment of the Anglo-Saxon group to
swell each others Meets with dread
naughts. The true bond of Union of
the Greater Britain involves no rup
ture with the Greater Germany, or the
Greater France or the Greater Scandi
navia to which we in America likewise
claim allegiance.
To the American, "Pan-Germanism,"
Pan-Slavism," as lie hears these ex
pounded seem a meaningless return to
ideals of tlie Middle Ages. They re
mind him of the Holy Roman Empire,
which never was, and should never be,
or still more they hark back to Pan-
Islamism the futile dream of the light
ing Turk.
There is nothing in aggrandizement
of race as such which appeals to the
American, the child of all European
races. That such races are ennobled
by conquest of lesser tribes and by
their undigested exploitation he does
not believe. To the American even
England's greatness does not exist on
her Indian Empire, but rather in spite
of it.
Within the last forty years there lias
grown up a new world in Europe and
in the range of civilization. The old
conception of the states of Europe
as opposed to one another and mutu
ally destructive must, pass away in the
broader aspects of civilization.
The growth of International life is
one of the most striking aspects of
this new relation. The extention of
travel, the spread of commerce, the
achievements of science, the exchanges
in education, all these tend to make
a great "melting pot" of the civilized
world. Neither in his business, in his
pleasures, nor in his intellectual pur
suits is the educated man anywhere
limited to any one country. All
rational human interests are con
nected by interlocking bonds of many
kinds, joining one people with another.
The hundreds of international con
gresses held every summer the world
over and covering almost every gen
eral interest of men is the strongest
possible evidence of this Interlocking,
and all this constitutes an inter
national bond not to be lightly severe.!.
A declaration of war between nations
is now little less than an attack on
civilization in all its most cherished
aspects, social, moral, as well as finan
cial. The lines of national policy
taken for granted half a century ago
are fast becoming impossible, their
very suggestion being ruinous.
I'c ideiicj toward < oix'ilintion
The influence of America tends to
wards international conciliation. It
involves the recognition of men as
men, each valued for what he is or
wlnit tie can do. Both of these deter
mined, of course, by bis blood and his
education, but not to be judged in ad
vance by any wholesale distinctions.
This is the spirit of the Interna
tionale, the common life and common
sympathy among civilized people, re
gardless of national boundaries. This
International life constitutes the final
and lasting basis of International
Peace.
As the history of America rests on
internationalism so is her social fab
ric built on democracy. Historically
her democracy has a double origin. Its
theory was French, its practice was
English. The French philosophers
furnished the one, the reaction against
British methods the other.
For inequality before the law is the
foundation of the polity of Great
Britain. Her constitution stands on
privilege. Her social customs rest on
precedence of classes, precedence of
individuals. England chooses her lords
and magnates, her patrons and tyrants
long before they are born. These be
long to her system of privilege by
which cities like Westminster, Shef
field, Davenport, Arundel, were so
long held, virtually tax-free, by men
whose ancestors received their land as
royal gifts or bought tlieni as cow
pastures. The law of favor rises above
the law of justice.

Hut men of the pioneer type, the
Roundhead, the Pilgrim, the Puritan,
the American have hated favor and
privilege and precedence of every
form. The toll of tin 1 rich and the dole
of the poor are alike offensive to them.
And this dislike of overreaching and of
coddling has passed over to their de
scendents. John Hay once said of the
people of the new state of Ohio. "They
looked to no one as their superiors,
and on none as their inferiors. They
knew 110 want they could not them
selves satisfy," and to this Senator
Bayard added the further note, "They
were too self-willed and independent
to allow any to rule over them but
t heniselves."
This in a word is the spirit of de
mocracy, of the democracy of the
pioneer if you like, but America is the
land of pioneers, and this fact still in-

11 uences all her acts unci her insti
tutions. Her people find their polit
ical ideals in an equal start with equal
opportunity, in equality before the
law, in equal access to education, in
equal access to the land, in equal ac
cess to legislation.
The nation is built on individuals
each responsible for himself. The
state is a mutual adjustment for their
collective benefit. The individual in
America does not live for the state, is
not the property of the state, the state
has no control over him except that
which the individual lias delegated. It
is no duty of the state to promote his
prosperity or the prosperity of his
group. The state is rather the umpire
which decides questions of justice, the
servant by which the needs of the
many are met by co-operation in so far
as these needs are general and conson
ant, with ideals of justice.
As the founders of our state were
frontiersmen scattered far and wide,
without cities, without corporations,
without great collective utilities, their
democracy became that of individual
ism. The demands of society, of col

leetive action, of national power were
little considered because such de
mands did not exist, and they have
never existed in the forms in which
hhirope knows them. And for this
reason, if for no other, the native
American lias not been strongly at
tracted to the various doctrines called
socialism in 13uropi. Like conditions
produce like results, and the growth
nl' industrialism with its successes and
its oppressions brings the same re
action as in Furope. But as a matter
of fact, those who take part in these
reactions are for the most part re
cent immigrants, whoso ideals of gov
ernment even in democracy are collec
tive, standing in strong contrast with
tho individualistic democracy native
to the soil.
Fifty year. - , ago, in lsC!, Fdouard
Laboulaye published bis renrirkable

hook "Paris <>n Amerique," (Paris in
America.) Its motive was to show
what a great city might become under
the conditions of freedom which pre
vailed in America. The America was
idealized of course. It, represented
the noblest ideals of free-born men,
rather than the actual America, the
forces of democracy must strive with
all the other forces extant in modern
civilization.
j The influence of this volume was
wide spread and long continued. It
was my fortune to know two men of
power, the one a Dane, the other a
Swiss who were drawn to America by
the charm of Laboulaye and who were
not disappointed. They found what
they sought, and this is a perennial
characteristic of the republic. Who
ever comes to America and with what
ever motive will find what he seeks.
If he remains long enough and has
penetration to look below the surface
I he will find America.
If one seeks religious freedom he
will find it. Our fathers provided for
that. Whatever form or type of re
ligious discipline he seeks he will find

accordingly, I>ut its discipline is vol
untary not enforced by the state. If
one would escape from all religious in
fluence he can do so in America. It is
for him to choose.
If one seeks for class distinction, for
domination of the great over the small,
hereditary or otherwise, he will find it
in personal and local only, not
wrought into the fabric of society. If
one would find privilege enthroned
even as in Europe he will find it in
America, just as powerful as in
Europe, Imi everywhere surrounded
by an equally powerful movement of
insurgency. If one would find greed,
selfishness, lust, vanity, tolerance,
anything which belongs to the dregs
of humanity, he will find it in America,
and it may be embodied in powerful
and defiant institutions. For freedom
guarantees only freedom, and the
meaning of freedom is opportunity.
In Laboulaye's work, the official
Napoleonic view, which "Paris in
America" takes as its point of depar
ture is thus expressed. "A society
without administration, without army,
without police, with the savage liberty
of praying, speaking, writing, acting
each in his fashion would not last a
quarter of an hour. It is the negation
of all these principles, of all the con
ditions of this civilization which
makes the unity of our French nation.
In constituting our administration,
hierarehal and centralized, the wis
dom of our fathers lias long since
raised France to the first rank and
shown to the French people that
Liberty is Obedience, then is our Glory
and our Force."
Ketcrse 01 Napoleon's Ideals
The distinctive character of the
American ideals reverses this. It is
the building up of a society in which
the government stands only for jus
tice. The state does not concern itself
with right, worship or wrong worship,
with right thinking or wrong think
ing, with writing truth or writing
falsehood, with right acts or words or
ceremonies, except as abuse of liberty
may infringe on the liberty of others.
"I'ne societe sans administration,
sans armee, sans gendarmes, avec
la liberie sauvage de prier. de ponser,
de parler, d'ecrire, d'agir. chacun a
sa facon ne durerait pas 1111 quart
d'heure. ("est la negation de tons ces
principcs, de toutes les conditions de
cette civilisation qui fait I'unite dp la
nation francaise. En constituant
notre administration bierarchis.ee et
centralised, la sagesse de 110s peres a
depuis longtemps eleve la France a
premier rang et appris aux Francais
<pie la liberte ("est l'obeissance. C'est
la notre glorie et notre force."
The state is not pious, benevolent,
virtuous, generous, because these per
sonal virtues, cannot be exercised by
officialism leads to their abuse.
Privilege to the poor means privilege
to the rich; privilege to the rich
means privilege to the poor, but al
ways the more powerful arm secures
the greater privilege. The essence of
democracy is that no one. rich or
poor should have a lease on privilege.
The wealth of the republic does not
rest on its great sweep of prairies,
its mines or its commerce. Its primal
source is in its free schools, and its
freedom of choice of trade or profes
sion. The results of this freedom
can be measured in money as well as
in power. Now as ever, "America
means opportunity," opportunity for
each man and woman to prepare for
the work he can do best, opportunity
for each to find his place in life, op


I'IIESIDKXT DAVID KTAitlt .lOUD \ X
portunity for the work that neeils to
be done to find the man who can do it.
It is for each man to plan his own
career, to make his rwn escape "from
status to contract." The democracy
of America can acknowledge no mas
sters save of its own creation and the
power that makes these is adequate
to set them aside.
While every conception In Europe
has its reflex in America, while every
idea of administration from absolut
ism to anarchy finds its earnest advo
cates, none of these seem likely to
displace the fundamental ideal of
democratic individualism developed by
the fathers of the republic. This ideal
was expressed by Lincoln and long be
fore him by Anstolle. It is the function
of the state to establish justice among
men and to perform those acts of com
mon necessity, contributing to the pre
servation and enjoyment of human life
which collective action can accomp
lish better than private effort. Fur
ther than that, democracy which is
simply enforced co-operation should
not go, and by this principle, that no
theory of government should be
pushed beyond the consideration of its
practical results, the republic escapes
the choice of any single one among
the hundreds of remedies for political
ills. There is 110 possibility of the
adoption of anarchism, socialism, col
lectivism or individualism or any
other system as an exclusive and ex
cluding finality. The people of Amer
ica are interested in actual results
rather than any form of logical neces
sity as a ground for political action.
The Test of Solidarity
The test of national solidarity may
be found in its freedom from the need
of force or authority in the conduct of
its affairs. Let us imagine if we can,
a catastrophe which should remove
from the United States every repre
sentative of coercive power, every offi
cial of whatever rank from the Presi
dent to the last notary public, every
representative of army or of navy, or
of church, every policeman, every
authority of whatever kind.
Such a loss might create wied
spread bewilderment or profound
sorrow. It would have no relation to
anarchy. Except among certain un
assimilated foreign populatipns in
large cities it would lead to no
violence, to no riots. The functions
of national life would go on as before.
One by one communities would come
together and provide for the election
of officers. It was said that the death
of Lincoln gave a new proof of how
"republics live, not by a single life
but the right divine of man, the mil
lion trained to be free."
I.ret us apply the same test to other
nations. 111 the France of Napoleon
111, we are assured that without force,
society would not endure "for a quar
ter of an hour." What would be the
result in Germany today? No one can
tell. The German is endlessly patient,
even under needless burdens. What
would he do, if burdens were all sud
denly thrown off, if "Strengstens Ver
boten," the motto of Prussian rule
were suddenly found to have no force
behind it?
The lesson of democracy is therefore
the lesson of the United States. It is
no new lesson. The people of the
United States are merely European
people who have had some additional
experience, have learned some things
in their travels, perhaps forgetting

Patterson Dana Nowell Tulare
Frank Herbert Richey Tipton, Ind.
Edga r Clarence Smith Azusa
Homer Roberts Spence Alameda
GRAPHIC ART
Ethel Ora Qardin Salinas
James Leo Duff Menlo Park
fErnest P»ruce Nelson San Jose
Louise Rider Watsonville
Stella Belle Sankey Clearfield, Pa.
Cordelia Madison Smith Venice
MATHEMATICS
Sydnie Aileen Gardner Orange
Dorothy Marian Hindle Del Mar
Julia R. Johnson Aberdeen, Wash.
Ralph Matthews Noble Galesburg, 111.
Margaret Marion Steele San Jose
Mary Hilda Volkmor Whittier
APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Grace Raymond Helmick Helena, Mont.
CHEMISTRY
George Henry Beurhaus Tacoma, Wash.
Hector Crandall San Francisco
fEdwin Reginald Harding San Bernardino
fPaul Mark Levy San Francisco
Hugh Harold Mosher San Jose
Robert Lindley Murray Palo Alto
+Zeno Ostenberg.. San Jose
Alfred Liles Phillips Santa Cruz
PHYSICS
Herbert Rovell Benham McKittrick
Francis Sitwell Pratt Ontario
Albert John Scholl, Jr Los Angeles
Ruth Sceley Los Gatos
Glen Miller Smyth Salt Lake City-, Utah
Guy Carleton Swan Lawrence, Mass.
Devi Dyal Virmani Bahawalpore, India
Waldo Ralph Waelty Santa Clara
William Irvin Weaver Colorado Springs, Colo.
BOTANY
Taylor Jay Blethen Portland, Ore.
Arthur Dickie Borden Palo Alto
Ollis Willard Newman Santa Barbara
Frank Jason Smiley Fresno
PHYSIOLOGY AND HISTOLOGY
Albert Gordon Bower Salt Lake City, Utah
Roscal Leroy Draper Arroyo Grande
Florence Edetha Dunlop Vale, Ore.
George Stevenson Holcman Riverside
Leonard R. Jenkins Ogden, Utah
Merton James Price San Francisco
Karl Ludwig Schaupp Santa Rosa
John Philip Stricklcr San Diego
fCharles Ernest von Geldern San Francisco
*Carleton Wolsey Washburne Sierra Madre
fClyde T. Wetmore Hollister
Robert William Wilcox Delta, Colo.
fElsa Will Rochester, N. Y.
ZOOLOGY
Clara Crosby Santa Cruz
Mary 1* isk Los Angeles
ENTOMOLOGY AND BIONOMICS
Leroy Childs Redlands
fWarren Locke Smith Ferndale
Verne Genoa Stevens Palo Alto
GEOLOGY AND MINING
Robert Edwin Anderson San Francisco
Harry Mayo Andreen Redwood City
fCarl Hugh Beal Palo Alto
Edward Burke Corbet San Francisco
Waldemar Fenn Dietrich San Francisco
Benjamin Edward Erb Chemainus, B. C.
Andrew Douglas Fyfe Oceanside
fWilliam Conrad Gehrmann Davenport, la.
Mortimer Louis Hall Pasadena
Harold Briggs Hannibal San Jose
Olaf Pitt Jenkins Stanford* University
Grover Berner Lantz Colton
tßernard Harold Lasky San Francisco
*Robcrt James McCann Pacific Grove
fHarvey Wright Parmelee Santa Barbara
*Alonzo William Peake Los Angeles
Arthur E. Remington Watertown, N. Y.
*Edwin John Stewart Los Angeles
CIVIL ENGINEERING
Charles Edward Beechcr Monrovia
Edwin Prcscott Bly Los Angeles
I von Clay Briggs San Francisco

some others equally important. In
like manner the choicest thoughts and
worthiest ideals of America are
thoughts and ideals long before treas
ured by the advanced minds of Europe.
Another lesson from America is that
of the effective federation. The United
States is composed of fortliy-eight
self-governing states, each an entity
within itself managing its own affairs,
with its own officials and its own
laws, controlled by the nation in those
interests only which it shares with
its sister states. Some of these states
are as populous and wealthy as the
Kingdom of Europe, but each is a
jurisdiction, not a power. None can
make war alone, either by force of
arms or force of tariffs. While there
is all machinery for settling disputes
between states such disputes never
arise, because no state has the right
to use its force to promote private
business.
Stilts Equality
The states in a federal union meet
as jurisdictions. The small ones have
no fear of the large ones, and those
not touching the sea suffer in no way
from their restricted position. A
"Power" hampered as is the state of
Illinois would chafe against its limita
tions, and its jingoes would talk of
fighting their way to the ocean. But
viewed as a jurisdiction, surrounded by
similar jurisdictions, the people of
Illinois have no consciousness of limi
tation.
And this should be our ultimate con
ception of a nation. Its boundary line
should represent merely the limit of
jurisdiction. That jurisdiction ceases
does not imply need of violence be
tween the people on the two sides nor
require fortification for the purpose
of repelling violence. The Canadian
boundary is an example of this meet
ing of nations not as powers but as
jurisdictions.
This four-thousand-mile line, rang
ing through all kinds of territory and
all sorts of conditions, disputed nearly
all the way "with all the brutal frank
ness common to blood relations," has
for nearly a hundred years not known
a fortress, a soldier, a warship or a
gun. It is a peace boundary, the limit
of the jurisdiction of one self-govern
ing nation, the beginning of that of
another. It lacks but one thing to
make it ideally perfect, the re
moval of the custom-house, the em
blem of national suspicion and greed,
the remnant, of the days when it was
considered good economics for a na
tion to "have its taxes paid by for
eigners."
Europe in Turmoil
Viewed as "great powers" devoted
to the exploitation of the wealth of
other regions the leading nations of
Europe are in constant turmoil. The
German empire for example, is hamp
ered on every side. Her scant sea
coast is split in two by the presence
of Denmark. Her German Rhine dis
charges itself through Holland. The
ports of Amsterdam, Rotterdam, Ant
werp and Ostend, geographically her's,
are occupied by alien people whom she
could crush out in a moment, were it
not. for the physical force of the rest
of Europe and the moral power of the
world. Of Poland, she has too much
or too little. A large part of the Ger
man people live in the alien empire of
Austro-Hungary and in the republic
of Switzerland, while after forty years
of possession, Germany scarcely owns
Alsace or Lorraine. The states are a
thorn in the side of the empire, a bur
den and a weakness, just so long as
their two millions of people are held in
semi-vassalhood by the rule of force.
A free republic of Alasace Lorraine, a
second Swithzerland, half-German,
half-French separating and joining
two great nations would be a strength
and an inspiration to both. The true
gateways of the Rhine held by the
power of blood and iron is a centre
of menace to civilization. For the
wrong done at the Treaty of Frank
fort forty years ago, Europe has had to
pay most dearly for it is around the
question of Alsace-Lorraine that half
the crushing armament of Europe has
been built up. She is hemmed in
everywhere by the scare of old strugg
les, to her perennial discomfort. For
this reason, she suffers from the
"Drang nach Osten," she seeks a road
to the Persian gulf, an empire over
seas, and every form of imperial ex
tension to lands "under the sun,"
which may for the moment seem
plausible or possible.
But Germany as a jurisdiction suf
fers none of these limitations. Her
powers are only those which are
needed for the people's good. They
are merely her public duties. It mat
ters noting that her sway is checked
on almost, every side before it reaches
the sea. Other jurisdictions inter
vene, and each of these looks after
the public needs of man, which are
mostly justice, conservation, educa
tion, sanitation, and peace. As one of
the "Great Powers" of the world, Ger
many (with her fellow states as well)
is a center of friction, injustice and
unrest.
"A Power" is u Menace.
As a jurisdiction Germany is busy
with profitable and constantly ad
vancing industries, with an admir
able system of education and exten
sive provision for all the people's
needs, and no enlargement of boun
daries could in the least increase her
usefulness, her wealth or her happi
ness. As "a power" Germany is a
menace to the well being of civiliza
tion as every other "power" of similar
nature must be in its degree For
the prosperity of every people de
pends on international peace, and
all power-manifestations are either
actual or potential war. War is a
form of world-sickness from which
every function of civilization suffers,
and most of all those bonds of com
mon thought and common interest
sumed up in internationalism. And
to the members of an international
state, German in blood and in sym
pathy as well as English, all these
destructive rivalries of state with
state seem mediaeval and unworthy.
There is, in fact, something primitive,
outworn and unprogressive in the
spectacle of a civilized nation com
posed of millions of clever people
trusting for its defense to forts and
ships. With all the resources of
business, of science, ef education, of
thought, to depend on force seems a
lazy, even cowardly, shirking of the
higher possibilities of national
strength. To be surrounded by armed
guards, "holding the drop" on all
Commercial rivals is not a lofty con
ception of a nations's greatness. This
attitude has been as disastrous to
England's own peace of mind as it has
been menacing to the world's welfare.
To escape from this condition is not
a matter of a day nor a generation. Tt
is not easy for America even to

Revoe Carlisle Briggs Pasadena
fFloyd Cromwell Brown Selma
fEdward James Cullen Gilroy
Harry Bascom Davis Pomona
Wilbur Harvey Doxsee Redwood City
Robert Francis Duryea Palo Alto
fClarence Bernard Goodwin Sunnyvale
fCharles Stewart Grace Rivera
John Stanley Grepe, Jr East Highlands
tNorman Marshall Ilalcombe San Francisco
George William Hawley Portland, Ore.
George Walter Hunt San Jose
Paul Eells Jeffers Los Angeles
William Aiken Laird Lindsay
Alexander Stuart Macdonald San Francisco
tßobert Patchen Miller Los Angeles
Maurice Everard Morrison Morgan Hill
fßoger Wolcott Olmsted Los Angeles
Chauncey Smith Elie, Manitoba, Canada
Thomas Joseph Spellman Colma
fßurroughs Agin Stephenson Los Altos
Harry George Todtmann Chicago, 111.
George Harlan Trask Los Angeles
Charles Ralph Tupper San Jose
Romney Leigh Vaughn San Francisco
Guss Valentine Wallach Boonville
Carlton Levi Wyant Montecito
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING
■fClarence P. Campbell Los Angeles
tWallace Rolland Finney...* Modesto
*Burdette Lord Hostettler Erie, Pa.
Kenneth Irving Marshall Los Angeles
tAugustus Mudge Sanborn Redlands
Cecil Stocker Simon Los Gatos
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
*Edward Niles Adam Melville, Mont.
Frank Edward Anderson Los Angeles
fClarence Cannon Argabrite Ventura
John Watson Fleming Armstrong....Fivemiletown, Tyrone, Ire.
Everett Morse Calderwood Palo Alto
Melville Nathaniel Clark Dayton, Me.
John Francis Cullen Gilroy
Walter Jennings Dodge Los Angeles
Charles Greenlaw Duffin Comas, Wash.
Harry Adolph Fore Campbell
Frank Julius Gleiss Los Angeles
Walter J. Hammond ! Grinncll, la.
Tomiichi Haraguchi Nagasaki, Japan
George Edward Holditch Orange
Edgar Alden Jackson Cupertino
Linford C. Lull, Jr Los Angeles
James Arthur Miller Hanford
Rea Cambridge Newman Santa Barbara
George Washington Poison Menlo Park
Gaylord Kenyon Snyder Los Angeles
fGiistav Wade Naples
George Ireland Wright Pasadena
BACHELOR OF LAWS
Jerome Devereaux Peters San Jose
Granville Numan Wood, Jr Blue Lake
MASTER OF ARTS
LATIN
Flora Anne Bagley Burlingame
fßuth Beard Modesto
Catherine Ida Birch Redlands
fAnna Shipley Cox San Jose
Mabel Harriett Usinger Berkeley
Malcolm Leland Yeary Los Angeles
GERMAN
Edward Vere Brewer Elyria, Ohio
Catharine Morris Cox San Jose
Lydia Lucilc Meyer . Milwaukee, Wis.
Clara Lydia Schaaf Fort Wayne, -Ind.
fElsie Louise Whittemore Alhambra
ENGLISH LITERATURE
Anais Julia Allen Pasadena
Walter Clyde Curry Gray-Court, S. C.
ENGLISH PHILOLOGY
Maude Cleveland Stanford University
EDUCATION
tWilliam Samuel Marten San Jose
Clarence Lucien Phelps Jamestown, Ky.
William Thomas Root, Jr Pasadena
William Roy Tanner Minneapolis, Minn.

emancipate herself from reactionary
influences in Europe. There are many
interests in a wealthy nation who find
an aid or an affinity in militarism.
Debt creates debt, and those inter
ested in spending band together
against reform.
These matters proceed by slow pro
gress, interrupted by reaction; we
are in a period of relapse at present,
when reactionary forces seem to be in
the ascendant. Hut this very fact with
its burdens and horrors may be count
ed on to turn the balance in the other
direction.
Neither will there be a formal fed
eration of nations in this era. In
deed federation in fact will come long
before it comes in name. A single
unified world-government with cen
tralized rule under one set of men at
some one place, is only a dream—and
not a cheerful dream at that. What
the world needs is more self-control,
more local responsibility not more
governmental machinery. Neverthe
less every step in removing injustice,
in eliminating sources of friction, in
extending common interests, as the
postol union, the telegraph union, in
ternational law, international police
duties, international conferences and
congresses, arbitration treaties a nd
other agreements—are steps in the di
rection of the passing of war. To this
end, three great contributing agencies
are: the growth of the popular con
science, the interlocking of personal
interests, and the ruinous expence
which the progress of science has
brought to every branch of the mili
tar art.
All this has its part in the great
movement towards common interna
tional life, "La Vie Internationale" of
the dreams of La Fontaine, a life
which shall make war impossible and
will, in time, do away with exploita
tions, with tariff barriers and with all
the products of that narrow nativism,
which considers only the purposes or
enrichment of the selfish few, the one
in-group against all the out-groups of
the world.
Value of Open Diplomacy
Another lesson which the United
States may teach is the value of open
diplomacy. A secret agreement of
any kind whatever. It was a warning
of Washington that his nation should
beware of Entangling Alliances. A
formal alliance is for the purpose of
making enemies, never of making
friends. Friendship among nations
rests on common interests, on the in
terlocking of minds, the interlocking
of trade.
In the United States a treaty can be
entered into only with the open and
public consent of the Senate. Every
international relation is therefore
open to the world. No minister, no
president, no group of men whatever
can secretly pledge the nation to any
line of action. No president, no cabi
net, no minister, no congress acting
alone can make any declaration of
public policy. For these reasons the
United States must stand outside the
tangled snare of concessions and intri
gues we call world politics. She must
play her games of diplomacy with
open hands. She cannot be the secret
friend of any other nation. She can
not be a secret enemy because all her
acts, friendly or hostile, are known to
all the world.
The secret treaty in the interest of
imperial spoliation is the bane of
Europe. It ties each foreign office to
the service of the most reckless and
greedy of its great exploiting inter
ests. It has reduced the chancelleries
of more than one nation to be nothing
more than the firm name under which
its exploiting corporations compass
their ends in Asia or in Africa.
The secret is a relic of the military
state. The civilzed world is still or
ganized on the mediaeval theory that
war is a natural function to he ex
pected in the normal course of events,
not a hideous inorau, physical;. and
financial catastrophe. la the old
theory as expounded by Machiavelli,
the king has no other business but
war. It is the duty of his ministers
to find weak places in the defenses of
other kings through which war may
be successful, and to find, after the
fact, excuses by which' war can be
justified. The secret treaty, the .con
cession to a friendly power, ithe. arti-.
ficial interference with a rival, —all
these belong to the days' of Ma<?hia
velli. If . all parties concerpe.4 ( |cojJ>ld :
come out.into the open, .Wihsre . t-het
United States is forced to stahd, we
should soon have an end to tneAttgld-
German struggle, of the rivalry be
tween the Triple Entente and the
Triple Alliance.
Outworn ideas ot' national glory, out
worn figures of.speech as tp national
purposes, outworn mediaevalism in
our -conception of the state.—all'these
find expression in the "secret treaty,"
the "entangling alliance," which is a'
chief obstacle in the way of the -con
ciliation of nations. ?>• -
Historically, the influence of Amer
ica has been exerted in opposition to
Imperialism and to infringement of
the great nations on the rights of the
sniall. This is the inception of the
Monroe Doctrine, which in spite of its
perversion and its wrong accentuation r
has protected Latin America from the
fate of Africa. That this should now
be a Pan-American, not njerely an.
American doctrine goes without say
ing. And it must never be allowed i.o
degenerate-into " a Dollar Diplomacy"
which would.reserve Tropical America
as a special "sphere of, .influence-' for
American exploitation,. For the true,
and final form of the Mojiuae.Doctrine
is found, in the Drago .Doctrine,. of the
republics of South Ameripa,, that tiie
forqe of . arms should. be used-ras.
an,instrument iu industiriul spoliation.
This the people of the United States
should adopt as• their-.own. « <
Principle Disregarded '
In a recent deciskm- of- arbitration;
the King 'of Swed'ant'laW down 'this
principle: that a nation "has 110
right to land- troops in .order-to pYe-'
serve the property or the rights of her
nationals.". This''lwinciple. ha,s '-beefr
disregarded in the •strangling of
Persia, the rape of Mongolia and of
Tibet, in the chronic robbery of
China, and in the annexation of Egypt, <
of Korea, uf Morocco and of Tripoli.
But it is for all that a just.-and honor
able principle, and it is disregarded
only when a nation, by virtue of super
ior strength or superior civilization
feels itself justified in taking posses
sion of another for its good, and inci
dentally for the commercial advant
age of its own exploitating interests.
It is true that the smaller nations of
the tropics are subject to violent
political disturbances. They have not
learned the value of liberty as regu
lated hjy law. Yet it is highly prob
able that not one in ten of these
periodical/ revolutions I's of spontan- 1
eous native origin. of them are
started for purposes of spoliation by

autside adventurer's and a large ma
jority are paid for by adventurers
'State. The Public School exists
everywhere at the public expense, and
belonging to one or more of the great
epinniarqia'ruatrojis tit', fheiear'th.. When."
'the"fi v nal' iriitli'Ts"known'"of unhappy
Mexico the responsibility for hfei' dis
(Mfer'sl will rest nht on'her martyred
president, ridr "on the' sol
"diers'of fortune by whose hands he
•fell, but on the men in New York or
in London perhaps,' whose nioiWy has
kept iliese revolutions going. Mexico,
with fatal riches of oil and gold, is not
tlie first nation to Ite torn asunder by
'conflicting ."sphere's of influence."
The. influence of the republic has
been always thrown against another
form of imperialism involved in the
phrase "Control of the Sea." America
has never claimed any such control
nor has she admitted the right to
others. It is a mediaeval idea going
back foiir hundred years to the time
when the great seas were divided be
tween Spain and Portugal. America
has stood for the open sea, the restric
tion of national jurisdiction to the
three-mile limit, the extermination of
piracy, and in iater years for the most
important doctrine of the immunity of
war. To make the high seas an open

HI STORY
Ella Wissie Beaver ...T. .Tulare
fEmrria Howse Kuno Palo Alto
George Lutes Righter '.Campbell
Francis Marion Russell .Los Angeles
MATHEMATICS
Rose Margaret Bennett »....San Diego
Amanda Westhold ..Quincy, 111:
CHEMISTRY
Alicje. .Ruth Bergcr San Jose
Elton Marion Hogg. v Saratoga
Charles Kirkton McWilliams San Joss
tWilliam John Van Sicklen Castle-ton, Ontario,,Canada
BOTANY
Charlotte Elliott Del Rapids, S. D.
BACTERIOLOGY
Frank Maltaner .Cincinnati, O.
ZOOLOGY
Josephine Louise Dows Randall Stanford University
ENTOMOLOGY
F rankie Willard Galexioo
GEOLOGY
Theodore Chapin., Los Angeles
Joseph Stanley Hook jjPerris ■
ENGINEER
CHEMICAL ENGINEERING
. Louis Wjlliam Pingree.-. ; Ogden-, Utah
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING
fDexter Simpson Kimball N. Y.
Lyman Stevenson King Oakland .
r *• . V <
JURIS DOCTOR
George Armand Ditz Stockton f-1
Maurice Timothy Dooling • Hollistter ,
fEmmet Ross Fertig Nobl.esvjlle, Ind.
fFrank Louis Guerena rs .. „Spnora
George Juan Hatfield ...Oakland-,
Frank Howard Hilton ; Portland, Ore.
Grant Holcomb San Bernardino^
Ignatius Martin Peckham tV| . San . Jose
Edmund Wright Pugh Los. (Angeles..
Alfred'Worcester Robertson Saflt? Ba,rbru:a ..
Chester Harvey Warlow : . r ., . ( Fresno,
Herbert Eustace White Saotamento^.
tFrederick feertram Wood i. . Alto.
* September 6, 1912
fjanuary 10, 1013 "O '?t it

highway-to be tr.a.ver?ed , ( afc ( anytime,-
in absolute--safety, by any, vessel what
ever would-gp/t'ar away
witji international..waff,.-and iSitill ftWH
ther in ren^.vi!),£..tlve- and dnv<-
gerous burden of naval protectioni»'l£;
all military operations.- at. sea couidibe
confined to the <oa,nnon shot.
from the. shore, the- original motive
of the three-mile limit of. jurisdiction,
it would represent one of ,the most
practical triumphs of civilization.- Ttfe
nations should join to make the ocean
safe, not to fill it with floating fort
resses designed t tp. protect merchant
ships from robbery by the very per
sons with whom they trade.
Still another lesson from. America is
one in which, we all agree; the divorce
of religion from political control and
therefore from the,domain of politics.
Absolute religions freedom exists .in
America because the state assumes
no relation of any kind to religious
corporations as such, So long as these
do not interfere with the freedom of
soul or body of men not. belonging to
them, their acts do not concern the
state. And on no, one policy is there
more firm agreement.in America* than
in the absolute separation of Church
nowhere can any sect or gpoup of seets
claim any dominating relation in re

gard to It. To the average American
the strife over Church properties and
Church interests so real in Europe
seem incomprehensible. The Church,
any church, is in every way better oif
for separation from the government.
Whatever achievement; whatever pro
gress it may make is its own, and this
progress is solid because it involves,
no ulterior political end.
Connected with the freedom of the
church is the freedom of the people
from other forms of paternalism. The
state becomes benevolent only when it
lias failed to be just. It allows special
opportunities to individuals only
where it has denied opportunity to
men at large.
The "old-age pension" is a conven
ient'illustration,.'lt has been justly
compared to- the. free pass homeward
granted to the human wrecks who
have lost their all in the. gambling
rooms of-Monte Carlo. It is the shill
ing given to the man run over by my
lord's automobile.
In a better system he would not have
been run over. He would not have
lost his money in a vile resort, lie
would not have needed an outside
pittance to carry him through old age.
Host Workers Died in War
The old-age pension exists in Eng
land as a convenient balm for inequal
ity and injustice. The best of her
workers have died in her wars/ leav
ing a weaker stock to breed from.
These have grown' up unskilled, in de
fault of the shools that make men
strong. They have grown up in the
atmosphere of the public house, sod
den with lust and beer and whisky.
They have lost the opportiiniy tljat
should be theirs, and at the end their
jfellows must be taxed to feed tliem.
The tragedy of the East End of Lon
don is no normal part of the tragedy
of Life. It is no part of the normal
America. It is no part of a nation
which has given opportunity.
Brit'in America a' new country, fresh,
unspoiled, full of life and hope, it is
possible to hctt'd' government" to its
rigid purpose, to develop opportunity
by the elimination of privilege, teacfy,.
men to lean' not on' government but
on themselves, and to aid by'fraternal '
giving those who have fallen in. tbg
prang 1 ; not "to weaken by unearned
public money those who are falling but
who can be made to stand, 'tfie wav
Up it i '">• vtc.
t)t the transgressor is hard and we
not make it eapier'ff we could;
|We' could not if we would'. To. give a..
plkh'a chance to'rise,' i'.s to allow him'
hlfbthe choice t<>Tali:" ' *';•"
1 is ! •?; . " *
foii.fession of Failure , '
■ "Tho old-age pension" .is, so- far as 1
it goes, a confession of failure of de- ■
jnocracy,. Except as a measure of'"
e |1 £r-fie.pcy, l Jts real purpose in Eng
land, it has no justification in good '
government. Clean up the. social at
mosphere, restore to the people, what ■
is rightfully theirs, and they will care, 1
rare accidents .excepted, for their own
old age.
in America tlie struggle, between '
labor and capital can never assume
the form it has in Europe. In a gov
ei nment which stands for justice, and
which is in no way occupied with
making money for its people, nor from
its People, nor in supporting exploiting
intei ests in other lauds, there is uo
visable necessity for universal col
lective ownership. Where classes do
not leally exist there is no pertinence
in the artificial distinctions of aristoc
racy, proletariat and bourgeoisie
which have been so laboriously
brought over from Europe. If these*
distinctions exist, most of us in Amer
ica belong to one single class, that of
the bourgeoisie.
There exist in America as elsewhere,
vast fortunes, disproportionate to the
ability or the efforts of those who con
trol them. But their history has been
of short duration. They are not leg
acies from an unjust past. Their or
igin belongs to the present. It is
mainly individual. Great luck, great
skill or ingeniously managed privilege
stands behind each of them. By the
same means as in Europe, by co
operation through interlocking direc
torates, these great fortunes have
been made to stand together and thus
by a process of financial suction to
build up fortunes still greater. But
one most important difference exists.
The national government, in theory
and for the most in fact, stands aloof
from these combinations. The con
trol of public affairs, even of financial
matters is beyond their permanent
reach. Their influence on foreign
diplomacy is limited because no secret
influence can control, and the power
of money for evil is mostly lost in
publicity.
Property May Rule
In all their operations, they are sur
rounded by an alert and in the long
run victorious opposition of democ
racy. In America property may rule,
but only for a time. In the earlier
•centuries of Europe, the period of
Absolutism, when monarchy was a
political power not a function of so
ciety, it was, of course, true that prop
erty ruled. But it was the ruler who
had the property. It was his by force
of position. Not until the money lend
ers of the last century secured the
strangle hold on the nations of
Europe was this condition brought to
an end.
Then again, property ruled, but it
was not that the King and the nobles
held the property. Property held
them, and in Europe today it is money
that rules, and it rules King and
peasant alike, for everything el3e
hinges on the Imperial Explotation of
foreign lands.
In America, this is true in a degree,
but the rule of money has its visible
limits. For the United States belongs
to its people.
"Dollar Diplomacy"
While Europe generally, the alliance
between financial interests and the
government is open and avowed, such
•connections in America have proved
fatal to political leaders and to polit
ical parties. The methods by which
the "powers of Europe" through their
foreign offices bolster up adventures
in foreign lands, could not be used in
America. The diplomacy of persua
sion, threats or force of arms in the
interest of private ventures would be
impossible here. The people might
consent to "Dollar Diplomacy" but
•only for a time and until its nature
is understood. The recent, repudia
tion of our relation to the "Six Power
Loan' to China will serve as a case in
point.
And here again we must admit that
out democratic conception of govern
ment has to struggle for acceptance
in America. The protective tariff in
theory and in practice is a flat viola
tion of its principles. Tt is a flat
violation of the spirit of the American
■constitution. It is privilege pure and
simple granted to the few by the
many, in the belief that in the long
run the many would profit by it. Its

purpose was to diversify industries by
letting the farmer help pay the ex
penses of the manufacturer. It has
just that effect, and the farmer and
laborer are becoming increasingly
discontented with its burdens and the
inequalities before the law which are
part and parcel of its operations.
In America, the army and navy,
though the latter has grown beyound
all reason through the rivalry from
England and Germany, still represent
a democratic ideal. We still hold to
the thought that our officers are not
rulers but servants of the people.
Our military element stands near
the parting of the ways, for all offi
cialism tends to aggrandize itself,
most of all that which is associated
with pomp and with patriotism. Mili
tarism for its own sake belongs to the
state in whoch property rules. "It
furnishes," says John A. Hobson, "a
profitable support to certain strong
vested interests. It is a decorative
element in social life and above all, it
is necessary to keep down the
pressure of the forces of internal
reform."
>o Room for Militarism
The ideals of Militarism and Democ
racy can never coexist. And this na
tion is too far given over to democ
racy ever to do more than dally with
the military ideal. In a nation that
knows no caste, and has no aristioc
racy other than temporary and self
selected, no military traditions will
ever be permanent. There can never
be a warrior caste holding special
privilege or special authority.
As a people, we of the United States
are too rich in resources of wealth, of
education and of intelligence to be
controlled by influences of militarism.
And thus and for the same reasons, in
the republic of America, the state ex
ists for the man, not the man for the
state. This is the fundamental differ
ence between the Eighteenth Century
and Twentieth. And let us speed the
day when it may be said not only that
"America means Opportunity" but
that the same hopeful word may be
spoken of Germany and England and
France and Russia and of all the na
tions in the sisterhood of civilization.
Lord Acton thus sums up the move
ment of the history of civilization:
"It is by the combined efforts of the
weak made under compulsion to re
sist the reign of force and constant
wrong that in the rapid change but
slow progress of four hundred years
liberty has been preserved and se
cured and extended and finally under
stood."
And as America comes to under
stand her own message of democracy,
internationalism and peace, she will
carry this understanding back to the
motherland of Europe.
Within the last two months Presi
dent Wilson and Mr. Bryan have
planned a most practical and effective
means of bringing American influence
to bear on the problems of World
peace.
The end in view is to relegate war
to a position of last resort in times
of international difference, to place
soldiers and dreadnaughts in the
background—not in the front of na
tional movement.
The essence of this American policy
is that in case of friction between
nations, the matter be placed for six
months in the hands of a joint high
Commission of investigation, chosen
in part from the contending nations,
the majority from friendly neutrals.
These- for six months shall study the
question at issue, neither nation in the

meantime demonstrating, mobilizing
or increasing the armament, until the
final report is made. After this each
nation is free to choose conciliation,
concession, compromise, arbitration
or war. And with six months to think
it over there will be no war. Wars are
waged for greed, for politics, or be
cause the mob has been stirred by
senseless speech or reckless journal
ism. And in many cases this reckless
journalism has been carefully cal :u
--lated and fully paid for by those in
terested in the sale of the accessories
of war.
The treaty of arbitration will natur
ally follow on the treaty for investi
gation. Courts will naturally supple
ment results of friendly offices. But
the agreement for friendly conference
comes first and is for the present the
more important. The Treaty of Arbi
tration is most valuable, — not as
preventing war, for a nation bent on
war, if there is such a case, will not
stop to agree to arbitrate. The world
is finally ruled by public opinion. Ar
bitration treaties clinch public opinion
and hold it to its duty.
The present decade has been char
acterized by needless, costly and
brutal wars, the result not of actual
conditions of today, but of blunders
and crimes committed in the past.
Wars do not spring up afresh in our
civilization. They spring from old
wars whose seeds were not destroyed
by peace.
Rut, however, dark the present out
look may seem with half the coined
money of the world spent each year
on war and war's accessories, the far
outlook is most promising. The cruel
horror of the Balkan war, the waste of
armed peace and frustrate war
throughout the civilized world, — all
these make powerfully for peace, for
real peace — the Peace of Law and
Trust, and not the Peace of Force.
And just now is the time when
American influence can be most defi
nitely crystallized and made effective.
And we are thankful that we have in
the seats of Authority at Washington
men who definitely work for peace
and whom war and war's fripperies
do not dazzle nor attract.
Two hundred and seven students were awarded the Bachelor of
Arts Degree by President David Stu rr Jordan in the Assembly Hull tills
morning. Two were granted the Bachelor of Laws Degree, while
thirty-five were given the Master of Arts Degree. In addition to these
the Academic Council also awarded three Engineer, thirteen .luris Doc
tor of Philosophy Degrees. The Co miuencemnet address preceded the
presenting of the sheepskins, *Th e Conquest of Europe by America,"
wsis the subject of the strong address delivered by Doctor Jordan.

I wish this morning to say a serious
word to you as citizens of the great
republic and as future leaders in its
thought and action. I wish you to
think earnestly of the part American
influence must play in the world his
tory of our century. It is for us to
help cure the accumulated evils of
the older civilization. Those men in
Europe who look furthest into the
future hope for the salvation of
Europe through ideals brought back
from practical service in America.
One of these. Senator La Fontaine of
Brussels, has given me my title as the
expression of the hope of his life,
"The Conquest of Europe by America."
I hasten to say that 1 do not mean
conquest by force of arms, for 1 have
no interest in such conquests and no
belief that victories thus won result in
any permanent good to any nation.
Nor do I mean financial conquests,
the floating of imperial loans or the
permeation of any part of European
business by financiers from the New
World. Still less do I celebrate a
shoppers' contest on the Place de
I'Opera or among the dazzling bar
gains of the Hon Marche. Nor does
the trail of American tourists who
cross with gold the palms of Europe's
servitors, all the way from Piccadilly
to the Pyramids awaken in me any
pride of nation or of race. The only
permanent conquest is that of ideas.
America stands, has always stood, for
two ideals from which she cannot
escape, for they are fundamental in
her origin and in her growth. These
are internationalism and democracy,
and these ideals being invincible
must conquer America, and through
her, reconquer Europe. And as both
are incompatible with war, their final
triumph marks the end of spoliation,
of and of that relation be
tween nations which breeds suspicion
and hatred. The conquest of the
world by the ideals of International
ism and Democracy marks the coming
of universal peace.
In the address at Baltimore in 1911,
Henri La Fontaine of Brussels, the
veteran prophet of International Life,
used these striking words.
"Emigration perhaps more than
war has deprived the old, historic
countries of their most energetic and
fittest ones to build the progressive
and wealthy people you are on this side
of the Atlantic. You are for us
Europeans, the beloved Brotherland,
Do not forget that Europe is always

and will still remain for you the be
loved Motherland. Europe is now for
America what Greece was for Europe.
Europe has liberated (Ireece. Amer
ica has to liberate Europe from its
burdens, its prejudices, its hatreds.
It is your duty, it is your highest duty
to reconcile outside your borders the
people you have reconciled within
your borders. For indeed the Amer
ican people is at present the true
international people. It is the elect
people which alone can further inter
nationalism and can transform all of
the people of the Earth into a family
of nations, a brotherhood of men, an
international people." "For coloniza
tion is not mainly done by men and by
capital, but also by ideas, by example,
by experiment."
Not Always True to Ideals
We may freely admit in the begin
ning that America has not always been
true to her own ideals, and that she
has not always clearly seen her own
future. She has had her own lapses,
moral and social, some of these be
cause of associations with Europe and
through imitation of glories alien to
her history. If she had been true to
herself she would never have known
a single foreign war. She has no part in
those greeds and jealousies of money
or of race which still keep up turmoil
in Europe. Her war with Spain with
its eagerness for exploitation, its
tinsel imperialism and its pride of
participation in "world politics" rep
resents the worst of these lapses, and
its evil effects are long in passing.
But though the inception of this affair
was European in method, its contin
uance has been characteristically
American. Instead of exploitation, we
have brought to the Philippines educa
tion and sanitation. We have expend
ed on them a hundred times what we
have received, and if ever imperilism
can be respectable we have made it so.
Another false movement has been
in the building of warships and forts
in America. This lacks the motive
for similar extravagances in Europe,
because the peace of the new world is
no where threatened. But with us as
everjwhere the military spirit grows
with the money spent on it. The more
mouths fed by the State the greater
the clamor for the feeding of still
more. We have also to reckon with
the desire for giant decoration, for
big navies for sheer bigness' sake, the
feeling that this is the richest and'
most progressive nation on the globe,

and that as such she can beat old
Europe at her own game even though
that game be not worth the candle.
But with all lapses and delinquin
cies the fact of internationalism and
the ideal of democracy have been and
must always remain with the United
States, and from the United States
these ideals will react with greater
and greater force on the thoughts and
deeds of Europe.
Internationalism is the heritage of
America, not of choice at first, but cf
necessity. She has perforce grown
up with this ideal, because no other
was possible. She became the cosmo
politan nation of the world because
of her complex origin and with this
origin she could be nothing else. In
a new civilization, in the struggles of
the frontier each man is rated for
what he is worth. Under these condi
tions no one cares for the petty pre
cedences of rank or race. What a
man can do in the next twenty-four
hours outvalues any question as to
who were his ancestors.
All Hate Dies
On a railway train not long ago
some one was overheard to say: "This
is the land where all hate dies. My
father was German; my mother was
French. What do I care for all that?
I am an American. The old hatreds
and rivalries are nothing to me."
America was English, first. In lang
uage, in spirit, in conscience and in
government it is England which domi
nates. For the English race, above
all others, with its adaptation for co
operation and for compromise is the
builder of free states.
It was the chosen among the Eng
lishmen of three centuries ago who
founded the germ colonies of Virginia
and Massachusetts May. In the fol
lowing years it has been the like
minded from their own nation and
from others who have crossed the seas
to enter into their work.
The first who came were the bold,
the free, the self-ruling, the pleasure
scorning element of English life. They
came to escape from the state
church and the church-state, that they
might worship in their own fashion
and according to dictates of their indi
vidual consciences.
They detested the law of primogeni
ture which thrust the spirit of pre
cedence into the bosom of every fam
ily. They abhorred the law of entail
which burdened the land with the
curse of privilege even to unborn gen
erations.
They had caught from France the

spirit of liberty, equality, fraternity,
but as befits the calmer blood of the
north, they gave this spirit a con
structive interpretation, and the idea
of equality was to them especially rich
in practical results. Equality before
the law, equal access to land, to edu
cation, to professions and trades,
. equal access to legislat ion, each of
these conceptions broadened out into
the spirit of democracy.
And after England came to other
nations of Europe, each with its own
part and in its own degree giving its
contingent of free-born men, the ad
| mixture of blood gave strength and
! versatility to the rising nation.
But withal, the dominant note is
English still, with as many diver-
I gences from the England of today as
j from the England of the Stuarts.
In later years other immigration has
come, not alone the bold in search of
adventure, of new homes and new free
doms, but the weak and the oppressed,
"the beaten men of the beaten races,"
who llee from war taxation in search
of living wages and of daily bread.
But all these are cast into the same
melting pot and in most of them there
arises a clear response to the call of
free institutions.
In this melting pot of America, all
the old racial antipathies disappear
and all hereditary hatreds. There is
110 final distinction of British or Ger
j man, of French or Italian, of Spanish
|or Slav, of Dutch or Scandinavian,
!or of Jew or Gentile. The average
| American is as cosmopolitan in origin
j and relationship as is royalty in
Europe, though for a different set of
| reasons. But in America there is 110
[ distinction of common or noble, of
high or low, of aristocracy, bour
j geoisie or proletariat except as these
| are artificially emphasized in the in
dustrial strife we have inherited from
Eu rope.
To the international mind of Amer
ica, there seems 110 need or pertinence
to an Anglo-Saxon alliance as against
any other people. In so far as such
alliance is desirable or humanly pos
sible it exists already in a common
sympathy and a common literature, ft
would lie weakened by a stated agree
ment of the Anglo-Saxon group to
swell each others Meets with dread
naughts. The true bond of Union of
the Greater Britain involves no rup
ture with the Greater Germany, or the
Greater France or the Greater Scandi
navia to which we in America likewise
claim allegiance.
To the American, "Pan-Germanism,"
Pan-Slavism," as lie hears these ex
pounded seem a meaningless return to
ideals of tlie Middle Ages. They re
mind him of the Holy Roman Empire,
which never was, and should never be,
or still more they hark back to Pan-
Islamism the futile dream of the light
ing Turk.
There is nothing in aggrandizement
of race as such which appeals to the
American, the child of all European
races. That such races are ennobled
by conquest of lesser tribes and by
their undigested exploitation he does
not believe. To the American even
England's greatness does not exist on
her Indian Empire, but rather in spite
of it.
Within the last forty years there lias
grown up a new world in Europe and
in the range of civilization. The old
conception of the states of Europe
as opposed to one another and mutu
ally destructive must, pass away in the
broader aspects of civilization.
The growth of International life is
one of the most striking aspects of
this new relation. The extention of
travel, the spread of commerce, the
achievements of science, the exchanges
in education, all these tend to make
a great "melting pot" of the civilized
world. Neither in his business, in his
pleasures, nor in his intellectual pur
suits is the educated man anywhere
limited to any one country. All
rational human interests are con
nected by interlocking bonds of many
kinds, joining one people with another.
The hundreds of international con
gresses held every summer the world
over and covering almost every gen
eral interest of men is the strongest
possible evidence of this Interlocking,
and all this constitutes an inter
national bond not to be lightly severe.!.
A declaration of war between nations
is now little less than an attack on
civilization in all its most cherished
aspects, social, moral, as well as finan
cial. The lines of national policy
taken for granted half a century ago
are fast becoming impossible, their
very suggestion being ruinous.
I'c ideiicj toward < oix'ilintion
The influence of America tends to
wards international conciliation. It
involves the recognition of men as
men, each valued for what he is or
wlnit tie can do. Both of these deter
mined, of course, by bis blood and his
education, but not to be judged in ad
vance by any wholesale distinctions.
This is the spirit of the Interna
tionale, the common life and common
sympathy among civilized people, re
gardless of national boundaries. This
International life constitutes the final
and lasting basis of International
Peace.
As the history of America rests on
internationalism so is her social fab
ric built on democracy. Historically
her democracy has a double origin. Its
theory was French, its practice was
English. The French philosophers
furnished the one, the reaction against
British methods the other.
For inequality before the law is the
foundation of the polity of Great
Britain. Her constitution stands on
privilege. Her social customs rest on
precedence of classes, precedence of
individuals. England chooses her lords
and magnates, her patrons and tyrants
long before they are born. These be
long to her system of privilege by
which cities like Westminster, Shef
field, Davenport, Arundel, were so
long held, virtually tax-free, by men
whose ancestors received their land as
royal gifts or bought tlieni as cow
pastures. The law of favor rises above
the law of justice.

Hut men of the pioneer type, the
Roundhead, the Pilgrim, the Puritan,
the American have hated favor and
privilege and precedence of every
form. The toll of tin 1 rich and the dole
of the poor are alike offensive to them.
And this dislike of overreaching and of
coddling has passed over to their de
scendents. John Hay once said of the
people of the new state of Ohio. "They
looked to no one as their superiors,
and on none as their inferiors. They
knew 110 want they could not them
selves satisfy," and to this Senator
Bayard added the further note, "They
were too self-willed and independent
to allow any to rule over them but
t heniselves."
This in a word is the spirit of de
mocracy, of the democracy of the
pioneer if you like, but America is the
land of pioneers, and this fact still in-

11 uences all her acts unci her insti
tutions. Her people find their polit
ical ideals in an equal start with equal
opportunity, in equality before the
law, in equal access to education, in
equal access to the land, in equal ac
cess to legislation.
The nation is built on individuals
each responsible for himself. The
state is a mutual adjustment for their
collective benefit. The individual in
America does not live for the state, is
not the property of the state, the state
has no control over him except that
which the individual lias delegated. It
is no duty of the state to promote his
prosperity or the prosperity of his
group. The state is rather the umpire
which decides questions of justice, the
servant by which the needs of the
many are met by co-operation in so far
as these needs are general and conson
ant, with ideals of justice.
As the founders of our state were
frontiersmen scattered far and wide,
without cities, without corporations,
without great collective utilities, their
democracy became that of individual
ism. The demands of society, of col

leetive action, of national power were
little considered because such de
mands did not exist, and they have
never existed in the forms in which
hhirope knows them. And for this
reason, if for no other, the native
American lias not been strongly at
tracted to the various doctrines called
socialism in 13uropi. Like conditions
produce like results, and the growth
nl' industrialism with its successes and
its oppressions brings the same re
action as in Furope. But as a matter
of fact, those who take part in these
reactions are for the most part re
cent immigrants, whoso ideals of gov
ernment even in democracy are collec
tive, standing in strong contrast with
tho individualistic democracy native
to the soil.
Fifty year. - , ago, in lsC!, Fdouard
Laboulaye published bis renrirkable

hook "Paris <>n Amerique," (Paris in
America.) Its motive was to show
what a great city might become under
the conditions of freedom which pre
vailed in America. The America was
idealized of course. It, represented
the noblest ideals of free-born men,
rather than the actual America, the
forces of democracy must strive with
all the other forces extant in modern
civilization.
j The influence of this volume was
wide spread and long continued. It
was my fortune to know two men of
power, the one a Dane, the other a
Swiss who were drawn to America by
the charm of Laboulaye and who were
not disappointed. They found what
they sought, and this is a perennial
characteristic of the republic. Who
ever comes to America and with what
ever motive will find what he seeks.
If he remains long enough and has
penetration to look below the surface
I he will find America.
If one seeks religious freedom he
will find it. Our fathers provided for
that. Whatever form or type of re
ligious discipline he seeks he will find

accordingly, I>ut its discipline is vol
untary not enforced by the state. If
one would escape from all religious in
fluence he can do so in America. It is
for him to choose.
If one seeks for class distinction, for
domination of the great over the small,
hereditary or otherwise, he will find it
in personal and local only, not
wrought into the fabric of society. If
one would find privilege enthroned
even as in Europe he will find it in
America, just as powerful as in
Europe, Imi everywhere surrounded
by an equally powerful movement of
insurgency. If one would find greed,
selfishness, lust, vanity, tolerance,
anything which belongs to the dregs
of humanity, he will find it in America,
and it may be embodied in powerful
and defiant institutions. For freedom
guarantees only freedom, and the
meaning of freedom is opportunity.
In Laboulaye's work, the official
Napoleonic view, which "Paris in
America" takes as its point of depar
ture is thus expressed. "A society
without administration, without army,
without police, with the savage liberty
of praying, speaking, writing, acting
each in his fashion would not last a
quarter of an hour. It is the negation
of all these principles, of all the con
ditions of this civilization which
makes the unity of our French nation.
In constituting our administration,
hierarehal and centralized, the wis
dom of our fathers lias long since
raised France to the first rank and
shown to the French people that
Liberty is Obedience, then is our Glory
and our Force."
Ketcrse 01 Napoleon's Ideals
The distinctive character of the
American ideals reverses this. It is
the building up of a society in which
the government stands only for jus
tice. The state does not concern itself
with right, worship or wrong worship,
with right thinking or wrong think
ing, with writing truth or writing
falsehood, with right acts or words or
ceremonies, except as abuse of liberty
may infringe on the liberty of others.
"I'ne societe sans administration,
sans armee, sans gendarmes, avec
la liberie sauvage de prier. de ponser,
de parler, d'ecrire, d'agir. chacun a
sa facon ne durerait pas 1111 quart
d'heure. ("est la negation de tons ces
principcs, de toutes les conditions de
cette civilisation qui fait I'unite dp la
nation francaise. En constituant
notre administration bierarchis.ee et
centralised, la sagesse de 110s peres a
depuis longtemps eleve la France a
premier rang et appris aux Francais
<pie la liberte ("est l'obeissance. C'est
la notre glorie et notre force."
The state is not pious, benevolent,
virtuous, generous, because these per
sonal virtues, cannot be exercised by
officialism leads to their abuse.
Privilege to the poor means privilege
to the rich; privilege to the rich
means privilege to the poor, but al
ways the more powerful arm secures
the greater privilege. The essence of
democracy is that no one. rich or
poor should have a lease on privilege.
The wealth of the republic does not
rest on its great sweep of prairies,
its mines or its commerce. Its primal
source is in its free schools, and its
freedom of choice of trade or profes
sion. The results of this freedom
can be measured in money as well as
in power. Now as ever, "America
means opportunity," opportunity for
each man and woman to prepare for
the work he can do best, opportunity
for each to find his place in life, op


I'IIESIDKXT DAVID KTAitlt .lOUD \ X
portunity for the work that neeils to
be done to find the man who can do it.
It is for each man to plan his own
career, to make his rwn escape "from
status to contract." The democracy
of America can acknowledge no mas
sters save of its own creation and the
power that makes these is adequate
to set them aside.
While every conception In Europe
has its reflex in America, while every
idea of administration from absolut
ism to anarchy finds its earnest advo
cates, none of these seem likely to
displace the fundamental ideal of
democratic individualism developed by
the fathers of the republic. This ideal
was expressed by Lincoln and long be
fore him by Anstolle. It is the function
of the state to establish justice among
men and to perform those acts of com
mon necessity, contributing to the pre
servation and enjoyment of human life
which collective action can accomp
lish better than private effort. Fur
ther than that, democracy which is
simply enforced co-operation should
not go, and by this principle, that no
theory of government should be
pushed beyond the consideration of its
practical results, the republic escapes
the choice of any single one among
the hundreds of remedies for political
ills. There is 110 possibility of the
adoption of anarchism, socialism, col
lectivism or individualism or any
other system as an exclusive and ex
cluding finality. The people of Amer
ica are interested in actual results
rather than any form of logical neces
sity as a ground for political action.
The Test of Solidarity
The test of national solidarity may
be found in its freedom from the need
of force or authority in the conduct of
its affairs. Let us imagine if we can,
a catastrophe which should remove
from the United States every repre
sentative of coercive power, every offi
cial of whatever rank from the Presi
dent to the last notary public, every
representative of army or of navy, or
of church, every policeman, every
authority of whatever kind.
Such a loss might create wied
spread bewilderment or profound
sorrow. It would have no relation to
anarchy. Except among certain un
assimilated foreign populatipns in
large cities it would lead to no
violence, to no riots. The functions
of national life would go on as before.
One by one communities would come
together and provide for the election
of officers. It was said that the death
of Lincoln gave a new proof of how
"republics live, not by a single life
but the right divine of man, the mil
lion trained to be free."
I.ret us apply the same test to other
nations. 111 the France of Napoleon
111, we are assured that without force,
society would not endure "for a quar
ter of an hour." What would be the
result in Germany today? No one can
tell. The German is endlessly patient,
even under needless burdens. What
would he do, if burdens were all sud
denly thrown off, if "Strengstens Ver
boten," the motto of Prussian rule
were suddenly found to have no force
behind it?
The lesson of democracy is therefore
the lesson of the United States. It is
no new lesson. The people of the
United States are merely European
people who have had some additional
experience, have learned some things
in their travels, perhaps forgetting

Patterson Dana Nowell Tulare
Frank Herbert Richey Tipton, Ind.
Edga r Clarence Smith Azusa
Homer Roberts Spence Alameda
GRAPHIC ART
Ethel Ora Qardin Salinas
James Leo Duff Menlo Park
fErnest P»ruce Nelson San Jose
Louise Rider Watsonville
Stella Belle Sankey Clearfield, Pa.
Cordelia Madison Smith Venice
MATHEMATICS
Sydnie Aileen Gardner Orange
Dorothy Marian Hindle Del Mar
Julia R. Johnson Aberdeen, Wash.
Ralph Matthews Noble Galesburg, 111.
Margaret Marion Steele San Jose
Mary Hilda Volkmor Whittier
APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Grace Raymond Helmick Helena, Mont.
CHEMISTRY
George Henry Beurhaus Tacoma, Wash.
Hector Crandall San Francisco
fEdwin Reginald Harding San Bernardino
fPaul Mark Levy San Francisco
Hugh Harold Mosher San Jose
Robert Lindley Murray Palo Alto
+Zeno Ostenberg.. San Jose
Alfred Liles Phillips Santa Cruz
PHYSICS
Herbert Rovell Benham McKittrick
Francis Sitwell Pratt Ontario
Albert John Scholl, Jr Los Angeles
Ruth Sceley Los Gatos
Glen Miller Smyth Salt Lake City-, Utah
Guy Carleton Swan Lawrence, Mass.
Devi Dyal Virmani Bahawalpore, India
Waldo Ralph Waelty Santa Clara
William Irvin Weaver Colorado Springs, Colo.
BOTANY
Taylor Jay Blethen Portland, Ore.
Arthur Dickie Borden Palo Alto
Ollis Willard Newman Santa Barbara
Frank Jason Smiley Fresno
PHYSIOLOGY AND HISTOLOGY
Albert Gordon Bower Salt Lake City, Utah
Roscal Leroy Draper Arroyo Grande
Florence Edetha Dunlop Vale, Ore.
George Stevenson Holcman Riverside
Leonard R. Jenkins Ogden, Utah
Merton James Price San Francisco
Karl Ludwig Schaupp Santa Rosa
John Philip Stricklcr San Diego
fCharles Ernest von Geldern San Francisco
*Carleton Wolsey Washburne Sierra Madre
fClyde T. Wetmore Hollister
Robert William Wilcox Delta, Colo.
fElsa Will Rochester, N. Y.
ZOOLOGY
Clara Crosby Santa Cruz
Mary 1* isk Los Angeles
ENTOMOLOGY AND BIONOMICS
Leroy Childs Redlands
fWarren Locke Smith Ferndale
Verne Genoa Stevens Palo Alto
GEOLOGY AND MINING
Robert Edwin Anderson San Francisco
Harry Mayo Andreen Redwood City
fCarl Hugh Beal Palo Alto
Edward Burke Corbet San Francisco
Waldemar Fenn Dietrich San Francisco
Benjamin Edward Erb Chemainus, B. C.
Andrew Douglas Fyfe Oceanside
fWilliam Conrad Gehrmann Davenport, la.
Mortimer Louis Hall Pasadena
Harold Briggs Hannibal San Jose
Olaf Pitt Jenkins Stanford* University
Grover Berner Lantz Colton
tßernard Harold Lasky San Francisco
*Robcrt James McCann Pacific Grove
fHarvey Wright Parmelee Santa Barbara
*Alonzo William Peake Los Angeles
Arthur E. Remington Watertown, N. Y.
*Edwin John Stewart Los Angeles
CIVIL ENGINEERING
Charles Edward Beechcr Monrovia
Edwin Prcscott Bly Los Angeles
I von Clay Briggs San Francisco

some others equally important. In
like manner the choicest thoughts and
worthiest ideals of America are
thoughts and ideals long before treas
ured by the advanced minds of Europe.
Another lesson from America is that
of the effective federation. The United
States is composed of fortliy-eight
self-governing states, each an entity
within itself managing its own affairs,
with its own officials and its own
laws, controlled by the nation in those
interests only which it shares with
its sister states. Some of these states
are as populous and wealthy as the
Kingdom of Europe, but each is a
jurisdiction, not a power. None can
make war alone, either by force of
arms or force of tariffs. While there
is all machinery for settling disputes
between states such disputes never
arise, because no state has the right
to use its force to promote private
business.
Stilts Equality
The states in a federal union meet
as jurisdictions. The small ones have
no fear of the large ones, and those
not touching the sea suffer in no way
from their restricted position. A
"Power" hampered as is the state of
Illinois would chafe against its limita
tions, and its jingoes would talk of
fighting their way to the ocean. But
viewed as a jurisdiction, surrounded by
similar jurisdictions, the people of
Illinois have no consciousness of limi
tation.
And this should be our ultimate con
ception of a nation. Its boundary line
should represent merely the limit of
jurisdiction. That jurisdiction ceases
does not imply need of violence be
tween the people on the two sides nor
require fortification for the purpose
of repelling violence. The Canadian
boundary is an example of this meet
ing of nations not as powers but as
jurisdictions.
This four-thousand-mile line, rang
ing through all kinds of territory and
all sorts of conditions, disputed nearly
all the way "with all the brutal frank
ness common to blood relations," has
for nearly a hundred years not known
a fortress, a soldier, a warship or a
gun. It is a peace boundary, the limit
of the jurisdiction of one self-govern
ing nation, the beginning of that of
another. It lacks but one thing to
make it ideally perfect, the re
moval of the custom-house, the em
blem of national suspicion and greed,
the remnant, of the days when it was
considered good economics for a na
tion to "have its taxes paid by for
eigners."
Europe in Turmoil
Viewed as "great powers" devoted
to the exploitation of the wealth of
other regions the leading nations of
Europe are in constant turmoil. The
German empire for example, is hamp
ered on every side. Her scant sea
coast is split in two by the presence
of Denmark. Her German Rhine dis
charges itself through Holland. The
ports of Amsterdam, Rotterdam, Ant
werp and Ostend, geographically her's,
are occupied by alien people whom she
could crush out in a moment, were it
not. for the physical force of the rest
of Europe and the moral power of the
world. Of Poland, she has too much
or too little. A large part of the Ger
man people live in the alien empire of
Austro-Hungary and in the republic
of Switzerland, while after forty years
of possession, Germany scarcely owns
Alsace or Lorraine. The states are a
thorn in the side of the empire, a bur
den and a weakness, just so long as
their two millions of people are held in
semi-vassalhood by the rule of force.
A free republic of Alasace Lorraine, a
second Swithzerland, half-German,
half-French separating and joining
two great nations would be a strength
and an inspiration to both. The true
gateways of the Rhine held by the
power of blood and iron is a centre
of menace to civilization. For the
wrong done at the Treaty of Frank
fort forty years ago, Europe has had to
pay most dearly for it is around the
question of Alsace-Lorraine that half
the crushing armament of Europe has
been built up. She is hemmed in
everywhere by the scare of old strugg
les, to her perennial discomfort. For
this reason, she suffers from the
"Drang nach Osten," she seeks a road
to the Persian gulf, an empire over
seas, and every form of imperial ex
tension to lands "under the sun,"
which may for the moment seem
plausible or possible.
But Germany as a jurisdiction suf
fers none of these limitations. Her
powers are only those which are
needed for the people's good. They
are merely her public duties. It mat
ters noting that her sway is checked
on almost, every side before it reaches
the sea. Other jurisdictions inter
vene, and each of these looks after
the public needs of man, which are
mostly justice, conservation, educa
tion, sanitation, and peace. As one of
the "Great Powers" of the world, Ger
many (with her fellow states as well)
is a center of friction, injustice and
unrest.
"A Power" is u Menace.
As a jurisdiction Germany is busy
with profitable and constantly ad
vancing industries, with an admir
able system of education and exten
sive provision for all the people's
needs, and no enlargement of boun
daries could in the least increase her
usefulness, her wealth or her happi
ness. As "a power" Germany is a
menace to the well being of civiliza
tion as every other "power" of similar
nature must be in its degree For
the prosperity of every people de
pends on international peace, and
all power-manifestations are either
actual or potential war. War is a
form of world-sickness from which
every function of civilization suffers,
and most of all those bonds of com
mon thought and common interest
sumed up in internationalism. And
to the members of an international
state, German in blood and in sym
pathy as well as English, all these
destructive rivalries of state with
state seem mediaeval and unworthy.
There is, in fact, something primitive,
outworn and unprogressive in the
spectacle of a civilized nation com
posed of millions of clever people
trusting for its defense to forts and
ships. With all the resources of
business, of science, ef education, of
thought, to depend on force seems a
lazy, even cowardly, shirking of the
higher possibilities of national
strength. To be surrounded by armed
guards, "holding the drop" on all
Commercial rivals is not a lofty con
ception of a nations's greatness. This
attitude has been as disastrous to
England's own peace of mind as it has
been menacing to the world's welfare.
To escape from this condition is not
a matter of a day nor a generation. Tt
is not easy for America even to

Revoe Carlisle Briggs Pasadena
fFloyd Cromwell Brown Selma
fEdward James Cullen Gilroy
Harry Bascom Davis Pomona
Wilbur Harvey Doxsee Redwood City
Robert Francis Duryea Palo Alto
fClarence Bernard Goodwin Sunnyvale
fCharles Stewart Grace Rivera
John Stanley Grepe, Jr East Highlands
tNorman Marshall Ilalcombe San Francisco
George William Hawley Portland, Ore.
George Walter Hunt San Jose
Paul Eells Jeffers Los Angeles
William Aiken Laird Lindsay
Alexander Stuart Macdonald San Francisco
tßobert Patchen Miller Los Angeles
Maurice Everard Morrison Morgan Hill
fßoger Wolcott Olmsted Los Angeles
Chauncey Smith Elie, Manitoba, Canada
Thomas Joseph Spellman Colma
fßurroughs Agin Stephenson Los Altos
Harry George Todtmann Chicago, 111.
George Harlan Trask Los Angeles
Charles Ralph Tupper San Jose
Romney Leigh Vaughn San Francisco
Guss Valentine Wallach Boonville
Carlton Levi Wyant Montecito
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING
■fClarence P. Campbell Los Angeles
tWallace Rolland Finney...* Modesto
*Burdette Lord Hostettler Erie, Pa.
Kenneth Irving Marshall Los Angeles
tAugustus Mudge Sanborn Redlands
Cecil Stocker Simon Los Gatos
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
*Edward Niles Adam Melville, Mont.
Frank Edward Anderson Los Angeles
fClarence Cannon Argabrite Ventura
John Watson Fleming Armstrong....Fivemiletown, Tyrone, Ire.
Everett Morse Calderwood Palo Alto
Melville Nathaniel Clark Dayton, Me.
John Francis Cullen Gilroy
Walter Jennings Dodge Los Angeles
Charles Greenlaw Duffin Comas, Wash.
Harry Adolph Fore Campbell
Frank Julius Gleiss Los Angeles
Walter J. Hammond ! Grinncll, la.
Tomiichi Haraguchi Nagasaki, Japan
George Edward Holditch Orange
Edgar Alden Jackson Cupertino
Linford C. Lull, Jr Los Angeles
James Arthur Miller Hanford
Rea Cambridge Newman Santa Barbara
George Washington Poison Menlo Park
Gaylord Kenyon Snyder Los Angeles
fGiistav Wade Naples
George Ireland Wright Pasadena
BACHELOR OF LAWS
Jerome Devereaux Peters San Jose
Granville Numan Wood, Jr Blue Lake
MASTER OF ARTS
LATIN
Flora Anne Bagley Burlingame
fßuth Beard Modesto
Catherine Ida Birch Redlands
fAnna Shipley Cox San Jose
Mabel Harriett Usinger Berkeley
Malcolm Leland Yeary Los Angeles
GERMAN
Edward Vere Brewer Elyria, Ohio
Catharine Morris Cox San Jose
Lydia Lucilc Meyer . Milwaukee, Wis.
Clara Lydia Schaaf Fort Wayne, -Ind.
fElsie Louise Whittemore Alhambra
ENGLISH LITERATURE
Anais Julia Allen Pasadena
Walter Clyde Curry Gray-Court, S. C.
ENGLISH PHILOLOGY
Maude Cleveland Stanford University
EDUCATION
tWilliam Samuel Marten San Jose
Clarence Lucien Phelps Jamestown, Ky.
William Thomas Root, Jr Pasadena
William Roy Tanner Minneapolis, Minn.

emancipate herself from reactionary
influences in Europe. There are many
interests in a wealthy nation who find
an aid or an affinity in militarism.
Debt creates debt, and those inter
ested in spending band together
against reform.
These matters proceed by slow pro
gress, interrupted by reaction; we
are in a period of relapse at present,
when reactionary forces seem to be in
the ascendant. Hut this very fact with
its burdens and horrors may be count
ed on to turn the balance in the other
direction.
Neither will there be a formal fed
eration of nations in this era. In
deed federation in fact will come long
before it comes in name. A single
unified world-government with cen
tralized rule under one set of men at
some one place, is only a dream—and
not a cheerful dream at that. What
the world needs is more self-control,
more local responsibility not more
governmental machinery. Neverthe
less every step in removing injustice,
in eliminating sources of friction, in
extending common interests, as the
postol union, the telegraph union, in
ternational law, international police
duties, international conferences and
congresses, arbitration treaties a nd
other agreements—are steps in the di
rection of the passing of war. To this
end, three great contributing agencies
are: the growth of the popular con
science, the interlocking of personal
interests, and the ruinous expence
which the progress of science has
brought to every branch of the mili
tar art.
All this has its part in the great
movement towards common interna
tional life, "La Vie Internationale" of
the dreams of La Fontaine, a life
which shall make war impossible and
will, in time, do away with exploita
tions, with tariff barriers and with all
the products of that narrow nativism,
which considers only the purposes or
enrichment of the selfish few, the one
in-group against all the out-groups of
the world.
Value of Open Diplomacy
Another lesson which the United
States may teach is the value of open
diplomacy. A secret agreement of
any kind whatever. It was a warning
of Washington that his nation should
beware of Entangling Alliances. A
formal alliance is for the purpose of
making enemies, never of making
friends. Friendship among nations
rests on common interests, on the in
terlocking of minds, the interlocking
of trade.
In the United States a treaty can be
entered into only with the open and
public consent of the Senate. Every
international relation is therefore
open to the world. No minister, no
president, no group of men whatever
can secretly pledge the nation to any
line of action. No president, no cabi
net, no minister, no congress acting
alone can make any declaration of
public policy. For these reasons the
United States must stand outside the
tangled snare of concessions and intri
gues we call world politics. She must
play her games of diplomacy with
open hands. She cannot be the secret
friend of any other nation. She can
not be a secret enemy because all her
acts, friendly or hostile, are known to
all the world.
The secret treaty in the interest of
imperial spoliation is the bane of
Europe. It ties each foreign office to
the service of the most reckless and
greedy of its great exploiting inter
ests. It has reduced the chancelleries
of more than one nation to be nothing
more than the firm name under which
its exploiting corporations compass
their ends in Asia or in Africa.
The secret is a relic of the military
state. The civilzed world is still or
ganized on the mediaeval theory that
war is a natural function to he ex
pected in the normal course of events,
not a hideous inorau, physical;. and
financial catastrophe. la the old
theory as expounded by Machiavelli,
the king has no other business but
war. It is the duty of his ministers
to find weak places in the defenses of
other kings through which war may
be successful, and to find, after the
fact, excuses by which' war can be
justified. The secret treaty, the .con
cession to a friendly power, ithe. arti-.
ficial interference with a rival, —all
these belong to the days' of Ma<?hia
velli. If . all parties concerpe.4 ( |cojJ>ld :
come out.into the open, .Wihsre . t-het
United States is forced to stahd, we
should soon have an end to tneAttgld-
German struggle, of the rivalry be
tween the Triple Entente and the
Triple Alliance.
Outworn ideas ot' national glory, out
worn figures of.speech as tp national
purposes, outworn mediaevalism in
our -conception of the state.—all'these
find expression in the "secret treaty,"
the "entangling alliance," which is a'
chief obstacle in the way of the -con
ciliation of nations. ?>• -
Historically, the influence of Amer
ica has been exerted in opposition to
Imperialism and to infringement of
the great nations on the rights of the
sniall. This is the inception of the
Monroe Doctrine, which in spite of its
perversion and its wrong accentuation r
has protected Latin America from the
fate of Africa. That this should now
be a Pan-American, not njerely an.
American doctrine goes without say
ing. And it must never be allowed i.o
degenerate-into " a Dollar Diplomacy"
which would.reserve Tropical America
as a special "sphere of, .influence-' for
American exploitation,. For the true,
and final form of the Mojiuae.Doctrine
is found, in the Drago .Doctrine,. of the
republics of South Ameripa,, that tiie
forqe of . arms should. be used-ras.
an,instrument iu industiriul spoliation.
This the people of the United States
should adopt as• their-.own. « <
Principle Disregarded '
In a recent deciskm- of- arbitration;
the King 'of Swed'ant'laW down 'this
principle: that a nation "has 110
right to land- troops in .order-to pYe-'
serve the property or the rights of her
nationals.". This''lwinciple. ha,s '-beefr
disregarded in the •strangling of
Persia, the rape of Mongolia and of
Tibet, in the chronic robbery of
China, and in the annexation of Egypt, <
of Korea, uf Morocco and of Tripoli.
But it is for all that a just.-and honor
able principle, and it is disregarded
only when a nation, by virtue of super
ior strength or superior civilization
feels itself justified in taking posses
sion of another for its good, and inci
dentally for the commercial advant
age of its own exploitating interests.
It is true that the smaller nations of
the tropics are subject to violent
political disturbances. They have not
learned the value of liberty as regu
lated hjy law. Yet it is highly prob
able that not one in ten of these
periodical/ revolutions I's of spontan- 1
eous native origin. of them are
started for purposes of spoliation by

autside adventurer's and a large ma
jority are paid for by adventurers
'State. The Public School exists
everywhere at the public expense, and
belonging to one or more of the great
epinniarqia'ruatrojis tit', fheiear'th.. When."
'the"fi v nal' iriitli'Ts"known'"of unhappy
Mexico the responsibility for hfei' dis
(Mfer'sl will rest nht on'her martyred
president, ridr "on the' sol
"diers'of fortune by whose hands he
•fell, but on the men in New York or
in London perhaps,' whose nioiWy has
kept iliese revolutions going. Mexico,
with fatal riches of oil and gold, is not
tlie first nation to Ite torn asunder by
'conflicting ."sphere's of influence."
The. influence of the republic has
been always thrown against another
form of imperialism involved in the
phrase "Control of the Sea." America
has never claimed any such control
nor has she admitted the right to
others. It is a mediaeval idea going
back foiir hundred years to the time
when the great seas were divided be
tween Spain and Portugal. America
has stood for the open sea, the restric
tion of national jurisdiction to the
three-mile limit, the extermination of
piracy, and in iater years for the most
important doctrine of the immunity of
war. To make the high seas an open

HI STORY
Ella Wissie Beaver ...T. .Tulare
fEmrria Howse Kuno Palo Alto
George Lutes Righter '.Campbell
Francis Marion Russell .Los Angeles
MATHEMATICS
Rose Margaret Bennett »....San Diego
Amanda Westhold ..Quincy, 111:
CHEMISTRY
Alicje. .Ruth Bergcr San Jose
Elton Marion Hogg. v Saratoga
Charles Kirkton McWilliams San Joss
tWilliam John Van Sicklen Castle-ton, Ontario,,Canada
BOTANY
Charlotte Elliott Del Rapids, S. D.
BACTERIOLOGY
Frank Maltaner .Cincinnati, O.
ZOOLOGY
Josephine Louise Dows Randall Stanford University
ENTOMOLOGY
F rankie Willard Galexioo
GEOLOGY
Theodore Chapin., Los Angeles
Joseph Stanley Hook jjPerris ■
ENGINEER
CHEMICAL ENGINEERING
. Louis Wjlliam Pingree.-. ; Ogden-, Utah
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING
fDexter Simpson Kimball N. Y.
Lyman Stevenson King Oakland .
r *• . V <
JURIS DOCTOR
George Armand Ditz Stockton f-1
Maurice Timothy Dooling • Hollistter ,
fEmmet Ross Fertig Nobl.esvjlle, Ind.
fFrank Louis Guerena rs .. „Spnora
George Juan Hatfield ...Oakland-,
Frank Howard Hilton ; Portland, Ore.
Grant Holcomb San Bernardino^
Ignatius Martin Peckham tV| . San . Jose
Edmund Wright Pugh Los. (Angeles..
Alfred'Worcester Robertson Saflt? Ba,rbru:a ..
Chester Harvey Warlow : . r ., . ( Fresno,
Herbert Eustace White Saotamento^.
tFrederick feertram Wood i. . Alto.
* September 6, 1912
fjanuary 10, 1013 "O '?t it

highway-to be tr.a.ver?ed , ( afc ( anytime,-
in absolute--safety, by any, vessel what
ever would-gp/t'ar away
witji international..waff,.-and iSitill ftWH
ther in ren^.vi!),£..tlve- and dnv<-
gerous burden of naval protectioni»'l£;
all military operations.- at. sea couidibe
confined to the <oa,nnon shot.
from the. shore, the- original motive
of the three-mile limit of. jurisdiction,
it would represent one of ,the most
practical triumphs of civilization.- Ttfe
nations should join to make the ocean
safe, not to fill it with floating fort
resses designed t tp. protect merchant
ships from robbery by the very per
sons with whom they trade.
Still another lesson from. America is
one in which, we all agree; the divorce
of religion from political control and
therefore from the,domain of politics.
Absolute religions freedom exists .in
America because the state assumes
no relation of any kind to religious
corporations as such, So long as these
do not interfere with the freedom of
soul or body of men not. belonging to
them, their acts do not concern the
state. And on no, one policy is there
more firm agreement.in America* than
in the absolute separation of Church
nowhere can any sect or gpoup of seets
claim any dominating relation in re

gard to It. To the average American
the strife over Church properties and
Church interests so real in Europe
seem incomprehensible. The Church,
any church, is in every way better oif
for separation from the government.
Whatever achievement; whatever pro
gress it may make is its own, and this
progress is solid because it involves,
no ulterior political end.
Connected with the freedom of the
church is the freedom of the people
from other forms of paternalism. The
state becomes benevolent only when it
lias failed to be just. It allows special
opportunities to individuals only
where it has denied opportunity to
men at large.
The "old-age pension" is a conven
ient'illustration,.'lt has been justly
compared to- the. free pass homeward
granted to the human wrecks who
have lost their all in the. gambling
rooms of-Monte Carlo. It is the shill
ing given to the man run over by my
lord's automobile.
In a better system he would not have
been run over. He would not have
lost his money in a vile resort, lie
would not have needed an outside
pittance to carry him through old age.
Host Workers Died in War
The old-age pension exists in Eng
land as a convenient balm for inequal
ity and injustice. The best of her
workers have died in her wars/ leav
ing a weaker stock to breed from.
These have grown' up unskilled, in de
fault of the shools that make men
strong. They have grown up in the
atmosphere of the public house, sod
den with lust and beer and whisky.
They have lost the opportiiniy tljat
should be theirs, and at the end their
jfellows must be taxed to feed tliem.
The tragedy of the East End of Lon
don is no normal part of the tragedy
of Life. It is no part of the normal
America. It is no part of a nation
which has given opportunity.
Brit'in America a' new country, fresh,
unspoiled, full of life and hope, it is
possible to hctt'd' government" to its
rigid purpose, to develop opportunity
by the elimination of privilege, teacfy,.
men to lean' not on' government but
on themselves, and to aid by'fraternal '
giving those who have fallen in. tbg
prang 1 ; not "to weaken by unearned
public money those who are falling but
who can be made to stand, 'tfie wav
Up it i '">• vtc.
t)t the transgressor is hard and we
not make it eapier'ff we could;
|We' could not if we would'. To. give a..
plkh'a chance to'rise,' i'.s to allow him'
hlfbthe choice t<>Tali:" ' *';•"
1 is ! •?; . " *
foii.fession of Failure , '
■ "Tho old-age pension" .is, so- far as 1
it goes, a confession of failure of de- ■
jnocracy,. Except as a measure of'"
e |1 £r-fie.pcy, l Jts real purpose in Eng
land, it has no justification in good '
government. Clean up the. social at
mosphere, restore to the people, what ■
is rightfully theirs, and they will care, 1
rare accidents .excepted, for their own
old age.
in America tlie struggle, between '
labor and capital can never assume
the form it has in Europe. In a gov
ei nment which stands for justice, and
which is in no way occupied with
making money for its people, nor from
its People, nor in supporting exploiting
intei ests in other lauds, there is uo
visable necessity for universal col
lective ownership. Where classes do
not leally exist there is no pertinence
in the artificial distinctions of aristoc
racy, proletariat and bourgeoisie
which have been so laboriously
brought over from Europe. If these*
distinctions exist, most of us in Amer
ica belong to one single class, that of
the bourgeoisie.
There exist in America as elsewhere,
vast fortunes, disproportionate to the
ability or the efforts of those who con
trol them. But their history has been
of short duration. They are not leg
acies from an unjust past. Their or
igin belongs to the present. It is
mainly individual. Great luck, great
skill or ingeniously managed privilege
stands behind each of them. By the
same means as in Europe, by co
operation through interlocking direc
torates, these great fortunes have
been made to stand together and thus
by a process of financial suction to
build up fortunes still greater. But
one most important difference exists.
The national government, in theory
and for the most in fact, stands aloof
from these combinations. The con
trol of public affairs, even of financial
matters is beyond their permanent
reach. Their influence on foreign
diplomacy is limited because no secret
influence can control, and the power
of money for evil is mostly lost in
publicity.
Property May Rule
In all their operations, they are sur
rounded by an alert and in the long
run victorious opposition of democ
racy. In America property may rule,
but only for a time. In the earlier
•centuries of Europe, the period of
Absolutism, when monarchy was a
political power not a function of so
ciety, it was, of course, true that prop
erty ruled. But it was the ruler who
had the property. It was his by force
of position. Not until the money lend
ers of the last century secured the
strangle hold on the nations of
Europe was this condition brought to
an end.
Then again, property ruled, but it
was not that the King and the nobles
held the property. Property held
them, and in Europe today it is money
that rules, and it rules King and
peasant alike, for everything el3e
hinges on the Imperial Explotation of
foreign lands.
In America, this is true in a degree,
but the rule of money has its visible
limits. For the United States belongs
to its people.
"Dollar Diplomacy"
While Europe generally, the alliance
between financial interests and the
government is open and avowed, such
•connections in America have proved
fatal to political leaders and to polit
ical parties. The methods by which
the "powers of Europe" through their
foreign offices bolster up adventures
in foreign lands, could not be used in
America. The diplomacy of persua
sion, threats or force of arms in the
interest of private ventures would be
impossible here. The people might
consent to "Dollar Diplomacy" but
•only for a time and until its nature
is understood. The recent, repudia
tion of our relation to the "Six Power
Loan' to China will serve as a case in
point.
And here again we must admit that
out democratic conception of govern
ment has to struggle for acceptance
in America. The protective tariff in
theory and in practice is a flat viola
tion of its principles. Tt is a flat
violation of the spirit of the American
■constitution. It is privilege pure and
simple granted to the few by the
many, in the belief that in the long
run the many would profit by it. Its

purpose was to diversify industries by
letting the farmer help pay the ex
penses of the manufacturer. It has
just that effect, and the farmer and
laborer are becoming increasingly
discontented with its burdens and the
inequalities before the law which are
part and parcel of its operations.
In America, the army and navy,
though the latter has grown beyound
all reason through the rivalry from
England and Germany, still represent
a democratic ideal. We still hold to
the thought that our officers are not
rulers but servants of the people.
Our military element stands near
the parting of the ways, for all offi
cialism tends to aggrandize itself,
most of all that which is associated
with pomp and with patriotism. Mili
tarism for its own sake belongs to the
state in whoch property rules. "It
furnishes," says John A. Hobson, "a
profitable support to certain strong
vested interests. It is a decorative
element in social life and above all, it
is necessary to keep down the
pressure of the forces of internal
reform."
>o Room for Militarism
The ideals of Militarism and Democ
racy can never coexist. And this na
tion is too far given over to democ
racy ever to do more than dally with
the military ideal. In a nation that
knows no caste, and has no aristioc
racy other than temporary and self
selected, no military traditions will
ever be permanent. There can never
be a warrior caste holding special
privilege or special authority.
As a people, we of the United States
are too rich in resources of wealth, of
education and of intelligence to be
controlled by influences of militarism.
And thus and for the same reasons, in
the republic of America, the state ex
ists for the man, not the man for the
state. This is the fundamental differ
ence between the Eighteenth Century
and Twentieth. And let us speed the
day when it may be said not only that
"America means Opportunity" but
that the same hopeful word may be
spoken of Germany and England and
France and Russia and of all the na
tions in the sisterhood of civilization.
Lord Acton thus sums up the move
ment of the history of civilization:
"It is by the combined efforts of the
weak made under compulsion to re
sist the reign of force and constant
wrong that in the rapid change but
slow progress of four hundred years
liberty has been preserved and se
cured and extended and finally under
stood."
And as America comes to under
stand her own message of democracy,
internationalism and peace, she will
carry this understanding back to the
motherland of Europe.
Within the last two months Presi
dent Wilson and Mr. Bryan have
planned a most practical and effective
means of bringing American influence
to bear on the problems of World
peace.
The end in view is to relegate war
to a position of last resort in times
of international difference, to place
soldiers and dreadnaughts in the
background—not in the front of na
tional movement.
The essence of this American policy
is that in case of friction between
nations, the matter be placed for six
months in the hands of a joint high
Commission of investigation, chosen
in part from the contending nations,
the majority from friendly neutrals.
These- for six months shall study the
question at issue, neither nation in the

meantime demonstrating, mobilizing
or increasing the armament, until the
final report is made. After this each
nation is free to choose conciliation,
concession, compromise, arbitration
or war. And with six months to think
it over there will be no war. Wars are
waged for greed, for politics, or be
cause the mob has been stirred by
senseless speech or reckless journal
ism. And in many cases this reckless
journalism has been carefully cal :u
--lated and fully paid for by those in
terested in the sale of the accessories
of war.
The treaty of arbitration will natur
ally follow on the treaty for investi
gation. Courts will naturally supple
ment results of friendly offices. But
the agreement for friendly conference
comes first and is for the present the
more important. The Treaty of Arbi
tration is most valuable, — not as
preventing war, for a nation bent on
war, if there is such a case, will not
stop to agree to arbitrate. The world
is finally ruled by public opinion. Ar
bitration treaties clinch public opinion
and hold it to its duty.
The present decade has been char
acterized by needless, costly and
brutal wars, the result not of actual
conditions of today, but of blunders
and crimes committed in the past.
Wars do not spring up afresh in our
civilization. They spring from old
wars whose seeds were not destroyed
by peace.
Rut, however, dark the present out
look may seem with half the coined
money of the world spent each year
on war and war's accessories, the far
outlook is most promising. The cruel
horror of the Balkan war, the waste of
armed peace and frustrate war
throughout the civilized world, — all
these make powerfully for peace, for
real peace — the Peace of Law and
Trust, and not the Peace of Force.
And just now is the time when
American influence can be most defi
nitely crystallized and made effective.
And we are thankful that we have in
the seats of Authority at Washington
men who definitely work for peace
and whom war and war's fripperies
do not dazzle nor attract.
Two hundred and seven students were awarded the Bachelor of
Arts Degree by President David Stu rr Jordan in the Assembly Hull tills
morning. Two were granted the Bachelor of Laws Degree, while
thirty-five were given the Master of Arts Degree. In addition to these
the Academic Council also awarded three Engineer, thirteen .luris Doc
tor of Philosophy Degrees. The Co miuencemnet address preceded the
presenting of the sheepskins, *Th e Conquest of Europe by America,"
wsis the subject of the strong address delivered by Doctor Jordan.

I wish this morning to say a serious
word to you as citizens of the great
republic and as future leaders in its
thought and action. I wish you to
think earnestly of the part American
influence must play in the world his
tory of our century. It is for us to
help cure the accumulated evils of
the older civilization. Those men in
Europe who look furthest into the
future hope for the salvation of
Europe through ideals brought back
from practical service in America.
One of these. Senator La Fontaine of
Brussels, has given me my title as the
expression of the hope of his life,
"The Conquest of Europe by America."
I hasten to say that 1 do not mean
conquest by force of arms, for 1 have
no interest in such conquests and no
belief that victories thus won result in
any permanent good to any nation.
Nor do I mean financial conquests,
the floating of imperial loans or the
permeation of any part of European
business by financiers from the New
World. Still less do I celebrate a
shoppers' contest on the Place de
I'Opera or among the dazzling bar
gains of the Hon Marche. Nor does
the trail of American tourists who
cross with gold the palms of Europe's
servitors, all the way from Piccadilly
to the Pyramids awaken in me any
pride of nation or of race. The only
permanent conquest is that of ideas.
America stands, has always stood, for
two ideals from which she cannot
escape, for they are fundamental in
her origin and in her growth. These
are internationalism and democracy,
and these ideals being invincible
must conquer America, and through
her, reconquer Europe. And as both
are incompatible with war, their final
triumph marks the end of spoliation,
of and of that relation be
tween nations which breeds suspicion
and hatred. The conquest of the
world by the ideals of International
ism and Democracy marks the coming
of universal peace.
In the address at Baltimore in 1911,
Henri La Fontaine of Brussels, the
veteran prophet of International Life,
used these striking words.
"Emigration perhaps more than
war has deprived the old, historic
countries of their most energetic and
fittest ones to build the progressive
and wealthy people you are on this side
of the Atlantic. You are for us
Europeans, the beloved Brotherland,
Do not forget that Europe is always

and will still remain for you the be
loved Motherland. Europe is now for
America what Greece was for Europe.
Europe has liberated (Ireece. Amer
ica has to liberate Europe from its
burdens, its prejudices, its hatreds.
It is your duty, it is your highest duty
to reconcile outside your borders the
people you have reconciled within
your borders. For indeed the Amer
ican people is at present the true
international people. It is the elect
people which alone can further inter
nationalism and can transform all of
the people of the Earth into a family
of nations, a brotherhood of men, an
international people." "For coloniza
tion is not mainly done by men and by
capital, but also by ideas, by example,
by experiment."
Not Always True to Ideals
We may freely admit in the begin
ning that America has not always been
true to her own ideals, and that she
has not always clearly seen her own
future. She has had her own lapses,
moral and social, some of these be
cause of associations with Europe and
through imitation of glories alien to
her history. If she had been true to
herself she would never have known
a single foreign war. She has no part in
those greeds and jealousies of money
or of race which still keep up turmoil
in Europe. Her war with Spain with
its eagerness for exploitation, its
tinsel imperialism and its pride of
participation in "world politics" rep
resents the worst of these lapses, and
its evil effects are long in passing.
But though the inception of this affair
was European in method, its contin
uance has been characteristically
American. Instead of exploitation, we
have brought to the Philippines educa
tion and sanitation. We have expend
ed on them a hundred times what we
have received, and if ever imperilism
can be respectable we have made it so.
Another false movement has been
in the building of warships and forts
in America. This lacks the motive
for similar extravagances in Europe,
because the peace of the new world is
no where threatened. But with us as
everjwhere the military spirit grows
with the money spent on it. The more
mouths fed by the State the greater
the clamor for the feeding of still
more. We have also to reckon with
the desire for giant decoration, for
big navies for sheer bigness' sake, the
feeling that this is the richest and'
most progressive nation on the globe,

and that as such she can beat old
Europe at her own game even though
that game be not worth the candle.
But with all lapses and delinquin
cies the fact of internationalism and
the ideal of democracy have been and
must always remain with the United
States, and from the United States
these ideals will react with greater
and greater force on the thoughts and
deeds of Europe.
Internationalism is the heritage of
America, not of choice at first, but cf
necessity. She has perforce grown
up with this ideal, because no other
was possible. She became the cosmo
politan nation of the world because
of her complex origin and with this
origin she could be nothing else. In
a new civilization, in the struggles of
the frontier each man is rated for
what he is worth. Under these condi
tions no one cares for the petty pre
cedences of rank or race. What a
man can do in the next twenty-four
hours outvalues any question as to
who were his ancestors.
All Hate Dies
On a railway train not long ago
some one was overheard to say: "This
is the land where all hate dies. My
father was German; my mother was
French. What do I care for all that?
I am an American. The old hatreds
and rivalries are nothing to me."
America was English, first. In lang
uage, in spirit, in conscience and in
government it is England which domi
nates. For the English race, above
all others, with its adaptation for co
operation and for compromise is the
builder of free states.
It was the chosen among the Eng
lishmen of three centuries ago who
founded the germ colonies of Virginia
and Massachusetts May. In the fol
lowing years it has been the like
minded from their own nation and
from others who have crossed the seas
to enter into their work.
The first who came were the bold,
the free, the self-ruling, the pleasure
scorning element of English life. They
came to escape from the state
church and the church-state, that they
might worship in their own fashion
and according to dictates of their indi
vidual consciences.
They detested the law of primogeni
ture which thrust the spirit of pre
cedence into the bosom of every fam
ily. They abhorred the law of entail
which burdened the land with the
curse of privilege even to unborn gen
erations.
They had caught from France the

spirit of liberty, equality, fraternity,
but as befits the calmer blood of the
north, they gave this spirit a con
structive interpretation, and the idea
of equality was to them especially rich
in practical results. Equality before
the law, equal access to land, to edu
cation, to professions and trades,
. equal access to legislat ion, each of
these conceptions broadened out into
the spirit of democracy.
And after England came to other
nations of Europe, each with its own
part and in its own degree giving its
contingent of free-born men, the ad
| mixture of blood gave strength and
! versatility to the rising nation.
But withal, the dominant note is
English still, with as many diver-
I gences from the England of today as
j from the England of the Stuarts.
In later years other immigration has
come, not alone the bold in search of
adventure, of new homes and new free
doms, but the weak and the oppressed,
"the beaten men of the beaten races,"
who llee from war taxation in search
of living wages and of daily bread.
But all these are cast into the same
melting pot and in most of them there
arises a clear response to the call of
free institutions.
In this melting pot of America, all
the old racial antipathies disappear
and all hereditary hatreds. There is
110 final distinction of British or Ger
j man, of French or Italian, of Spanish
|or Slav, of Dutch or Scandinavian,
!or of Jew or Gentile. The average
| American is as cosmopolitan in origin
j and relationship as is royalty in
Europe, though for a different set of
| reasons. But in America there is 110
[ distinction of common or noble, of
high or low, of aristocracy, bour
j geoisie or proletariat except as these
| are artificially emphasized in the in
dustrial strife we have inherited from
Eu rope.
To the international mind of Amer
ica, there seems 110 need or pertinence
to an Anglo-Saxon alliance as against
any other people. In so far as such
alliance is desirable or humanly pos
sible it exists already in a common
sympathy and a common literature, ft
would lie weakened by a stated agree
ment of the Anglo-Saxon group to
swell each others Meets with dread
naughts. The true bond of Union of
the Greater Britain involves no rup
ture with the Greater Germany, or the
Greater France or the Greater Scandi
navia to which we in America likewise
claim allegiance.
To the American, "Pan-Germanism,"
Pan-Slavism," as lie hears these ex
pounded seem a meaningless return to
ideals of tlie Middle Ages. They re
mind him of the Holy Roman Empire,
which never was, and should never be,
or still more they hark back to Pan-
Islamism the futile dream of the light
ing Turk.
There is nothing in aggrandizement
of race as such which appeals to the
American, the child of all European
races. That such races are ennobled
by conquest of lesser tribes and by
their undigested exploitation he does
not believe. To the American even
England's greatness does not exist on
her Indian Empire, but rather in spite
of it.
Within the last forty years there lias
grown up a new world in Europe and
in the range of civilization. The old
conception of the states of Europe
as opposed to one another and mutu
ally destructive must, pass away in the
broader aspects of civilization.
The growth of International life is
one of the most striking aspects of
this new relation. The extention of
travel, the spread of commerce, the
achievements of science, the exchanges
in education, all these tend to make
a great "melting pot" of the civilized
world. Neither in his business, in his
pleasures, nor in his intellectual pur
suits is the educated man anywhere
limited to any one country. All
rational human interests are con
nected by interlocking bonds of many
kinds, joining one people with another.
The hundreds of international con
gresses held every summer the world
over and covering almost every gen
eral interest of men is the strongest
possible evidence of this Interlocking,
and all this constitutes an inter
national bond not to be lightly severe.!.
A declaration of war between nations
is now little less than an attack on
civilization in all its most cherished
aspects, social, moral, as well as finan
cial. The lines of national policy
taken for granted half a century ago
are fast becoming impossible, their
very suggestion being ruinous.
I'c ideiicj toward < oix'ilintion
The influence of America tends to
wards international conciliation. It
involves the recognition of men as
men, each valued for what he is or
wlnit tie can do. Both of these deter
mined, of course, by bis blood and his
education, but not to be judged in ad
vance by any wholesale distinctions.
This is the spirit of the Interna
tionale, the common life and common
sympathy among civilized people, re
gardless of national boundaries. This
International life constitutes the final
and lasting basis of International
Peace.
As the history of America rests on
internationalism so is her social fab
ric built on democracy. Historically
her democracy has a double origin. Its
theory was French, its practice was
English. The French philosophers
furnished the one, the reaction against
British methods the other.
For inequality before the law is the
foundation of the polity of Great
Britain. Her constitution stands on
privilege. Her social customs rest on
precedence of classes, precedence of
individuals. England chooses her lords
and magnates, her patrons and tyrants
long before they are born. These be
long to her system of privilege by
which cities like Westminster, Shef
field, Davenport, Arundel, were so
long held, virtually tax-free, by men
whose ancestors received their land as
royal gifts or bought tlieni as cow
pastures. The law of favor rises above
the law of justice.

Hut men of the pioneer type, the
Roundhead, the Pilgrim, the Puritan,
the American have hated favor and
privilege and precedence of every
form. The toll of tin 1 rich and the dole
of the poor are alike offensive to them.
And this dislike of overreaching and of
coddling has passed over to their de
scendents. John Hay once said of the
people of the new state of Ohio. "They
looked to no one as their superiors,
and on none as their inferiors. They
knew 110 want they could not them
selves satisfy," and to this Senator
Bayard added the further note, "They
were too self-willed and independent
to allow any to rule over them but
t heniselves."
This in a word is the spirit of de
mocracy, of the democracy of the
pioneer if you like, but America is the
land of pioneers, and this fact still in-

11 uences all her acts unci her insti
tutions. Her people find their polit
ical ideals in an equal start with equal
opportunity, in equality before the
law, in equal access to education, in
equal access to the land, in equal ac
cess to legislation.
The nation is built on individuals
each responsible for himself. The
state is a mutual adjustment for their
collective benefit. The individual in
America does not live for the state, is
not the property of the state, the state
has no control over him except that
which the individual lias delegated. It
is no duty of the state to promote his
prosperity or the prosperity of his
group. The state is rather the umpire
which decides questions of justice, the
servant by which the needs of the
many are met by co-operation in so far
as these needs are general and conson
ant, with ideals of justice.
As the founders of our state were
frontiersmen scattered far and wide,
without cities, without corporations,
without great collective utilities, their
democracy became that of individual
ism. The demands of society, of col

leetive action, of national power were
little considered because such de
mands did not exist, and they have
never existed in the forms in which
hhirope knows them. And for this
reason, if for no other, the native
American lias not been strongly at
tracted to the various doctrines called
socialism in 13uropi. Like conditions
produce like results, and the growth
nl' industrialism with its successes and
its oppressions brings the same re
action as in Furope. But as a matter
of fact, those who take part in these
reactions are for the most part re
cent immigrants, whoso ideals of gov
ernment even in democracy are collec
tive, standing in strong contrast with
tho individualistic democracy native
to the soil.
Fifty year. - , ago, in lsC!, Fdouard
Laboulaye published bis renrirkable

hook "Paris <>n Amerique," (Paris in
America.) Its motive was to show
what a great city might become under
the conditions of freedom which pre
vailed in America. The America was
idealized of course. It, represented
the noblest ideals of free-born men,
rather than the actual America, the
forces of democracy must strive with
all the other forces extant in modern
civilization.
j The influence of this volume was
wide spread and long continued. It
was my fortune to know two men of
power, the one a Dane, the other a
Swiss who were drawn to America by
the charm of Laboulaye and who were
not disappointed. They found what
they sought, and this is a perennial
characteristic of the republic. Who
ever comes to America and with what
ever motive will find what he seeks.
If he remains long enough and has
penetration to look below the surface
I he will find America.
If one seeks religious freedom he
will find it. Our fathers provided for
that. Whatever form or type of re
ligious discipline he seeks he will find

accordingly, I>ut its discipline is vol
untary not enforced by the state. If
one would escape from all religious in
fluence he can do so in America. It is
for him to choose.
If one seeks for class distinction, for
domination of the great over the small,
hereditary or otherwise, he will find it
in personal and local only, not
wrought into the fabric of society. If
one would find privilege enthroned
even as in Europe he will find it in
America, just as powerful as in
Europe, Imi everywhere surrounded
by an equally powerful movement of
insurgency. If one would find greed,
selfishness, lust, vanity, tolerance,
anything which belongs to the dregs
of humanity, he will find it in America,
and it may be embodied in powerful
and defiant institutions. For freedom
guarantees only freedom, and the
meaning of freedom is opportunity.
In Laboulaye's work, the official
Napoleonic view, which "Paris in
America" takes as its point of depar
ture is thus expressed. "A society
without administration, without army,
without police, with the savage liberty
of praying, speaking, writing, acting
each in his fashion would not last a
quarter of an hour. It is the negation
of all these principles, of all the con
ditions of this civilization which
makes the unity of our French nation.
In constituting our administration,
hierarehal and centralized, the wis
dom of our fathers lias long since
raised France to the first rank and
shown to the French people that
Liberty is Obedience, then is our Glory
and our Force."
Ketcrse 01 Napoleon's Ideals
The distinctive character of the
American ideals reverses this. It is
the building up of a society in which
the government stands only for jus
tice. The state does not concern itself
with right, worship or wrong worship,
with right thinking or wrong think
ing, with writing truth or writing
falsehood, with right acts or words or
ceremonies, except as abuse of liberty
may infringe on the liberty of others.
"I'ne societe sans administration,
sans armee, sans gendarmes, avec
la liberie sauvage de prier. de ponser,
de parler, d'ecrire, d'agir. chacun a
sa facon ne durerait pas 1111 quart
d'heure. ("est la negation de tons ces
principcs, de toutes les conditions de
cette civilisation qui fait I'unite dp la
nation francaise. En constituant
notre administration bierarchis.ee et
centralised, la sagesse de 110s peres a
depuis longtemps eleve la France a
premier rang et appris aux Francais
<pie la liberte ("est l'obeissance. C'est
la notre glorie et notre force."
The state is not pious, benevolent,
virtuous, generous, because these per
sonal virtues, cannot be exercised by
officialism leads to their abuse.
Privilege to the poor means privilege
to the rich; privilege to the rich
means privilege to the poor, but al
ways the more powerful arm secures
the greater privilege. The essence of
democracy is that no one. rich or
poor should have a lease on privilege.
The wealth of the republic does not
rest on its great sweep of prairies,
its mines or its commerce. Its primal
source is in its free schools, and its
freedom of choice of trade or profes
sion. The results of this freedom
can be measured in money as well as
in power. Now as ever, "America
means opportunity," opportunity for
each man and woman to prepare for
the work he can do best, opportunity
for each to find his place in life, op


I'IIESIDKXT DAVID KTAitlt .lOUD \ X
portunity for the work that neeils to
be done to find the man who can do it.
It is for each man to plan his own
career, to make his rwn escape "from
status to contract." The democracy
of America can acknowledge no mas
sters save of its own creation and the
power that makes these is adequate
to set them aside.
While every conception In Europe
has its reflex in America, while every
idea of administration from absolut
ism to anarchy finds its earnest advo
cates, none of these seem likely to
displace the fundamental ideal of
democratic individualism developed by
the fathers of the republic. This ideal
was expressed by Lincoln and long be
fore him by Anstolle. It is the function
of the state to establish justice among
men and to perform those acts of com
mon necessity, contributing to the pre
servation and enjoyment of human life
which collective action can accomp
lish better than private effort. Fur
ther than that, democracy which is
simply enforced co-operation should
not go, and by this principle, that no
theory of government should be
pushed beyond the consideration of its
practical results, the republic escapes
the choice of any single one among
the hundreds of remedies for political
ills. There is 110 possibility of the
adoption of anarchism, socialism, col
lectivism or individualism or any
other system as an exclusive and ex
cluding finality. The people of Amer
ica are interested in actual results
rather than any form of logical neces
sity as a ground for political action.
The Test of Solidarity
The test of national solidarity may
be found in its freedom from the need
of force or authority in the conduct of
its affairs. Let us imagine if we can,
a catastrophe which should remove
from the United States every repre
sentative of coercive power, every offi
cial of whatever rank from the Presi
dent to the last notary public, every
representative of army or of navy, or
of church, every policeman, every
authority of whatever kind.
Such a loss might create wied
spread bewilderment or profound
sorrow. It would have no relation to
anarchy. Except among certain un
assimilated foreign populatipns in
large cities it would lead to no
violence, to no riots. The functions
of national life would go on as before.
One by one communities would come
together and provide for the election
of officers. It was said that the death
of Lincoln gave a new proof of how
"republics live, not by a single life
but the right divine of man, the mil
lion trained to be free."
I.ret us apply the same test to other
nations. 111 the France of Napoleon
111, we are assured that without force,
society would not endure "for a quar
ter of an hour." What would be the
result in Germany today? No one can
tell. The German is endlessly patient,
even under needless burdens. What
would he do, if burdens were all sud
denly thrown off, if "Strengstens Ver
boten," the motto of Prussian rule
were suddenly found to have no force
behind it?
The lesson of democracy is therefore
the lesson of the United States. It is
no new lesson. The people of the
United States are merely European
people who have had some additional
experience, have learned some things
in their travels, perhaps forgetting

Patterson Dana Nowell Tulare
Frank Herbert Richey Tipton, Ind.
Edga r Clarence Smith Azusa
Homer Roberts Spence Alameda
GRAPHIC ART
Ethel Ora Qardin Salinas
James Leo Duff Menlo Park
fErnest P»ruce Nelson San Jose
Louise Rider Watsonville
Stella Belle Sankey Clearfield, Pa.
Cordelia Madison Smith Venice
MATHEMATICS
Sydnie Aileen Gardner Orange
Dorothy Marian Hindle Del Mar
Julia R. Johnson Aberdeen, Wash.
Ralph Matthews Noble Galesburg, 111.
Margaret Marion Steele San Jose
Mary Hilda Volkmor Whittier
APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Grace Raymond Helmick Helena, Mont.
CHEMISTRY
George Henry Beurhaus Tacoma, Wash.
Hector Crandall San Francisco
fEdwin Reginald Harding San Bernardino
fPaul Mark Levy San Francisco
Hugh Harold Mosher San Jose
Robert Lindley Murray Palo Alto
+Zeno Ostenberg.. San Jose
Alfred Liles Phillips Santa Cruz
PHYSICS
Herbert Rovell Benham McKittrick
Francis Sitwell Pratt Ontario
Albert John Scholl, Jr Los Angeles
Ruth Sceley Los Gatos
Glen Miller Smyth Salt Lake City-, Utah
Guy Carleton Swan Lawrence, Mass.
Devi Dyal Virmani Bahawalpore, India
Waldo Ralph Waelty Santa Clara
William Irvin Weaver Colorado Springs, Colo.
BOTANY
Taylor Jay Blethen Portland, Ore.
Arthur Dickie Borden Palo Alto
Ollis Willard Newman Santa Barbara
Frank Jason Smiley Fresno
PHYSIOLOGY AND HISTOLOGY
Albert Gordon Bower Salt Lake City, Utah
Roscal Leroy Draper Arroyo Grande
Florence Edetha Dunlop Vale, Ore.
George Stevenson Holcman Riverside
Leonard R. Jenkins Ogden, Utah
Merton James Price San Francisco
Karl Ludwig Schaupp Santa Rosa
John Philip Stricklcr San Diego
fCharles Ernest von Geldern San Francisco
*Carleton Wolsey Washburne Sierra Madre
fClyde T. Wetmore Hollister
Robert William Wilcox Delta, Colo.
fElsa Will Rochester, N. Y.
ZOOLOGY
Clara Crosby Santa Cruz
Mary 1* isk Los Angeles
ENTOMOLOGY AND BIONOMICS
Leroy Childs Redlands
fWarren Locke Smith Ferndale
Verne Genoa Stevens Palo Alto
GEOLOGY AND MINING
Robert Edwin Anderson San Francisco
Harry Mayo Andreen Redwood City
fCarl Hugh Beal Palo Alto
Edward Burke Corbet San Francisco
Waldemar Fenn Dietrich San Francisco
Benjamin Edward Erb Chemainus, B. C.
Andrew Douglas Fyfe Oceanside
fWilliam Conrad Gehrmann Davenport, la.
Mortimer Louis Hall Pasadena
Harold Briggs Hannibal San Jose
Olaf Pitt Jenkins Stanford* University
Grover Berner Lantz Colton
tßernard Harold Lasky San Francisco
*Robcrt James McCann Pacific Grove
fHarvey Wright Parmelee Santa Barbara
*Alonzo William Peake Los Angeles
Arthur E. Remington Watertown, N. Y.
*Edwin John Stewart Los Angeles
CIVIL ENGINEERING
Charles Edward Beechcr Monrovia
Edwin Prcscott Bly Los Angeles
I von Clay Briggs San Francisco

some others equally important. In
like manner the choicest thoughts and
worthiest ideals of America are
thoughts and ideals long before treas
ured by the advanced minds of Europe.
Another lesson from America is that
of the effective federation. The United
States is composed of fortliy-eight
self-governing states, each an entity
within itself managing its own affairs,
with its own officials and its own
laws, controlled by the nation in those
interests only which it shares with
its sister states. Some of these states
are as populous and wealthy as the
Kingdom of Europe, but each is a
jurisdiction, not a power. None can
make war alone, either by force of
arms or force of tariffs. While there
is all machinery for settling disputes
between states such disputes never
arise, because no state has the right
to use its force to promote private
business.
Stilts Equality
The states in a federal union meet
as jurisdictions. The small ones have
no fear of the large ones, and those
not touching the sea suffer in no way
from their restricted position. A
"Power" hampered as is the state of
Illinois would chafe against its limita
tions, and its jingoes would talk of
fighting their way to the ocean. But
viewed as a jurisdiction, surrounded by
similar jurisdictions, the people of
Illinois have no consciousness of limi
tation.
And this should be our ultimate con
ception of a nation. Its boundary line
should represent merely the limit of
jurisdiction. That jurisdiction ceases
does not imply need of violence be
tween the people on the two sides nor
require fortification for the purpose
of repelling violence. The Canadian
boundary is an example of this meet
ing of nations not as powers but as
jurisdictions.
This four-thousand-mile line, rang
ing through all kinds of territory and
all sorts of conditions, disputed nearly
all the way "with all the brutal frank
ness common to blood relations," has
for nearly a hundred years not known
a fortress, a soldier, a warship or a
gun. It is a peace boundary, the limit
of the jurisdiction of one self-govern
ing nation, the beginning of that of
another. It lacks but one thing to
make it ideally perfect, the re
moval of the custom-house, the em
blem of national suspicion and greed,
the remnant, of the days when it was
considered good economics for a na
tion to "have its taxes paid by for
eigners."
Europe in Turmoil
Viewed as "great powers" devoted
to the exploitation of the wealth of
other regions the leading nations of
Europe are in constant turmoil. The
German empire for example, is hamp
ered on every side. Her scant sea
coast is split in two by the presence
of Denmark. Her German Rhine dis
charges itself through Holland. The
ports of Amsterdam, Rotterdam, Ant
werp and Ostend, geographically her's,
are occupied by alien people whom she
could crush out in a moment, were it
not. for the physical force of the rest
of Europe and the moral power of the
world. Of Poland, she has too much
or too little. A large part of the Ger
man people live in the alien empire of
Austro-Hungary and in the republic
of Switzerland, while after forty years
of possession, Germany scarcely owns
Alsace or Lorraine. The states are a
thorn in the side of the empire, a bur
den and a weakness, just so long as
their two millions of people are held in
semi-vassalhood by the rule of force.
A free republic of Alasace Lorraine, a
second Swithzerland, half-German,
half-French separating and joining
two great nations would be a strength
and an inspiration to both. The true
gateways of the Rhine held by the
power of blood and iron is a centre
of menace to civilization. For the
wrong done at the Treaty of Frank
fort forty years ago, Europe has had to
pay most dearly for it is around the
question of Alsace-Lorraine that half
the crushing armament of Europe has
been built up. She is hemmed in
everywhere by the scare of old strugg
les, to her perennial discomfort. For
this reason, she suffers from the
"Drang nach Osten," she seeks a road
to the Persian gulf, an empire over
seas, and every form of imperial ex
tension to lands "under the sun,"
which may for the moment seem
plausible or possible.
But Germany as a jurisdiction suf
fers none of these limitations. Her
powers are only those which are
needed for the people's good. They
are merely her public duties. It mat
ters noting that her sway is checked
on almost, every side before it reaches
the sea. Other jurisdictions inter
vene, and each of these looks after
the public needs of man, which are
mostly justice, conservation, educa
tion, sanitation, and peace. As one of
the "Great Powers" of the world, Ger
many (with her fellow states as well)
is a center of friction, injustice and
unrest.
"A Power" is u Menace.
As a jurisdiction Germany is busy
with profitable and constantly ad
vancing industries, with an admir
able system of education and exten
sive provision for all the people's
needs, and no enlargement of boun
daries could in the least increase her
usefulness, her wealth or her happi
ness. As "a power" Germany is a
menace to the well being of civiliza
tion as every other "power" of similar
nature must be in its degree For
the prosperity of every people de
pends on international peace, and
all power-manifestations are either
actual or potential war. War is a
form of world-sickness from which
every function of civilization suffers,
and most of all those bonds of com
mon thought and common interest
sumed up in internationalism. And
to the members of an international
state, German in blood and in sym
pathy as well as English, all these
destructive rivalries of state with
state seem mediaeval and unworthy.
There is, in fact, something primitive,
outworn and unprogressive in the
spectacle of a civilized nation com
posed of millions of clever people
trusting for its defense to forts and
ships. With all the resources of
business, of science, ef education, of
thought, to depend on force seems a
lazy, even cowardly, shirking of the
higher possibilities of national
strength. To be surrounded by armed
guards, "holding the drop" on all
Commercial rivals is not a lofty con
ception of a nations's greatness. This
attitude has been as disastrous to
England's own peace of mind as it has
been menacing to the world's welfare.
To escape from this condition is not
a matter of a day nor a generation. Tt
is not easy for America even to

Revoe Carlisle Briggs Pasadena
fFloyd Cromwell Brown Selma
fEdward James Cullen Gilroy
Harry Bascom Davis Pomona
Wilbur Harvey Doxsee Redwood City
Robert Francis Duryea Palo Alto
fClarence Bernard Goodwin Sunnyvale
fCharles Stewart Grace Rivera
John Stanley Grepe, Jr East Highlands
tNorman Marshall Ilalcombe San Francisco
George William Hawley Portland, Ore.
George Walter Hunt San Jose
Paul Eells Jeffers Los Angeles
William Aiken Laird Lindsay
Alexander Stuart Macdonald San Francisco
tßobert Patchen Miller Los Angeles
Maurice Everard Morrison Morgan Hill
fßoger Wolcott Olmsted Los Angeles
Chauncey Smith Elie, Manitoba, Canada
Thomas Joseph Spellman Colma
fßurroughs Agin Stephenson Los Altos
Harry George Todtmann Chicago, 111.
George Harlan Trask Los Angeles
Charles Ralph Tupper San Jose
Romney Leigh Vaughn San Francisco
Guss Valentine Wallach Boonville
Carlton Levi Wyant Montecito
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING
■fClarence P. Campbell Los Angeles
tWallace Rolland Finney...* Modesto
*Burdette Lord Hostettler Erie, Pa.
Kenneth Irving Marshall Los Angeles
tAugustus Mudge Sanborn Redlands
Cecil Stocker Simon Los Gatos
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
*Edward Niles Adam Melville, Mont.
Frank Edward Anderson Los Angeles
fClarence Cannon Argabrite Ventura
John Watson Fleming Armstrong....Fivemiletown, Tyrone, Ire.
Everett Morse Calderwood Palo Alto
Melville Nathaniel Clark Dayton, Me.
John Francis Cullen Gilroy
Walter Jennings Dodge Los Angeles
Charles Greenlaw Duffin Comas, Wash.
Harry Adolph Fore Campbell
Frank Julius Gleiss Los Angeles
Walter J. Hammond ! Grinncll, la.
Tomiichi Haraguchi Nagasaki, Japan
George Edward Holditch Orange
Edgar Alden Jackson Cupertino
Linford C. Lull, Jr Los Angeles
James Arthur Miller Hanford
Rea Cambridge Newman Santa Barbara
George Washington Poison Menlo Park
Gaylord Kenyon Snyder Los Angeles
fGiistav Wade Naples
George Ireland Wright Pasadena
BACHELOR OF LAWS
Jerome Devereaux Peters San Jose
Granville Numan Wood, Jr Blue Lake
MASTER OF ARTS
LATIN
Flora Anne Bagley Burlingame
fßuth Beard Modesto
Catherine Ida Birch Redlands
fAnna Shipley Cox San Jose
Mabel Harriett Usinger Berkeley
Malcolm Leland Yeary Los Angeles
GERMAN
Edward Vere Brewer Elyria, Ohio
Catharine Morris Cox San Jose
Lydia Lucilc Meyer . Milwaukee, Wis.
Clara Lydia Schaaf Fort Wayne, -Ind.
fElsie Louise Whittemore Alhambra
ENGLISH LITERATURE
Anais Julia Allen Pasadena
Walter Clyde Curry Gray-Court, S. C.
ENGLISH PHILOLOGY
Maude Cleveland Stanford University
EDUCATION
tWilliam Samuel Marten San Jose
Clarence Lucien Phelps Jamestown, Ky.
William Thomas Root, Jr Pasadena
William Roy Tanner Minneapolis, Minn.

emancipate herself from reactionary
influences in Europe. There are many
interests in a wealthy nation who find
an aid or an affinity in militarism.
Debt creates debt, and those inter
ested in spending band together
against reform.
These matters proceed by slow pro
gress, interrupted by reaction; we
are in a period of relapse at present,
when reactionary forces seem to be in
the ascendant. Hut this very fact with
its burdens and horrors may be count
ed on to turn the balance in the other
direction.
Neither will there be a formal fed
eration of nations in this era. In
deed federation in fact will come long
before it comes in name. A single
unified world-government with cen
tralized rule under one set of men at
some one place, is only a dream—and
not a cheerful dream at that. What
the world needs is more self-control,
more local responsibility not more
governmental machinery. Neverthe
less every step in removing injustice,
in eliminating sources of friction, in
extending common interests, as the
postol union, the telegraph union, in
ternational law, international police
duties, international conferences and
congresses, arbitration treaties a nd
other agreements—are steps in the di
rection of the passing of war. To this
end, three great contributing agencies
are: the growth of the popular con
science, the interlocking of personal
interests, and the ruinous expence
which the progress of science has
brought to every branch of the mili
tar art.
All this has its part in the great
movement towards common interna
tional life, "La Vie Internationale" of
the dreams of La Fontaine, a life
which shall make war impossible and
will, in time, do away with exploita
tions, with tariff barriers and with all
the products of that narrow nativism,
which considers only the purposes or
enrichment of the selfish few, the one
in-group against all the out-groups of
the world.
Value of Open Diplomacy
Another lesson which the United
States may teach is the value of open
diplomacy. A secret agreement of
any kind whatever. It was a warning
of Washington that his nation should
beware of Entangling Alliances. A
formal alliance is for the purpose of
making enemies, never of making
friends. Friendship among nations
rests on common interests, on the in
terlocking of minds, the interlocking
of trade.
In the United States a treaty can be
entered into only with the open and
public consent of the Senate. Every
international relation is therefore
open to the world. No minister, no
president, no group of men whatever
can secretly pledge the nation to any
line of action. No president, no cabi
net, no minister, no congress acting
alone can make any declaration of
public policy. For these reasons the
United States must stand outside the
tangled snare of concessions and intri
gues we call world politics. She must
play her games of diplomacy with
open hands. She cannot be the secret
friend of any other nation. She can
not be a secret enemy because all her
acts, friendly or hostile, are known to
all the world.
The secret treaty in the interest of
imperial spoliation is the bane of
Europe. It ties each foreign office to
the service of the most reckless and
greedy of its great exploiting inter
ests. It has reduced the chancelleries
of more than one nation to be nothing
more than the firm name under which
its exploiting corporations compass
their ends in Asia or in Africa.
The secret is a relic of the military
state. The civilzed world is still or
ganized on the mediaeval theory that
war is a natural function to he ex
pected in the normal course of events,
not a hideous inorau, physical;. and
financial catastrophe. la the old
theory as expounded by Machiavelli,
the king has no other business but
war. It is the duty of his ministers
to find weak places in the defenses of
other kings through which war may
be successful, and to find, after the
fact, excuses by which' war can be
justified. The secret treaty, the .con
cession to a friendly power, ithe. arti-.
ficial interference with a rival, —all
these belong to the days' of Ma<?hia
velli. If . all parties concerpe.4 ( |cojJ>ld :
come out.into the open, .Wihsre . t-het
United States is forced to stahd, we
should soon have an end to tneAttgld-
German struggle, of the rivalry be
tween the Triple Entente and the
Triple Alliance.
Outworn ideas ot' national glory, out
worn figures of.speech as tp national
purposes, outworn mediaevalism in
our -conception of the state.—all'these
find expression in the "secret treaty,"
the "entangling alliance," which is a'
chief obstacle in the way of the -con
ciliation of nations. ?>• -
Historically, the influence of Amer
ica has been exerted in opposition to
Imperialism and to infringement of
the great nations on the rights of the
sniall. This is the inception of the
Monroe Doctrine, which in spite of its
perversion and its wrong accentuation r
has protected Latin America from the
fate of Africa. That this should now
be a Pan-American, not njerely an.
American doctrine goes without say
ing. And it must never be allowed i.o
degenerate-into " a Dollar Diplomacy"
which would.reserve Tropical America
as a special "sphere of, .influence-' for
American exploitation,. For the true,
and final form of the Mojiuae.Doctrine
is found, in the Drago .Doctrine,. of the
republics of South Ameripa,, that tiie
forqe of . arms should. be used-ras.
an,instrument iu industiriul spoliation.
This the people of the United States
should adopt as• their-.own. « <
Principle Disregarded '
In a recent deciskm- of- arbitration;
the King 'of Swed'ant'laW down 'this
principle: that a nation "has 110
right to land- troops in .order-to pYe-'
serve the property or the rights of her
nationals.". This''lwinciple. ha,s '-beefr
disregarded in the •strangling of
Persia, the rape of Mongolia and of
Tibet, in the chronic robbery of
China, and in the annexation of Egypt, <
of Korea, uf Morocco and of Tripoli.
But it is for all that a just.-and honor
able principle, and it is disregarded
only when a nation, by virtue of super
ior strength or superior civilization
feels itself justified in taking posses
sion of another for its good, and inci
dentally for the commercial advant
age of its own exploitating interests.
It is true that the smaller nations of
the tropics are subject to violent
political disturbances. They have not
learned the value of liberty as regu
lated hjy law. Yet it is highly prob
able that not one in ten of these
periodical/ revolutions I's of spontan- 1
eous native origin. of them are
started for purposes of spoliation by

autside adventurer's and a large ma
jority are paid for by adventurers
'State. The Public School exists
everywhere at the public expense, and
belonging to one or more of the great
epinniarqia'ruatrojis tit', fheiear'th.. When."
'the"fi v nal' iriitli'Ts"known'"of unhappy
Mexico the responsibility for hfei' dis
(Mfer'sl will rest nht on'her martyred
president, ridr "on the' sol
"diers'of fortune by whose hands he
•fell, but on the men in New York or
in London perhaps,' whose nioiWy has
kept iliese revolutions going. Mexico,
with fatal riches of oil and gold, is not
tlie first nation to Ite torn asunder by
'conflicting ."sphere's of influence."
The. influence of the republic has
been always thrown against another
form of imperialism involved in the
phrase "Control of the Sea." America
has never claimed any such control
nor has she admitted the right to
others. It is a mediaeval idea going
back foiir hundred years to the time
when the great seas were divided be
tween Spain and Portugal. America
has stood for the open sea, the restric
tion of national jurisdiction to the
three-mile limit, the extermination of
piracy, and in iater years for the most
important doctrine of the immunity of
war. To make the high seas an open

HI STORY
Ella Wissie Beaver ...T. .Tulare
fEmrria Howse Kuno Palo Alto
George Lutes Righter '.Campbell
Francis Marion Russell .Los Angeles
MATHEMATICS
Rose Margaret Bennett »....San Diego
Amanda Westhold ..Quincy, 111:
CHEMISTRY
Alicje. .Ruth Bergcr San Jose
Elton Marion Hogg. v Saratoga
Charles Kirkton McWilliams San Joss
tWilliam John Van Sicklen Castle-ton, Ontario,,Canada
BOTANY
Charlotte Elliott Del Rapids, S. D.
BACTERIOLOGY
Frank Maltaner .Cincinnati, O.
ZOOLOGY
Josephine Louise Dows Randall Stanford University
ENTOMOLOGY
F rankie Willard Galexioo
GEOLOGY
Theodore Chapin., Los Angeles
Joseph Stanley Hook jjPerris ■
ENGINEER
CHEMICAL ENGINEERING
. Louis Wjlliam Pingree.-. ; Ogden-, Utah
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING
fDexter Simpson Kimball N. Y.
Lyman Stevenson King Oakland .
r *• . V <
JURIS DOCTOR
George Armand Ditz Stockton f-1
Maurice Timothy Dooling • Hollistter ,
fEmmet Ross Fertig Nobl.esvjlle, Ind.
fFrank Louis Guerena rs .. „Spnora
George Juan Hatfield ...Oakland-,
Frank Howard Hilton ; Portland, Ore.
Grant Holcomb San Bernardino^
Ignatius Martin Peckham tV| . San . Jose
Edmund Wright Pugh Los. (Angeles..
Alfred'Worcester Robertson Saflt? Ba,rbru:a ..
Chester Harvey Warlow : . r ., . ( Fresno,
Herbert Eustace White Saotamento^.
tFrederick feertram Wood i. . Alto.
* September 6, 1912
fjanuary 10, 1013 "O '?t it

highway-to be tr.a.ver?ed , ( afc ( anytime,-
in absolute--safety, by any, vessel what
ever would-gp/t'ar away
witji international..waff,.-and iSitill ftWH
ther in ren^.vi!),£..tlve- and dnv<-
gerous burden of naval protectioni»'l£;
all military operations.- at. sea couidibe
confined to the <oa,nnon shot.
from the. shore, the- original motive
of the three-mile limit of. jurisdiction,
it would represent one of ,the most
practical triumphs of civilization.- Ttfe
nations should join to make the ocean
safe, not to fill it with floating fort
resses designed t tp. protect merchant
ships from robbery by the very per
sons with whom they trade.
Still another lesson from. America is
one in which, we all agree; the divorce
of religion from political control and
therefore from the,domain of politics.
Absolute religions freedom exists .in
America because the state assumes
no relation of any kind to religious
corporations as such, So long as these
do not interfere with the freedom of
soul or body of men not. belonging to
them, their acts do not concern the
state. And on no, one policy is there
more firm agreement.in America* than
in the absolute separation of Church
nowhere can any sect or gpoup of seets
claim any dominating relation in re

gard to It. To the average American
the strife over Church properties and
Church interests so real in Europe
seem incomprehensible. The Church,
any church, is in every way better oif
for separation from the government.
Whatever achievement; whatever pro
gress it may make is its own, and this
progress is solid because it involves,
no ulterior political end.
Connected with the freedom of the
church is the freedom of the people
from other forms of paternalism. The
state becomes benevolent only when it
lias failed to be just. It allows special
opportunities to individuals only
where it has denied opportunity to
men at large.
The "old-age pension" is a conven
ient'illustration,.'lt has been justly
compared to- the. free pass homeward
granted to the human wrecks who
have lost their all in the. gambling
rooms of-Monte Carlo. It is the shill
ing given to the man run over by my
lord's automobile.
In a better system he would not have
been run over. He would not have
lost his money in a vile resort, lie
would not have needed an outside
pittance to carry him through old age.
Host Workers Died in War
The old-age pension exists in Eng
land as a convenient balm for inequal
ity and injustice. The best of her
workers have died in her wars/ leav
ing a weaker stock to breed from.
These have grown' up unskilled, in de
fault of the shools that make men
strong. They have grown up in the
atmosphere of the public house, sod
den with lust and beer and whisky.
They have lost the opportiiniy tljat
should be theirs, and at the end their
jfellows must be taxed to feed tliem.
The tragedy of the East End of Lon
don is no normal part of the tragedy
of Life. It is no part of the normal
America. It is no part of a nation
which has given opportunity.
Brit'in America a' new country, fresh,
unspoiled, full of life and hope, it is
possible to hctt'd' government" to its
rigid purpose, to develop opportunity
by the elimination of privilege, teacfy,.
men to lean' not on' government but
on themselves, and to aid by'fraternal '
giving those who have fallen in. tbg
prang 1 ; not "to weaken by unearned
public money those who are falling but
who can be made to stand, 'tfie wav
Up it i '">• vtc.
t)t the transgressor is hard and we
not make it eapier'ff we could;
|We' could not if we would'. To. give a..
plkh'a chance to'rise,' i'.s to allow him'
hlfbthe choice t<>Tali:" ' *';•"
1 is ! •?; . " *
foii.fession of Failure , '
■ "Tho old-age pension" .is, so- far as 1
it goes, a confession of failure of de- ■
jnocracy,. Except as a measure of'"
e |1 £r-fie.pcy, l Jts real purpose in Eng
land, it has no justification in good '
government. Clean up the. social at
mosphere, restore to the people, what ■
is rightfully theirs, and they will care, 1
rare accidents .excepted, for their own
old age.
in America tlie struggle, between '
labor and capital can never assume
the form it has in Europe. In a gov
ei nment which stands for justice, and
which is in no way occupied with
making money for its people, nor from
its People, nor in supporting exploiting
intei ests in other lauds, there is uo
visable necessity for universal col
lective ownership. Where classes do
not leally exist there is no pertinence
in the artificial distinctions of aristoc
racy, proletariat and bourgeoisie
which have been so laboriously
brought over from Europe. If these*
distinctions exist, most of us in Amer
ica belong to one single class, that of
the bourgeoisie.
There exist in America as elsewhere,
vast fortunes, disproportionate to the
ability or the efforts of those who con
trol them. But their history has been
of short duration. They are not leg
acies from an unjust past. Their or
igin belongs to the present. It is
mainly individual. Great luck, great
skill or ingeniously managed privilege
stands behind each of them. By the
same means as in Europe, by co
operation through interlocking direc
torates, these great fortunes have
been made to stand together and thus
by a process of financial suction to
build up fortunes still greater. But
one most important difference exists.
The national government, in theory
and for the most in fact, stands aloof
from these combinations. The con
trol of public affairs, even of financial
matters is beyond their permanent
reach. Their influence on foreign
diplomacy is limited because no secret
influence can control, and the power
of money for evil is mostly lost in
publicity.
Property May Rule
In all their operations, they are sur
rounded by an alert and in the long
run victorious opposition of democ
racy. In America property may rule,
but only for a time. In the earlier
•centuries of Europe, the period of
Absolutism, when monarchy was a
political power not a function of so
ciety, it was, of course, true that prop
erty ruled. But it was the ruler who
had the property. It was his by force
of position. Not until the money lend
ers of the last century secured the
strangle hold on the nations of
Europe was this condition brought to
an end.
Then again, property ruled, but it
was not that the King and the nobles
held the property. Property held
them, and in Europe today it is money
that rules, and it rules King and
peasant alike, for everything el3e
hinges on the Imperial Explotation of
foreign lands.
In America, this is true in a degree,
but the rule of money has its visible
limits. For the United States belongs
to its people.
"Dollar Diplomacy"
While Europe generally, the alliance
between financial interests and the
government is open and avowed, such
•connections in America have proved
fatal to political leaders and to polit
ical parties. The methods by which
the "powers of Europe" through their
foreign offices bolster up adventures
in foreign lands, could not be used in
America. The diplomacy of persua
sion, threats or force of arms in the
interest of private ventures would be
impossible here. The people might
consent to "Dollar Diplomacy" but
•only for a time and until its nature
is understood. The recent, repudia
tion of our relation to the "Six Power
Loan' to China will serve as a case in
point.
And here again we must admit that
out democratic conception of govern
ment has to struggle for acceptance
in America. The protective tariff in
theory and in practice is a flat viola
tion of its principles. Tt is a flat
violation of the spirit of the American
■constitution. It is privilege pure and
simple granted to the few by the
many, in the belief that in the long
run the many would profit by it. Its

purpose was to diversify industries by
letting the farmer help pay the ex
penses of the manufacturer. It has
just that effect, and the farmer and
laborer are becoming increasingly
discontented with its burdens and the
inequalities before the law which are
part and parcel of its operations.
In America, the army and navy,
though the latter has grown beyound
all reason through the rivalry from
England and Germany, still represent
a democratic ideal. We still hold to
the thought that our officers are not
rulers but servants of the people.
Our military element stands near
the parting of the ways, for all offi
cialism tends to aggrandize itself,
most of all that which is associated
with pomp and with patriotism. Mili
tarism for its own sake belongs to the
state in whoch property rules. "It
furnishes," says John A. Hobson, "a
profitable support to certain strong
vested interests. It is a decorative
element in social life and above all, it
is necessary to keep down the
pressure of the forces of internal
reform."
>o Room for Militarism
The ideals of Militarism and Democ
racy can never coexist. And this na
tion is too far given over to democ
racy ever to do more than dally with
the military ideal. In a nation that
knows no caste, and has no aristioc
racy other than temporary and self
selected, no military traditions will
ever be permanent. There can never
be a warrior caste holding special
privilege or special authority.
As a people, we of the United States
are too rich in resources of wealth, of
education and of intelligence to be
controlled by influences of militarism.
And thus and for the same reasons, in
the republic of America, the state ex
ists for the man, not the man for the
state. This is the fundamental differ
ence between the Eighteenth Century
and Twentieth. And let us speed the
day when it may be said not only that
"America means Opportunity" but
that the same hopeful word may be
spoken of Germany and England and
France and Russia and of all the na
tions in the sisterhood of civilization.
Lord Acton thus sums up the move
ment of the history of civilization:
"It is by the combined efforts of the
weak made under compulsion to re
sist the reign of force and constant
wrong that in the rapid change but
slow progress of four hundred years
liberty has been preserved and se
cured and extended and finally under
stood."
And as America comes to under
stand her own message of democracy,
internationalism and peace, she will
carry this understanding back to the
motherland of Europe.
Within the last two months Presi
dent Wilson and Mr. Bryan have
planned a most practical and effective
means of bringing American influence
to bear on the problems of World
peace.
The end in view is to relegate war
to a position of last resort in times
of international difference, to place
soldiers and dreadnaughts in the
background—not in the front of na
tional movement.
The essence of this American policy
is that in case of friction between
nations, the matter be placed for six
months in the hands of a joint high
Commission of investigation, chosen
in part from the contending nations,
the majority from friendly neutrals.
These- for six months shall study the
question at issue, neither nation in the

meantime demonstrating, mobilizing
or increasing the armament, until the
final report is made. After this each
nation is free to choose conciliation,
concession, compromise, arbitration
or war. And with six months to think
it over there will be no war. Wars are
waged for greed, for politics, or be
cause the mob has been stirred by
senseless speech or reckless journal
ism. And in many cases this reckless
journalism has been carefully cal :u
--lated and fully paid for by those in
terested in the sale of the accessories
of war.
The treaty of arbitration will natur
ally follow on the treaty for investi
gation. Courts will naturally supple
ment results of friendly offices. But
the agreement for friendly conference
comes first and is for the present the
more important. The Treaty of Arbi
tration is most valuable, — not as
preventing war, for a nation bent on
war, if there is such a case, will not
stop to agree to arbitrate. The world
is finally ruled by public opinion. Ar
bitration treaties clinch public opinion
and hold it to its duty.
The present decade has been char
acterized by needless, costly and
brutal wars, the result not of actual
conditions of today, but of blunders
and crimes committed in the past.
Wars do not spring up afresh in our
civilization. They spring from old
wars whose seeds were not destroyed
by peace.
Rut, however, dark the present out
look may seem with half the coined
money of the world spent each year
on war and war's accessories, the far
outlook is most promising. The cruel
horror of the Balkan war, the waste of
armed peace and frustrate war
throughout the civilized world, — all
these make powerfully for peace, for
real peace — the Peace of Law and
Trust, and not the Peace of Force.
And just now is the time when
American influence can be most defi
nitely crystallized and made effective.
And we are thankful that we have in
the seats of Authority at Washington
men who definitely work for peace
and whom war and war's fripperies
do not dazzle nor attract.
