# The 						Carpenter Report on Parking and Transportation
## 
### 
Following is the text of a report on "Recommended
Parking and Transportation Policies for Stanford University"
prepared by Peter F. Carpenter, assistant vice-president for
medical affairs, at the request of the University's
vice-presidents.

PURPOSE
In November of 1974, the author was asked by the
Vice-Presidents to review the parking and transportation
problem at Stanford University and to recommend a compre
hensive program. At that time, there was confusion about
present policies, high variability of enforcement, and low
degree of compliance with regulations.
In response to that request, I undertook a study effort to
provide a specific program that interested individuals could
react to and that would establish the basis for the further
development of an unending list of details.
There are no easy solutions. The parking problem is, in a
very reai sense, a zero sum game; i.e., any individual's or
group's gain must be at the expense of someone else.
For example, the present parking program, although
frequently referred to as "free" is a subsidized system
wherein everyone (through tuition, general funds, and the
absence of a more uniform benefit to employees) pays the
cost for those who use the parking system.
There is no corresponding subsidy for those who walk,
ride public transit, or bicycle to work, though they clearly
impose less of a burden on the University in terms of
facilities to accommodate their chosen mode of transit.
Formation of a new system poses a basic dilemma
between equity and simplicity. A very simple system will fail
to recognize many of the legitimate needs of members of this
community; a system that is more equitable will be corre
spondingly more complex. A balance must somehow be
found between complete simplicty and complete equity.
The distribution of the limited parking resource is a
political, economic, and emotional issue. At best, we may be
able to achieve a relatively uniform distribution of unhappi
ness. It would be both ambitious and foolhardy to anticipate
popularity for any parking system. This report should permit
the community to focus on some specific recommendations
which, although not ideal, may be satisfactory as one ap
proach to the problem.
Although the parking issue is important in day-to-day
living, it is peripheral to the educational purpose of the
institution. I j»ope that further discussion and decisions will
help to restore it to its appropriate insti* itional context.
IMPORTANCE OF
STANFORD TAKING
A LEADERSHIP POSTURE
There are several important reasons to establish, with all
due haste, a comprehensive parking and transportation sy
stem at Stanford.
As members of an institution of higher learning, we pride
ourselves on staying at the forefront of knowledge and
frequently being at the vanguard of social change. At present,
the energy crisis and environmental concerns that face the
nation should lead us at Stanford to a policy that would
de-emphasize the importance of the private motor vehicle as
the primary mode of transportation.
One would hope that this community could translate its
concern with environmental and conservation problems into
a practical demonstration through its own policies and our
behavior. If we are incapable of taking a tough posture on
environmental and energy conservation issues, it is fright
ening to speculate about the ability of the country-at-large to
make the same difficult decisions.
There is also a real spectre of external regulations, which
could have a severe impact on this campus and its parking
and transportation policies.
The Environmental Protection Agency has promulgated
for comment regulations that would place an extremely high
parking tax on every individual space at Stanford University;
a system that would allow very little latitude for differenti
ating between individual needs. After July 1976, the pro
posed tax would have been $450 per space per year. Inevita
bly, the University would pass such a tax on to the users of
those spaces.
In addition, the City of Palo Alto is now considering
incentives for not using the automobile, possibly a parking
tax. We do not know whether such regulations would apply
only within the city limits or throughout the larger area for
which the city has planning jurisdiction. If they apply solely
within the city limits, the dislocation of vehicles from the
Medical Center to other lots throughout the University will
create a problem for the entire campus.
It would seem appropriate that Stanford voluntarily
control campus parking rather than waiting for externally
imposed regulations, over which we would have little control.
If we have a strong program in place, it is possible that
external regulations might not be applied here, or, if applied,
would allow us to continue an existing system if it meets
general standards.
Finally, the ratio of automobiles to people on the campus
is rising. Comparatively, the rise is significantly greater than
that experienced in the county-at-large. The estimated ratio
of cars to people on this campus rose from .75 in 1957 to .90
in 1968.
During the same period, the ratio of cars to people in
Santa Clara County went from .40 to .48. Although the
energy crisis and the economic situation make extra popula
tion risky, the trend, if unabated and unrestricted, will result
in a campus consisting of buildings surrounded by acres of
automobiles. Most of us agree with the ASSU Senate that
"Stanford University should not develop into a huge parking
lot."
STEPS TAKEN TO
PREPARE RECOMMENDATIONS
In order to prepare the following recommendations, I
took the following steps:
1. A review of prior studies at Stanford University on the
parking and transportation problem. These studies represent
a significant background source for understanding Stanford's
parking and transportation problems. The reader should note
the consistency with which these studies have recommended
similar solutions and the consistency with which those
recommendations have not yet been implemented. Because
these studies went into a number of areas in considerable
detail, it was not necessary in this particular review to study
many of the same areas. The interested reader is urged to
review these studies for himself.
2. In order to achieve the highest possible degree of
public participation in the preparation of my recornmcnda

tions, a series of eight public hearings was held throughout
the campus. These hearings were advertised in the Stanford
Daily and in public service announcements on KZSU. Of
particular concern is the relatively low level of participation
at a majority of these hearings.
3. I also met with a number of individuals who had either
particular perspectives or responsibilities with respect to
parking and transportation.
4. Of particular importance was a series of meetings with
the Parking Subcommittee of the Committee on Land and
Building Development. These meetings served as*a very
valuable source of information as well as feedback from the
members of that subcommittee on the manner in which the
review was conducted and the factors considered in making
my recommendations. The subcommittee was not asked to
endorse these recommendations prior to their submission to
the Vice-Presidents because it seemed more appropriate for
them to be able to respond freely to the recommendations
after they have been placed on the record.
5. Information was requested of and received from the
ASSU Senate regarding the parking system.
6. Another source of information was a survey on the
parking and transportation policies of a large number of
universities throughout the United States and Canada.
Individual readers who review the details of this survey
will probably find examples of any system they might wish
to advocate. There is no single pattern except that a larger
number of the institutions charge for parking than do not
charge for parking.
Those institutions which appear to the author to be
comparable to this institution in location, population densi
ty, and the nature of academic programs offered (e.g. Yale,
UC-Berkeley, UC-Davis, and Cornell), take a much more
aggressive posture in control of parking than does Stanford
University.
Generally, their attitude on enforcement is aggressive; by
and large they do not hesitate to impose heavy fines or to
tow or immobilize vehicles that are illegally parked.
The questionnaires and the back-up information that were
provided with them has been placed on file in the Facilities
Planning Office, and is available for reference by interested
individuals.
Most institutions emphasize that parking is a privilege, not
a right and that individuals must comply with regulations to
avail themselves of that privilege. Free parking is disappearing
throughout institutions of higher learning for a variety of
reasons, not the least of which is the continuing increase in
the number of campus vehicles per employee and student.
This is simply a manifestation of a nation-wide phenome
non. Given the institutions' limited physical and financial
resources, it is unreasonable to expect that their parking
accommodations can continue to expand.
Some rationing must be introduced into the system in
order to equitably distribute a commodity that is expensive
to both the institution (in terms of space and enforcement)
and the society (in terms of environmental and energy
consequences).
7. The final source of information was a survey of a large
number of members of the Stanford community, which was
designed and conducted by a group of students from the
Graduate School of Business.
In order to supplement the information obtained from
previous reports and from the public hearings, a group of
GSB students undertook as a class project a survey of
community behavior, attitudes, and preferences with respect
to parking and transportation. Their questionnaire was sent
to a random sample of the community and of the 1,500
questionnaires sent out, more than 40% were completed and
returned.
The data from the survey indicate that there are clear
community preferences on a number of points. There is wide
support for users paying the cost of parking and conversely,
opposition to nonusers being taxed to provide free or
inexpensive parking for someone else. There is also consider
able concern with the equity of any proposed parking system
and strong support for enforcement that is reasonable but
not harsh. •

The report has been referred to the University Committee
on Land and Building Development, headed by Prof. Charles
Meyers, law, and its subcommittee on parking and
transportation, headed by Prof. Scott Pearson, Food Research
Institute, for further consideration.

(Space paid for by News and Publications)

It should be noted that the community preferences
depend to a large degree on how a question is asked. For
example, in the response to the question "at what annual
registration fee would you seriously consider alternative
means of transportation?," 57% of those who currently drive
indicated that they would do so at the $25 level while in
response to the question "at what annual registration fee
would you leave your car home?, only 38% indicated that
they would do so at the $25 level.
For this reason, it is important to use caution when
analyzing the response to a single question. The GSB analysis
is helpful because it attempts to correlate answers from
particular questions with various other responses received
with regard to status and preferences. And some patterns do
emerge.
The following responses to selected questions bear on the
recommendations in this report:
a. Seventy percent felt that there is a parking problem.
b. Forty-one percent live within two miles of their daily
campus destination. (Of these, 81% felt there is a
parking problem.)
c. The only group for which there is any significant
(more than 35% support for preferred space assign
ments is for handicapped drivers.
d. Seventy-two percent felt that "all of those who use it"
or "some of those who use it" should pay the cost of a
parking system (vs. having "everyone" pay that cost).
e. Assuming a fee system, 44% preferred a "registration
sticker, fixed fee" and 42% preferred a "registration
sticker, varying fee."
112. The most preferred method of varying fee was "prefer
ential treatment for carpools"-32%.
g. The second most preferred method of varying fees was
"according to status"-18%.
h. The third most preferred method of varying fees was
"according to desirability of parking space"-16%.
i. Seventy-two percent did not feel that cars should be
assigned to a specific lot.
j. Eighty-eight percent did not feel that cars should be
assigned to a specific space.
k. Twenty-six percent of graduate students currently
have staff parking permits.
1. Eighty-two percent feel that bikepaths need improve
ments.
m. Sixty-eight percent feel that walkways need improve
ment.
n. Forty-five percent of those who currently drive would
use public transit more than three times per week if it
were improved on and near campus. A recent Gallup
Poll provides similar data.
The GSB study was used by the author primarily to
facilitate choice between alternatives. It is entirely possible
that others may draw different conclusions from the same
data. In order to facilitate examination, the card deck with
the responses to the questionnaires has been filed with the
Facilities Planning Office and is available for further analysis.
It is entirely possible to utilize this data to support a
broad range of conclusions; therefore, I have not attempted
to cite answers to specific questions in support of specific
recommendations. The only realistic way in which these
recommendations can be tested against a questionnaire is to
design a questionnaire with the specific recommendations in
this report and to utilize it for a follow-up survey.
IS THERE A
PARKING PROBLEM?
Whether or not there is a parking problem at Stanford
depends upon whom you talk to, where they want to park,
how far they are willing to walk from parking space to
destination, and whether or not it is raining. The reader is
encouraged to look at the information noted in the GSB
students' report. Most people they queried think that there is
a parking problem at Stanford and that the problem consists
primarily of a shortage of spaces.

A questionnaire administered at the time of the 1974-75
automobile registration at the Medical Center had substantial
ly identical results with that of the GSB survey. People
indicated that they felt that there is a parking problem and
that the problem was an absence of spaces rather than the
distance of those spaces from the destination or some other
factor. It is significant to note that in neither of these surveys
was personal security in parking lots considered a significant
problem. In the GSB survey 8% of the females and 2% of the
males indicated that it was a problem.
A review of aerial photographs shows that there is never a
time when all the parking spaces at Stanford are filled and
that during good weather there are a large number of unfilled
spaces in peripheral lots. Clearly, weather does influence this
issue; there is a cross-over from bicycles to other modes of
transportation in rainy weather. This particular question is
examined in slightly more detail in the GSB study.
It is not clearly understood why people have a high
resistance to walking even short distances, but it is clear that
parking near one's destination is an ingrained habit. It is not
unusual to see a person search for five or ten minutes for a
vacant space though there are vacant spaces in an adjacent lot
less than 100 feet away.
More trequently, however, there is an absence of spaces
during the busier hours of the day, and individuals spend a
great deal of time looking for any parking. Eventually they
park at a distance and walk to their office. The use of such
time is, in effect a tax paid by both the individual who
expends the time and by the institution, which loses that
same time and energy from productive work.
The perceived present parking problem will be further
exacerbated by the new buildings under construction or
planned. The Main Library Expansion, the Pearce Mitchell
houses, the Terman Engineering Center, the Fairchild Center,
the Phase I Hospital expansion, the Mudd Chemistry Build
ing, and the three new Row houses will all contribute some
additional parking demand and remove some existing parking
spaces from our current inventory.
Under these circumstances, the demand for parking spaces
on this campus is not even standing still, particularly in light
of the continued trend of individuals to prefer to utilize
individual automobiles as their mode of transportation. If
there were no other reason to re-evaluate our parking policy,
these new projects would in and of themselves push us over
the brink with the existing system (or nonsystem as some
have suggested).
It is in the context of this background that the following
recommendations are therefore made for the parking and
transportation policies of the University.
BROAD PARKING AND
TRANSPORTATION POLICIES
The most critical policy that Stanford needs to articulate
is its basic philosophy with respect to parking and transporta
tion. For this purpose, I recommcnd the following statement:
With regard to parking and transportation, the Universi
ty's first priority in planning, design, regulations, and ex
penditures is to facilitate pedestrian and bicycle travel; the
second priority is to facilitate group transit; and the last
priority is to facilitate private motor vehicle travel.
If broad censensus can be reached throughout the com
munity on this basic policy, then a large number of other
policies will naturally follow from it.
Given a basic policy statement that has broad institutional
support, the next most critical issue in the parking and
transportation area is the designation of the policy making
responsibility. I recommend that the Vice-President for Busi
ness and Finance be given the responsibility for parking and
transportation policy within the University with advice from
a parking and transportation committee. Policies promul
gated by the Vicc-President of Business and Finance may at
his option or at the requ' t of another vice-president be
taken to the Vice-Presidential Group for discussion and
comment.
To facilitate and assure broad and representative advice
and consultation on policy matters, I recommcnd the estab
lishment of a Parking and Transportation Committee with
the following membership to replace the existing Parking
Subcommittee: three faculty members; three staff members,
three students; and four ex-officio members-the Director of
Public Safety, a representative of the Facilities Planning
Office, and one representative each from the Provost's Office
and the Medical Center.
Each of these members should be appointed for a mini
mum of two years. Reappointment will be permissible, and
appointments should be made in such a way that the terms
overlap. The complexity of the parking problem and the
requirement for consistency are such that Committee mem
bers should be exposed to the problem for more than a single
academic year.
The charge to this Committee will be to:
1. Evaluate the operation of the 1975-76 regulations,
which result from this report, and the changes that
occur in the review process.
2. To continue to survey the attitudes of the community
concerning the adequacy of the regulations.
3. To hold, when necessary, public hearings.
4. To recommend revisions in the regulations.
5. To prepare proposals for alternative transportation
experiments.
6. To review the charges and users of the Parking and
Transportation Trust Fund.
In addition, some members of this Committee will serve
on the Special Requests Appeals Board described later.
The administrative responsibility for the parking and
transportation regulations should be assigned to the Director
of Public Services, who should have the responsibility for the
day-to-day operations of the regulations and the discretion to
make minor changes. Such minor changes will be reported
after the fact to the Vice-President for Business and Finance
and to the Parking and Transportation Committee.
Some balance must be achieved between the ability to
make changes in parking regulations promptly and the desir
ability of providing an opportunity for broad public com
ment concerning basic policy changes.
Model Parking Regulations: Utilizing a number of other
universities' regulations as examples, I have prepared a set of
mou<-'< parking regulations for reference and consideration.
Rather than trying to incorporate the existing Stanford
regulations into the specific regulations proposed here, I
developed this model by relying exclusively on parking
systems employed at other universities in order to permit a
comparison between those and the existing Stanford regula
tions.
Portions of the existing Stanford regulations, particularly
the descriptive portions that relate specifically to Stanford,
can probably be utilized in the development of new regula
tions. For the policy sections of the regulations, the language
utilized in the model regulations may be more appropriate.
The model regulations are neither complete nor guaranteed
to be consistent with the recommendations in this report;
they are merely a starting point.
The model regulations use phraseology quite common at
other universities, that regulations are "subject to change
without notice." While this approach is useful for making
minor changes that are obviously needed, it creates the
impression (perhaps understandably) that the "administra
tion" will act precipitously to make changes without the
opportunity for input.
If the community level of paranoia is high and we can live
with a system that may have difficulties but cannot be
changed promptly to resolve those difficulties, then the
"subject to change without notice" clause might be changed
to read "subject to change with 30 days notice."
Given the turnout for hearings on this parking review, it
seems that the opportunity to be heard is much more
important than the exercise of the prerogative. A notice that
all parking was going to be abolished probably would not
attract any attention until the day it took effect. (Oh well,
maybe that is what makes this place so interesting.)
Since there will be a number of problems that go beyond
day-to-day operations but fall short of requiring a change in
the basic regulations, I recommcnd the establishment of an
exception process in the form of a subcommittee of the
Parking and Transportation Committee. This subcommittee,
the Special Requests Appeals Board, will consist of the
(Space paid for by News and Publications)

Director of Public Services, members from the Facilities
Planning Office and the Provost's Office, two student mem
bers, two staff members, and two faculty members. Their
responsibility will be to provide for special variances to
established regulations. The model regulations outline the
specific responsibilities of the Board.
The mechanism for changing the rules and policies for
parking and transportation is important. In the past, when
rules and policies have not been well-defined and responsibili
ty has not been explicit, individuals who were concerned
with or aggrieved by the system did not have a clear
mechanism for presenting their viewpoints.
The recommended system should be more responsive.
Minor changes will be made by Police Services, with a report
to the Special Requests Appeals Board. Exceptions for
individuals and major changes in lot or space designations will
also be handled by the $RA Board. Basic changes in rules and
policies will be reviewed by the Parking and Transportation
Committee and recommended to the Vice-President for
Business and Finance. It is expected that at various points in
this process community views will be solicited and incorpo
rated into the recommendations.
I recommend the establishment of a Parking and Trans
portation Trust Fund to receive all proceeds from parking
fees. It will be used exclusively for capital improvements to
the parking and transportation system and to fund innova
tions, experiments, and the incremental costs of instituting a
paid-parking system. /
The uses of this fund will follow the priorities established
by the basic policy statement and will be dependent upon
review by and recommendation of the Parking and Transpor
tation Committee. It is important that this fund be set up in
such a way as to minimize its impact on indirect cost
recovery.
The parking fees would be incremental income and the
fund would be used for incremental costs; therefore, the
impact on cost recovery would be minimized. However, in
future years it may be advantageous to place the entire
parking and transportation system on a totally self-sufficient
footing.
I also recommend that the University establish a policy of
experimentation with transportation alternatives. The speci
fic transportation alternatives that should be considered will
range broadly from the use of electric carts, elephant trains,
and shuttle buses, to free bicycles located strategically
throughout the campus, etc.
The scope of my effort and the time limitations of my
review did not permit exhaustive examination of alternatives.
However, both the SWOPSI and the Germane reports, noted
in the Bibliography and included in the reference collection
in the Facilities Planning Office, dealt extensively with this
point.
At the present time, there are also a number of experi
ments taking place in Santa Clara County; PAMTRANS, a
joint Stanford-Palo Alto-Menlo Park effort, is examining a
number of transportation alternatives.
It is important that some of the funds from the Parking
and Transportation Trust Fund be utilized for creative
innovations. Although not all the experiments will be success
ful, they should be given an adequate opportunity to prove
themselves.
It is difficult to change people's behavior, and each
individual experiment will require thoughtful planning, mar
keting, and patience. It is encouraging to note that 49% of
the respondents to the GSB survey indicated that they would
use public transit more than once a week if the transit were
improved on and near the campus.
PARKING PROGRAM
RECOMMENDATIONS
I recommend the following basic policies with respect to
parking:
1. Mandatory registration of ail vehicles normally oper
ated on the campus.
2. The establishment of four zones:
a. A Free Zone, open only to registered vehicles,
b. An Academic Zone, open to registered vehicles on
an annual fee basis,
c. A Residence Zone, open to registered vehicles on
an annual fee basis,
d. A Vehicle Exclusion Zone, in which parking is not
generally permitted.
3. Paid parking at selected sites in the Academic and
Residence Zones on a per diem basis through the use
of meters or a manned toll booth.
4. The establishment of a Parking and Transportation
Trust Fund.
5. The institution of a vigorous enforcement program.
The University grounds where registration is mandatory
for legal parking is shown on the accompanying map. This
area is broadly defined, including a much larger area than
that in which parking needs to be rigorously enforced;
however, unless registration is carried out widely, the inevita
ble problem of where one draws the line is going to arise
between the required registration and the nonregistration
areas.
There is no clear demarcation between the faculty-staff
housing area and student residences; thus, some of the former
will have to be included or there will be uncontrolled parking
on the fringes of the student residence area. When some of
the faculty-staff housing area is included, there is no strong
case for not including all of it.
Since equity is a high concern, I have opted to include a
larger rather than a smaller area for mandatory registration. It
consists of the entire campus (including SLAC), excepting
only the Industrial Park and the Shopping Center. This is a
topic where some modification might well be proposed
during the review process; however, I would stress that
making the area smaller risks treating similar people different
ly and therefore inequitably.
As shown in the model parking regulations, autos, motor
cylces, and bicycles must all be registered. Registration will
be free, and there will be no cost for registering two or more
vehicles or for replacement of registration stickers.
The stickers should be designed to differentiate between
compact and standard-sized cars so that a subsequent recom
mendation to stripe and designate spaces for compact cars
will be easily enforceable.
Stickers should also indicate the classification of the
individuals registering the car-faculty, staff, student
vehicle. University or other. This is proposed primarily for
contingency purposes since it may be desirable later to
redefine some of the areas and to restrict parking by certain
individuals on the basis of classification. Making this distinc
tion at the time of registration will facilitate such changes in
the regulations.
It is proposed that registration be a one-time operation
unless the ownership of the vehicle changes or the status of
the owner changes. However, if the registration file becomes

too bulky, annual re-registration may become necessary to
keep the records current and to eliminate the vehicles of
former students, faculty, and staff who have not advised
Police Services of their departure. The model regulations
require proof of ownership at the time of registration.
Zone Boundaries
The boundaries of the zones are shown on the map. The
Free Zone includes all of the campus except the Academic
and Residence Zones. Most lots are in the Free Zone on the
periphery. However, some are located in the Academic and
Residence Zones to provide parking for individuals who
either do not want to pay or who are unable to pay to have
access to reasonably convenient parking.
These central Free Zone lots are limited and will be on a
first-come, first-served basis. Academic and Residence Zone
permit holders will also be allowed to use these spaces.
Parking in the Free Zone requires prior registration of the
vehicle; unregistered vehicles will not be permitted to park in
thest areas.
The Academic Zone consists primarily of the central
campus. Consideration should be given to re-assigning some
low-utilization spaces presently assigned to such residences as
Wilbur and Stem into the Academic Zone and out of the
Residence Zone.
The Residence Zone includes the areas surrounding the
student residences, the Pearce Mitchell houses, and a suffi
ciently large buffer area to control street parking in this
immediate area. Off-street, privately owned residence parking
will not require a parking permit but such parking is within
the mandatory registration area; and vehicles routinely oper
ated there will be required to display a registration sticker.
The Inner Quadrangle is designated as the sole Vehicle
Exclusion Zone. The Quad is a special area from a planning,
aesthetic, and symbolic standpoint. Current regulations do
not permit parking in this area; however, this rule is seldom
observed and difficult to enforce.
The only exceptions to parking in this area will be the
President and the Provost; however, they shall be required to
register their vehicles and to pay a fee equal to two times the
fee recommended for parking in the Academic Zone. It is
recommended that access to this area be controlled by a
card-operated gate behind the Chapel, and that cards be
issued to the President, the Provost, and to the operators of
service vehicles that must routinely use the area. However,
our policy should be to discourage access by motor vehicles
even for service purposes when at all possible. Arrangements
for temporary access to the area will be discussed later.
Zone Distribution—First Year
There are now approximately 13,000 parking spaces on
the campus. A critical factor in making the proposed program
work is to properly allocate those spaces among the Free,
Academic, and Residence £ones in order to approximate the
perceived demand and ability and willingness to pay for
parking by the persons who will be using these spaces.
As a subjective estimate, I recommend that the Free Zone
be allocated approximately 30% of the total number of
spaces on the campus (not counting the off-street, privately
owned spaces in the faculty-staff housing area), or about
3,900 spaces.
I recommend that we allocate to the Academic Zone
approximately 40% of the total number of spaces on campus,
or 5,100 spaces; of that 40%, 510 spaces should be charged
for by parking meters or on a per diem basis. The balance of
the Academic Zone spaces should carry an annual fee. There
should be no parking in this Zone except in marked areas.
The Residence Zone should be so defined as to include
approximately 30% of the total number of spaces available
(again, approximately 3,900 spaces). Of these, 5% should be
metered and 95% should be subject to an annual fee. No
parking will be permitted in the Vehicle Exclusion Zone
except as noted above.
Further subdivision of the Academic Zone into faculty,
staff, and student areas is possible, using the existing desig
nations but reducing the amount of Reserved Parking in
keeping with a stricter definition of eligibility for a faculty
sticker and a likely decline in the number of users willing to
pay an annual fee for these areas. The cost of such a further
subdivision meani less efficient use of the total spaces
available.
Zone Distribution—Subsequent Years
Based upon the experience of the first year, shifts of
spaces may be appropriate between zones, i.e., moving spaces
from the Academic to the Free Zone or from the Free to the
Residence Zone. In addition, it may be desirable to make
some distributions within zones and to shift to a more highly
differentiated system that distinguishes among various cate
gories of individuals within zones.
It may also be necessary to subdivide the Academic Zone
to prohibit people from parking in various locations and
using their cars for on-campus transportation during the day.
In this case, individuals would be assigned to a lot near their
place of work and would not be allowed to park elsewhere in
the Academic Zone. Again, the cost of such further subdivi
sion means less efficient use of the total spaces available.
Recommended Fee Levels
For the first year, I recommend a uniform fee for all

Academic Zone lots of $60 per year 01 $15 per quarter. In
the case of the President and Provost, the fee for parking in
the Inner Quadrangle would be twice that of the Academic-
Zone fee, or $120 per year. The uniform fee for Residence
Zone lots will be $48 per year or $12 per quarter for the first
car of an eligible individual, and $96 per year or $24 per
quarter for the second car of an eligible individual.
The fee for parking motorcycles in the Academic and
Residence Zones should be the same as that for autos since
the operation of such vehicles in either zone brings all the
attendant problems of the operation of an automobile.
Although they require somewhat smaller space, motorcycles
create more severe environmental problems than do autos.
These fee levels need to be considered in relation to the
cost of alternate transportation in both dollar and time. For
example, where good bus service is available via the Santa
Clara County Transit system, it now costs 50 cents per day
(or $100 per year) to go to and from campus and usually
takes considerably more time than driving a private automo
bile. A fee system that is a small fraction of the cost of
alternate transportation will do Little to encourage such
alternatives.
More than half of the commuting students (see Black et
al, "A Survey of Commuting Students at Stanford") live less
than three miles from the Quad. Their marginal cost of
driving would be about $50 to $55 a year. A $60 parking fee
would provide some reasonable balance to the $100 per year
that would be required to use the bus system and would also
provide a positive incentive to walk or use a bicycle.
in addition, the fee system must be set at a level that will
generate sufficient money for the Parking and Transportation
Trust Fund for us to undertake the projects required to
facilitate nonauto modes of transportation. A token effort in
such experimentations will have little impact.
Since all individuals have been supporting the parking
system for years through tuition and the employee benefit
system, it does not seem inappropriate that the individuals
who want to park on campus in the future subsidize alternate
modes of transportation for others. In addition, the reader is
urged to look at the fee schedules at comparable institutions.
Obviously, the specific fee levels are arbitrary and can be
adjusted during the review process; however, 1 would urge
that careful consideration be given to maintaining them at
the recommended level. If the level is lowered significantly, it
will have a minor impact on people's behavior, it will
generate an insignificant amount of funds, and we will be
saddled with the burden of a fee system with few of the
benefits.
Parking Fees in Future Years
The survey of other institutions indicates a broad diversi
ty for the criteria utilized to establish parking fees; and I
would recommend that the Parking and Transportation Com
mittee give serious consideration to other fee alternatives in
order to achieve greater equity. ,
In future years, the parking fee could be determined to be
a function of income, distance of campus from home, lot
location, community role, and a number of other factors.
However, the establishment of these criteria, and the manner
in which two or more criteria are combined to determine a
resulting fee is sufficiently complex that it should not be
attempted during the first year of the program.
Parking Permits
In issuing parking permits, some consideration must be
given to limiting the number of stickers issued in relation to
the number of spaces available within each of the zones. In
making this determination, consideration must be given to
the number of multiple stickers that are issued to the same
individual, the fact that individuals seldom use their vehicle
every single day (particularly those who travel in and out of
town), and the fact that it will be extremely expensive to
provide an individual space for each person possessing a
permit.
Based upon these considerations and having reviewed
similar situations at other institutions and a more technical
study (Narragon, et al) I recommend that during the first
year there be a 40% over-issue in the Academic Zone; i.e.,
that 1.4 stickers be issued for every actual parking space in
that zone.
Multiple stickers issued to members of carpools and to
individuals with multiple registered cars will only count as
one in these calculations. Since some of the factors operating
in the Academic Zone do not affect the Residence Zone, I
recommend that 1.2 stickers be issued for each available
space in the Residence Zone.
In lieu of separate areas within the Academic Zone for
faculty, staff, and students, I recommend that we attempt to
allocate stickers on a priority basis by means of staggered
application until the 1.4 sticker per space ratio has been
reached.
First, using a strict definition of faculty-i.e., current
membership in the Academic Council-qualified individuals
who wish to purchase a parking permit for the Academic
Zone will be given a limited period in which to apply for
permits. At the end of that time, those persons who have not
applied revert to the next lower priority category and will be
treated on a first-come, first-served basis in that category.
During the second period, all staff (except those who are
registered as students at Stanford) will apply on a first-come.

fust-served basis for parking permits in the Academic Zone.
If, at the end of the issuance of stickers to faculty and staff,
the 1.4 J t'ckers per space ratio has not been reached, students
will be permitted to apply for parking permits in the
Academic Zone.
The primary purpose rule described in the model regula
tions specifies that an individual currently registered as a
student is not eligible for any other type of parking permit
except under unusual circumstances.
Among students, first priority for Academic Zone permits
will be given to those students who live off-campus and
outside the mandatory registration area. (Again, to be oper
ated within the mandatory registration area, including the
Academic Zone, a vehicle must be registered regardless of
where the owner lives.) Second priority will be given to those
students who live on campus; however, any student wishing
to park in the Residence Zone and the Academic Zone must
pay both fees and display both stickers.
Arrangements will have to be made throughout the year
to add incremental faculty, staff, and students who come to
Stanford during the academic year to give them access to
parking in one of the fee zones. However, individuals who
were present during the initial bid period and did not apply
will not be permitted to place a bid for stickers until the
following year unless there is clear under-utilization of spaces
in the desired area.
In the case of individuals desiring to use more than one
vehicle in the Academic Zone, multiple parking permits will
be issued subject to written agreement that that individual
will have only one vehicle in the Academic Zone at any given
time. The integrity of the members of this community is such
that these written agreements should be taken as binding
commitments and should not require a great deal of enforce
ment. Failure to comply with this commitment will result in
mandatory revocation; and, if a survey of the situation
indicates that there is widespread abuse, the rules should be
changed for everyone.
In order to encourage the formation of car pools, groups
of individuals will establish their priority for sticker issuance
according to the highest classification of any rider in the
pool, and they will be able to share the cost of the parking
permit among the riders because only one permit will be
required.
Rather than have one portable permit that moves from
car-to-car, car pool permit applications will require a state
ment from the individuals involved that only one car in the
pool will be parked in an annual fee space in the Academic
Zone at any given time. Abuse of the system will result in
mandatory revocation of the pool permits, and the individu
als involved will not be eligible for individual parking permits
until the following year. There will be some definitional
problems as to what constitutes a car pool, but 1 leave that
for later consideration.
Permit priorities for the Residence Zone lots are recom
mended as follows: first priority to the first vehicle of
resident faculty; i.e., those individuals who live in student
type residences and perform an academic function; second
priority for the first vehicle of each eligible staff or student
resident; third priority for the second or third vehicles of any
of the above individuals.
Multiple stickers will not be issued except at the fees
described above for the Residence Zone since it is assumed
that all such vehicles will be on the campus simultaneously.
Individuals not wishing to avail themselves of parking in the
Residence Zone will be able to leave their registered vehicles
in a Free Zone parking lot.
The parking stickers should be of the same bumper-type
currently used and should be affixed in the same general
location as the registration stickers.
Some distinction between zones should be made also by
design or color of the sticker to facilitate easy enforcement.
Sharp differences in sticker design from year-to-year will also
be necessary.
Parking in Unmarked Areas
In order to deal with one of the obvious responses to a
stricter parking system-i.e., street parking-certain restric
tions will have to be established in the Academic Zone where
parking will be prohibited in all areas except those marked
for parking.
In the Residence Zone, street parking should be prohib
ited except in marked zones between 7:30 a.m. and 5 p.m.,
Monday through Friday. This is needed to prevent overflow
onto the streets in the faculty-staff housing area. Although
the restriction may be viewed as onerous by residents of the
faculty-staff housing area, there is no readily available alter
native.
If a better way can be described, it should be imple
mented since this regulation requires enforcement over an
extended area. The size of the Residence Zone boundary has
been made sufficiently large to discourage individuals from
parking in portions of the faculty-staff housing area not in
the Residence Zone.
Special Purpose Lots
There are at the present time some special purpose lots on
the campus that need to be taken into consideration with
respect to these recommendations. Lot E-E at Stanford
University Hospital is reserved for community physicians
who go to and from the hospital and their offices a number


Campus Boundary and Parking Zones
(Space paid for by News and Publications)

of times each day and who need access to parking adjacent to
the hospital.
At the present time, this is a card-controlled gate lot and
cards are issued only to community physicians (not to
full time faculty). Since this lot is part of the Academic Zone,
it will be subject to the annual charge. I anticipate no
difficulty in levying that charge although it will not be
welcome.
The Hoover Institution has a lot that is considered an
exclusive lot; it may well be that the Institution would like to
assume the expense of installing a gate to control access to
this lot. However, parking there will still be subject to the
annual Academic Zone fee. Access to the Hoover Institution
lot should be a matter of determination by the director of
the Hoover Institution.
There is some question concerning certain nonresidential
leaseholds, and whether those leases include control over any
parking areas. As those leaseholds are modified in future
years, that issue should be clarified and the lots should be
considered as part of either the Academic or the Residence
Zone.
Parking and Rental Agreements
Since not all renters have cars, the inclusion of parking
space with the lease or rent of residential quarters wouid
provide an unequal benefit. I recommend that in the future
(regardless of what the situation is determined to have been
in the past) all leases for rental housing on the campus clearly
indicate that parking is not included implicitly or explicitly
as a function of that lease.
In addition, the sale of Pearce Mitchell residences should
indicate that street parking is not provided as a condition of
the sale. Since there are not nearly enough spaces for all the
renters on campus, it is clear that some rationing system must
be in place. And since all renters do not have vehicles, it
seems neither equitable nor efficient to attach an individual
parking space to an individual residence.
While this may meet with early resistance, it should be
recognized by the residents of the rental units that it is
commonplace, both at other universities and at most equally
dense apartment complexes in urban areas, to charge sepa
rately for parking; there is no reason not to do so here. To do
otherwise is to ask all the tenants to share the expense of
benefits that are unequally distributed.
In the case of faculty-staff housing, the parking is off the
street and on the leasehold, and a case can be clearly made
that the owner has in fact incurred all the expenses associated
with the parking whether or not the owner wishes to use
them. In addition, there is nothing in these regulations to
preclude the owner of a faculty-staff house from renting out
a parking space to a student so long as it is off the street and
on the leasehold, and the student vehicle is properly regis
tered.
Per-Diem and Metered Spaces
I recommend the installation of approximately 250
parking meters in the Academic Zone and about 200 meters
in the Residence Zone. These metered spaces may be used by
anyone, although some consideration may be given to lim
iting some of the spaces to prohibit parking of registered
vehicles thus effectively reserving those spaces for visitors.
In addition to these meters, there is a large pay lot at the
hospital, which provides space for 350 cars, so that the total
number of visitor spaces at the University is significant.
The meter rate should be 25 cents per hour, and some of
the meters should have an eight-hour clock with a daily
charge of approximately one dollar. It is important that the
cost of parking at meters be greater than the annual cost of
an Academic or Residence Zone pay permit. The daily rate
for the hospital parking lot should be raised from 50 cents to
$1. At $1 a day, the cost of parking at a meter or in the
hospital lot is $200 per year.
The per-diem parking system provides a viable alternative
to the bicyclists who wish to drive only on rainy days. They
would not be required to buy a parking permit and would
still have access to some parking during bad weather.
University Vehicles
University vehicles, as noted in the model regulations,
must be registered, and, if used in the Academic or Residence
Zones, will also require appropriate parking permits, the fees
of which will be charged to the owner-departments.
While some may argue that it makes little sense to charge
the University for parking on its own campus, I think it is
imperative that no free parking be permitted within the
Academic or Residence Zones. The existence of the first free
permit simply raises the question of who should receive the
second.
Gate-Controlled Areas
As has been previously mentioned, there are areas that
can be best controlled by gated access. Lot E-E at the
hospital, the Vehicle Exclusion Zone (the Quad), and Hoover
Institution all have a suitable configuration for card
controlled gates. Such gates can either be operated 24 hours a
day, seven days a week or can be left open for periods when
less restrictive rules apply.
In the case of the Quad, it may be desirable to have a
specified time each week when individuals can go in and out
to pick up large quantities of materials from their offices
without making prior arrangements with Police Services.
Obviously, arrangements for temporary permits, as described
in the model regulations, would give people access to these
gated areas under special circumstances any time during the
day.
Non-Categorized Individuals
Some definitions arc required for certain individuals who
drive within the campus boundaries and who do not fit the
specified categories. Ineligible spouses of eligible individuals
should be subjcct to the rules applied to the spouse since
their status on the campus is solely a derived one.
The ineligible children of eligible parents must register
their vehicles but arc not eligible to park in the Academic and
Residence Zones unless their parents wish to utilize their
children's vehicles and wish to pay in advance for the
privilege of parking in these zones.
In the case of eligible spouses of eligible individuals, the
rules would apply to each of them separately. The eligible
spouse may be authorized to have a staff sticker, in which
case she/he would either elect to use the Free Zone or to
park in the Academic Zone. Their parking at their residence
would be controlled by the rules which apply to the one who
has primary eligibility for the residence (it is about at this
point that one is tempted to junk the whole thing, but then
equity rears its pretty head and we press on!).
Ineligible tenants of eligible persons should be retfuired to
register their vehicles but not be allowed to park in pay
zones. Residents in emeritus status should carry the same
status as when they were employed; Emeriti faculty would
enjoy the same privileges as current members of the Academ
ic Council.
Needless to say, this sort of delineation can get tricky, but
it underscores the difficulty involved in creating comprehen
sive parking regulations. The only feasible alternative is to
have no regulations at all, raising a spectre we are probably
not willing to accept.
Service Vehicles, Conferences, and
Special Event Parking
Service areas throughout the Academic and Residence
Zones will be clearly marked as such and will be available to
unregistered vehicles performing service functions as well as
registered service vehicles. Special arrangements will have to
be made to control the use of these areas. Arrangements will
also have to be made for special groups such as conference
attendees, construction workers, vendors, and the handi
capped.
Conference attendees will have a number of options:
meters and pre-paid auto dashboard cards described in the
model regulations, use of the free lots; or one-day stickers
issued at a central point like the Police Department. Con
struction contracts should include specific provisions for
parking by the workers.
We should attempt to get contractors to locate their
workers on low-use lots and shuttle them to construction
sites. I realize that this may be difficult to accomplish, but I

feel that it is imperative since construction workers otten
arrive early in the morning and would quickly take up Free
Zone spaces or would park illegally and need to be ticketed.
Purchasing and Police Services should develop a mecha
nism to designate the vehicles belonging to vendors and
arrange for their access to gate-controlled areas. The particu
lar needs of handicapped persons will be handled by the
Special Request Appeals Board.
Special event parking-e.g., athletic events-should require
no exceptions to the regulations during regular hours. Indi
viduals will either use visitors' spaces or have a properly
registered car with a parking sticker.
During other hours, the issue is more difficult. Equity
suggests that parking for special athletic events should bear
some of the cost of operating the overall parking system. I
recommend that this possibility be a subject to review in
1975-76 with the object of establishing a policy for special
event parking. The question of whether it should be a fee
system or another mechanism should be carefully examined.
Changes to Existing Lots
All the existing lots should be restriped for maximum
density, with areas set aside for compact cars. Compact car
spaces should be located in the more advantageous locations
throughout the lots to provide an additional incentive for the
use of compact vehicles.
As indicated earlier, there may be a number of lots where
the installation of gates is desirable. At present, three areas
(Lot E-E, the Vehicle Exclusion Zone, and the Hoover
Institution) are the only ones where gates seem to make
sense.
However, if there is such further sub-division of either the
Academic or the Residence Zone into particular areas, gates
may be necessary there. For example, this might be a way to
restrict access to residence areas if we wish to restrict parking
at a particular residence to only those who reside there and
pay the parking fee. It also might serve as a good control
mechanism for some of the more densely populated residen
tial areas, such as Escondido Village, both to control through
traffic and to simplify enforcement.
A survey should also be made of the lighting on the lots
to assure that there is adequate security, particularly during
the winter months and for evening and night shift personnel.
Additional Parking Spaces
During the review, a number of people indicated that
there are large numbers of small areas throughout the campus
that are not now used for parking but possibly could be.
Many of these suggestions focused on areas where parking is
prohibited for safety reasons.
However, it would be worthwhile for the Planning Office
and Public Services to review all the small areas in which
parking is now prohibited to determine whether any of them
can be converted into parking spaces without creating a fire
or safety hazard. In addition, the experience of the first year
under the new system should be used to determine whether
or not there is demand for new lots at this time.
In the absence of any effective constraints (economic or
otherwise) upon parking demand, additional parking will be
required, particularly in conjunction with new construction
and the attendant loss of existing parking spaces. I hope that
the recommendations that place economic disincentives in
the system may drastically reduce the requirement for addi
tional parking.
Numerous suggestions were received about the construc
tion of structured parking. Structured parking is an extreme
ly expensive proposition (more than $5,000 per space); the
parking fees recommended in this report would not even pay
the interest on the cost per space to build a parking structure.
Unless we are willing to either go to substantially higher
fees or to finance structured parking in some other way, it
does not appear feasible at this time to build structured
parking on the campus. New surface-level parking lots must
also be evaluated in terms of cost and environmental impact.
Even without a land-use charge, the cost per space of a new
surface lot (including appropriate landscaping) is about $850.
Again, the. proposed fees would not cover the debt service for
such an expenditure.
Hence, unless the economic disincentives to parking can
reduce the net demand for parking, as parking lots are
withdrawn from the current inventory by new construction,
a parking shortage will reoccur. The planned addition of 225
spaces (Lot E-F) and 150 spaces (Lot H) are intended to
partially offset losses due to new construction.
The situation is compounded by a number of strong,
external factors, such as the EPA regulations and the poten
tial for a substantial increase in the cost of gasoline, both of
which may drastically affect parking demand.
IMPROVEMENTS FOR
NONAUTO USERS
Pedestrians
To facilitate pedestrian travel, a number of improvements
are necessary on the campus, primarily in the surface of the
walkways and in lighting. Most of the existing lighting on
campus has been designed primarily to light roadways; hence,
high, overhead standards have been installed.
For pedestrian and bicycle purposes, a lower height light
standard should be adequate, aesthetically more pleasing, and
possibly less expensive to install and operate. Pedestrians
should have the right-of-way at all intersections with road
ways throughout the campus.
All such intersections should have their priority status
inverted so that, instead of crosswalks for pedestrians, there
arc "auto-crossings" to indicate that the automobile is cross
ing a pedestrian way and that the pedestrian has the right-of
way. This inversion of crosswalks to "roadcrosses" is an
important manifestation of the basic policy priorities recom
mended in the early part of this report.
Bicycles
In order to encourage heavier usage of bicyles, consider
able investment needs to be made in the improvement of
bikeways, and priority must be given to the prompt repair of
bikeways throughout the campus.
It is difficult for an individual who does not use a bicycle
regularly to appreciate the importance of a well-designed and
well-maintained system of bike paths. Small holes not visible
from the road and unimportant to the pedestrian can be a
serious problem for the bicyclist, causing falls and wreaking
havoc with wheel rims.
Adequate bike path lighting (of the same type described
above) is also essential. Investment in bicycle paths helps
reduce demand for parking and can be very cost-effective.
Arrangement should be made for bicycle storage that pro
vides security and protection from the elements and would
reduce the present clutter.
The installation of high-quality security racks at the
Medical Center has proved valuable in reducing thefts, but
many bicyclists continue to park in pedestrian areas, creating
pedestrian traffic problems. However, if one must choose
between bicycle and automobile congestion, it is clear that
the former should win the day.
Motorcycles
Adequate, well marked, and very secure parking spaces
need to be provided for motorcyclists on the Free, Resi
dence, and Academic Zones. This action should include the
installations of hitching-rack type facilities at appropriate
locations within the boundaries for legal operations of such
vehicles and at a sufficient distance from buildings to satisfy
the fire regulations. Efforts should be made to find some
effective means of excluding motorcycles from areas where
their use is prohibited.
Alternate Transportation
We must recognize that the typical mass transit experi
ment is a multi-million dollar operation, which can not be
undertaken casually by Stanford University. A relatively
simple analysis of the demand for point-to-point transporta
tion and of the number of persons who want to go from one
point to another point at the same time during the day,
indicates that there are no links on the campus that have the

potential demand required to support a mass transit opera
tion.
Hence, innovations and experiments in intra-campus
group transit should focus on moving relatively small num
bers of people with relatively short times between service.
However, individuals should recognize that, in order to be
economical, practically any campus system must follow a
circuitous route to provide the coverage required by our
geographic dispersion.
There are a number of studies and experiments under way
in the county, including the joint Stanford-Palo Alto-Menlo
Park transit study, (PAMTRANS), which will examine alter
natives. These efforts should be followed closely and incorpo
rated into the future campus planning.
The "Survey of Commuting Students at Stanford" indi
cates the importance that off-campus students place on
"some kind of shuttle transportation to Palo Alto/Menlo
Park and for some kind of security for bicyles parked
overnight."
Solutions to these problems should be pursued aggressive
ly since a large number of students commute from a reason
ably small area (from a transit perspective). Facilitating
student commuting is clearly less expensive than building
either new parking lots or new dormitories and new parking
lots.
In order to properly assess the willingness of individuals
on this campus to utilize alternate transportation systems, 1
recommend that careful consideration be given by the
Parking and Transportation Committee to the establishment
of a number of experiments on campus during the forth
coming year. Two points aie important:
First, no experiment will have much impact unless it is
tried for a minimum of 90 days. Second, an experiment
should be designed so as to elicit attitudinal information
about the particular alternative undergoing experimentation.
To some degree, people vote their attitudes by use of the
system; however, since that group is a self-selecting sample, it
is important to survey individuals who do not use the system
to find out why they are not using it.
The current ASSU experiments to better tie the campus
into the county Dial-a-Bus system and to provide evening
shuttle-bus service are the kinds of innovation that should be
supported by the Parking and Transportation Trust Fund;
their results should be incorporated in future experimenta
tion and planning.
Through Traffic
The road system of the main portion of the campus
(between Stanford Avenue, El Camino Real, Quarry Road,
and Junipero Serra Boulevard) should be designed to facili
tate internal circulation but to discourage through traffic.
As we place a higher priority on non-automobile modes of
transportation within the core campus area, the amount of
through traffic should be minimized as much as possible.
After registration is completed, through traffic should be
surveyed, at first passively by observation, subsequently by
stopping all non-registered vehicles to do an origin-and
destination study to determine why such vehicles use the
campus core for through traffic purposes.
Serious consideration should be given to lowering the
speed limits on the majority of campus streets. With the
exception of Campus Drive and Palm Drive, all streets should
have the lowest possible speed limit; and on Campus and
Palm Drives, intersections with pedestrian and bikeways
should be constructed in such a way that the pedestrians and
bicycles clearly have priority.
DISSEMINATION OF POLICIES
AND REGULATIONS
An important element of any new policy is the timely
dissemination of the rules and regulations. Simply posting
these rules and regulations at a couple of central locations on
the campus is not adequate. Further, it is not possible to
provided them in abbreviated form, given their complexity
and the concern over detail they will generate.
In my review of the systems of other institutions, I was
impressed with the detail they included in booklets prepared
to explain the parking rules and regulations. The benefits of
such a booklet are well worth the effort, particularly since
the cost of publication should be charged against the Parking
and Transportation Trust Fund.
We should prepare a comprehensive book containing all
the policies, the full text of the rules, and a map showing the
areas where different types of parking are permitted. In
addition to being posted in the libraries, the courts, and the
Police Department, it should be provided at the time of
automobile registration to each individual registering.
A one-page explanation and the map also should be
prepared for handout and/or mailout with the student regis
tration packet, the employee package, and all conference
packets to explain the steps involved in using the parking
system.
ENFORCEMENT
One of the most difficult aspects to any parking and
transportation system is enforcement. Fortunately, the pre
sent system incorporates the county judicial system in the
enforcement process and relieves the University of a signifi
cant burden. Properly promulgated and publicized regula
tions then become a judicial matter rather than a source of
recurring internal strife.
Since one of the characteristics of this institution is the
ability of its members to debate items of personal privilege to
the point of community exhaustion, it is important that
individual cases not be allowed to bog down the system
totally.
The Special Requests Appeals Board described in the
model regulations does provide an escape valve for exceptions
prior to the time of citation. However, once a citation is
issued, the matter is between the individual and the court
system.
I would recommend that this procedure be continued and
that we focus on insuring that our regulations should be
required to satisfactorily clear that violation before appealing
the regulation for change.
Arrangements must be made with the City of Palo Alto to
provide adequate enforcement for that portion of the campus

that is within the city limits. At present, although Palo Alto
is very concerned about Stanford's traffic generation and
parking requirements, the City does not enforce the parking
regulations at the Medical Center, though the California
Vehicle Code clearly places that authority with the City.
1 recommend that the Liaison Committee reach an agree
ment with Palo Alto as to the City's responsibility and its
willingness to enforce regulations within the city limits. If the
City is unwilling to use its resources for this purpose, it
should deputize members of either the Medical Center securi
ty office or the campus police service to issue city parking
tickets for violations occurring within the city limits.
The regulations with respect to the operation and parking
of motorcycles have not been adequately enforced in the
past. There is a widespread disregard by motorcyclists on this
campus for the restrictions against motorcycles in non
automobile areas. ,
At present, the violation of these regulations is the most
visible of all the motor vehicle violations on the campus; and,
because of the noise and the general disregard for the safety
of others exhibited by some motorcyclists, their intrusion on
the Vehicle Exclusion Zone should not be allowed to con
tinue.
The interception of moving motorcyclists is tricky and
can be dangerous in a pedestrian area; therefore, emphasis
should be given to enforcing motorcycle regulations by
impounding illegally parked motorcycles. When motorcycles
are found parked within pedestrian areas, they clearly were
operated in violation of the rules.
In addition, local fire ordinances prohibit the parking of
motorcycles within 100 feet of a building exccpt in a
designated parking area. In these instances, either the im
poundment or the immobilization of motorcycles should be
employed. These methods should dramatically increase com
pliance with the regulations.
FIRST YEAR IMPLEMENTATION EFFORT
The recommendations made here are only a first step in
the development of a body of more equitable and hence
more complex regulations. First-year implementation will
require great effort; for this reason, the recommendations
attempt to keep the system as simple as possible. However,
our concern with equity is such that, in future years, it will
be important to move from the simple system described in
this report to something that will be more complex.
In order to have this system in place by the beginning of
the next academic year, it is important to assign specific
responsibilities and to develop a specific time table for
review, approval, and implementation. Some of the key
policy decisions that must be made are:
1. Adoption of the basic Parking and Transportation
Priorities policy statement.
2. Confirmation of the zone sizes and boundaries.
3. Confirmation of the fee structure for the Academic
and Residence Zones.
4. Modification and confirmation of the general regula
tions that have been proposed.
5. Confirmation of the system to be utilized for visitor
parking in the areas in which meters and pay lots will
be installed.
If these kinds of decisions can be made and promulgated
prior to the end of the academic year, a crash effort will be
required to order the necessary materials, to make the
changes in the lots, and to place signs at all the entrances to
the campus to indicate the parking restrictions.
I recommend that the current Parking Subcommittee of
the Committee of Land and Building Development be uti
lized as a proxy for the proposed Parking and Transportation
Committee to assist in the implementation of these recom
mendations.
EXTERNALLY CONTROLLED CHANGES
In addition to changes in the internal regulations, there
are some changes that we should attempt to make through
our legislative representatives. Specifically, we should request
the Legislature to augment the California Veluclc Code
Section 21113, which currently prescribes the manner in
which parking regulations are promulgated at Stanford, to
include provisions on fines that are similar to the UC system.
(Under Penal Code Section 14636 the fine assessed for a
parking violation on any UC campus is divided equally
between the campus and the county judicial system.)
This system is essentially the same as that existing within
most city limits (wherein the city and the county divide the
fine equally) and would place Stanford and Palo Alto in a
position like that between the campuses of the University of
California and the state colleges and their local cities. The
proceeds to the University should go into the Police Depart
ment budget for an enforcement program rather than to the
Parking and Transportation Trust Fund since these funds are
clearly associated with enforcement
We should also work with the county judicial system to
change the bail/fine for current parking violations. At the $2
level, an individual is tempted to play the probabilities.
Without the higher fee schedule recommended, there will be
many who feel reasonably confident that they will not be
ticketed more than 24 or 30 times a year and will use the
probability approach to beat the paid parking system.
1 recommend that the present $2 fine be raised to $10
both as a deterrent and to provide an incentive for the
county to follow up on tickets. I also recommend higher
fines in fire zones and other no-parking areas.
If we are not able to raise the $2 fine structure, we should
give serious consideration to higher fine categories for a
number of areas where people habitually park illegally.
However, the principal problem at Stanford is illegal parking
in legal parking spaces; e.g., without permits, beyond the
allowed time, etc. Unless there is a significant change in the
fine system, the number of those who gamble on parking
illegally will increase.
Most universities that have their own enforcement system
refuse to issue parking permits or registrations to persons
who have unpaid parking fines at the time of registration.
Since our system is bifurcated between the University and
the county, this approach would be difficult, but not impos
sible. We should require declarations by applicants for regis
tration or a parking permit indicating that there are no
outstanding unpaid fines for parking tickets issued on cam
pus.
