# The 						Current Constitution
## 
### 
Preamble
We. the students of Stanford University, in order to advance our interests,
define our responsibilities, and provide for our meaningful participation in the
governance.of the University, do hereby associate and establish this Constitu
tion
Article I: Name arid
Membership
Section 1. Name
The name of the organization under this Constitution shall be the Associated
Students of Stanford University, hereafter referred to as the "Association."
Section 2. Membership
All registered students of Stanford University, and only such persons, shall be
members of this Association. As members they shall be entitled to vote, to
hold office in the Association, and to exercise the various rights and privileges
of membership They shall also be liable for such fees as this Association
may assess.
Section 3. Representative of the Student Body
The Association shall be the sole representative of the entire Stanford student
body. ......

A. Within the University
Only the Association and its designees shall represent the entire Stanford
student body in any dealings with other elements of the University.
B. Outside of the University
Only the Association and its designees shall have the right to represent the
entire Stanford student body in non university affairs.
Article II: Legislative Branch
Section 1. Final Representative Authority
The final representative authority of the Association shall be vested in the
Senate of the Association The Senate shall be composed of twenty-one voting
members, and such ex-officio members without vote as are herein provided
or may be provided in the By-Laws of the Association Ten of these shall be
elected by and shall represent the undergraduate members of the Association,
ten shall be elected by and shall represent the graduate and professional school
members of the Association, and the twenty-first shall be the Senate Chair
Section 2. Membership in the Senate
A. General
1. The twenty elected regular members of the Senate, along with the
twenty elected alternate members, shall be chosen each year in the
Association general flection This election shall be held on two con
secutive weekdays during the second, third, or fourth week of Spring
Quarter the,exact date to be specified in the By-Laws of the Associa
tion..
11<77< /. i-: ii i' i'<i -/>'/* iti \ /•; /JK,-t\c•//
2. Each of the elected regular and alternate members of the Senate shall,
at the time of their election and during their continuance in office, be
members of the Association and of the constituency they represent.
However, during the general election, members of the Association may
be clccted from the constituency in which they will be enrolled during
the next academic year
3. An elected member of the Senate shall cease to be a member of the
Senate upon the event of his or her death, resignation, disqualification,
recall, or expulsion Except as otherwise provided in the By-Laws of the
Association, the Senate shall call such special elections as are required
to fill vacant regular seats in the Senate, and may at its discretion call
special elections to fill vacant alternate seats.
4. In the event that one or more regular seats in the Senate are vacant, the
membership of the Senate for the purpose of determining quorums and
counting votes shall be considered to be twenty-one minus the number
of vacant regular seats.
5. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as preventing the Senate
from enforcing appropriate sanctions against candidates whose actions
in seeking office were in violation of the laws governing student elections.
B. Election of I r ndergrailuate Senators
1. The ten regular undergraduate members of the Senate shall be elected
at-large by all undergraduate members of the Association. Each under
graduate member of the Association voting may cast one vote for each
of ten candidates seeking election to the Senate. The ten candidates
who receive the largest number of votes shall become regular
of the Senate.
2. The ten candidates for undergraduate Senate seats who receive t' e next
largest number of votes shall become alternate members of the Senate.
Each regular and alternate undergraduate member of the Senate shall
be assigned a rank in accordance with the number of votes-received,
provided that members elected in any special election shall be ranked
below those elected in the general election or in previous special elec
tions held since the general election. Should any regular undergraduate
member of the Senate cease to be a member of the Senate, that seat
shall be awarded to the highest-ranking alternate member, who shall
then become a regular member.
C. Election of (Irjuliiate Senators
1. The ten regular graduate and professional school members of the Senate
shall be elected from one or more districts as specified in the By-Laws of
the Association, the composition of which shall be based on an equitable
apportionment of the graduate and professional school members of the
Association Each graduate and professional school member of the
Association voting may cast one vote in the district to which he or
she belongs for each of as many regular Senate seats are assigned to
that district. In each district, the candidates equal in number to the
number of regular Senate seats assigned to that district who receive the
largest number of votes shall become regular members of the Senate.
No member of the Association shall vote in a district of which he or she
is not a member.
2. In each district, the candidates equal in number to the number of reg
ular Senate seats assigned to that district who receive the next largest
number of votes shall become alternate members of the Senate Each
regular and alternate graduate and professional school member of £jie
Senate shall be assigned a rank in accordance with the number of votes
received divided by the number of eligible voters in their district, pro
vided that members elected in any special election shall be ranked below
those elected in the general election or in previous special elections held
since the general election Should any regular graduate or professional
school member of the Senate cease to be a member of the Senate, that
seat shall be awarded to the highest ranking alternate member from that
district who shall then become a regular member
D. Duties of A Item.lie Senators
1. Alternate members may attend all meetings of the Senate and engage
in debate In addition, they shall have such privileges in the committees
of the Senate as may be provided, in the ißy Laws of the Association

2 When a regular undergraduate member of the Senate fails to be in atten
" deuce at a meeting, the highest ranking undergraduate alternate member
present shall be allowed to vote, to be counted as a part of a quorum,
and to perform all functions of a regular member.
3. When a regular graduate or professional school member of the Senate
fails to be in attendence at a meeting, the highest-ranking alternate
member from the absent member's district shall be allowed to vote, to be
counted as a part of a quorum, and to perform all functions of a regular
member. Should neither regular nor alternate members from a given
district be present in sufficient numbers to fill all regular Senate seats
assigned to that district, the highest-ranking alternate member from
among the remaining districts shall be allowed to vote, to be counted as
a part of a quorom. and to perform all functions of a regular member.
4. A regular member who arrives late at a meeting may reclaim the to
vote from the alternate acting as his or her substitute by so informing
the Senate Chair
E. Ex-Ollicio Members
1. The Council of Presidents shall be ex-officio members without vote.
2. The Financial Manager shall be an ex-officio member without vote.
Section 3. Term
A. Senate Elect
Members of the Association elected and certified as members of the new
Senate shall meet as the Senate Elect within one week after certification by
the Senate, and at regular intervals thereafter.
B. Organization of tin- Senate Elect
The Senate Elect shall elcct its officers and organize itself in a manner similar
to that of the Senate Members of the Senate Elcct shall be ex-officio members
of the Senate and observers on any body containing a member of the Senate.
Members of the Senate shall be ex officio members of the Senate Elect.
C. Chair of the Senate Elect
The Chair of the Senate shall be the Chair of the Senate Elcct until that body
has selected another Chair
D. Transition from the Senate Elect to the Senate
At a date specified in the By-Laws of the Association, or 14 days before the
end of Spring quarter, whichever comes first, the Senate and Senate Elect
shall dissolve and the former members of the Senate Elect shall constitute
the new Senate
E. Initial Meeting of the New Senate
The new Senate shall meet at least once in Spring quarter, at which time it
shall formalize the membership of Senate committees and the appointment of
Senate officers
Section 4. Presiding Officer
The Senate shall elect a ( hairman, who shall preside over meetings of that
body. The Senate shall elect a Deputy Chairman to preside in the absence
of the Chairman. 1 he presiding officer shall vote only when his vote would be
decisive
Section 5. Procedure
The Senate shall have the power to choose its other officers, to determine its
rules of procedure, to constitute committees, to judge the credentials of its
members, and to discipline it's members.' 1 • • ' ' '
A HTH IK 11. LIX: IS LA TIVE Ml A AC II
Section G. Quorum
One half of the regular members of the Senate plus one shall constitute a
quorom to conduct business.
Section 7. Constitutional Interpretation
The Senate shall have the power to interpret this Constitution and the By-
Laws of the Association.
Section 8. Budgetary and Financial Policy
Except as otherwise provided in this Constitution, the Senate shall have the
ultimate authority to determine the budget of the Association and its agencies
and their budgetary, financial, investment, business, and operating policies,
and to establish rules ensuring that funds derived from fees levied upon the
members of the Association are expended and accounted for properly
Section 9. Agencies of the Association
The Senate shall have the power to create, modify, and abolish agencies of
the Association for specific purposes, including but not limited to projects
providing services to members of the Association The functions, structure,
officers, and finances of all such agencies shall be specified in the By-Laws.
However, corporate subsidiaries of the Association shall be subject to their
own corporate charters and by-laws.
Section 10. Nominations Commission
A. Jurisdiction
All members of the Association appointed to such positions on the following
bodies as are reserved for members of the Association shall be nominated by
the Association through its Nominations Commission with the concurrence
of the Senate, as.providcd herein: committees and commissions of the Uni
versity President and of the Academic Council. University Committees and
Administrative Panels, committees of the Board of Trustees of the University,
sub-committees of the above-named committees, and such additional com
mittees and other bodies as may be from time to time specified in agreements
approved by the President of the University and by the Senate.
Alternative procedures for these nomination may be specified from time to
time in agreements approved by the Senate and the President of the University,
cither of whom may terminate such an agreement at any time
B. Membership
1. The Nominations Commission shall consist of 7 members of the Asso
ciation. and such ex-officio members without vote as may be provided
in the By-Laws of the Association
a. Three members of the Commission shall be appointed by the Sen
ate by a two-thirds vote. These three members shall include at
least one graduate, and at least one undergraduate, member of the
Association.
1). Four members of the Commission shall be nominated by the Coun
cil of Presidents and confirmed by the Senate by a two thirds vote
These four members shall include at least one graduate and at
least one undergraduate, member of the Association.
2. The qualifications for. and additional procedures for the nomination
of. members of the Commission, and its rules of procedure, shall be
specified in the By-Laws of the Association. Four voting member of the
Commission shall constitute a quorum.
3. Members of the Nominations Commission shall be chosen .during the
Winter Quarter, and shall serve a one year term of officc. beginning on
a date specified in the By Laws of the Association, but no later than
the first week of Spring quarter. They shall continue to serve until their
successors have taken officc. or until they have resigned or been removed
by the Senate.
4. Members of the Commission may be removed from office by a majority
vote of the Senate cither upon the recommendation of a majority of

the Commission or upon the joint recommendation of the Chair of the
Commission and the Council of Presidents, or by a two-thirds vote of
the Senate.
5. In the event that a position on the Commission becomes vacant, the
Senate shall, at its next meeting, appoint a new member to serve the
remainder of the term of the original member, such appointment to be
by a two-thirds vote.
G. In the event that a quorum of the Commission is unable to meet during
the Summer quarter or between quarters, or during a quarter after at
tempting to do so for two weeks or more, the Senate shall provide for
a body to carry out the duties and responsibilities of the Commission
until the Commission is able to resume meeting
C. C'liair
At the time of their confirmation, one of the members of the Commission shall
be designated by the Senate as Chair of the Commission. The Senate may.
by a two-thirds vote, remove the chair and designate another member of the
Commission as chair.
D. Normal Nominat ion Procedure for Kopieseut.nl ives
The Nominations Commission shall announce all positions for which it seeks
representatives to the entire Association All members of the Association
shall be accorded equal opportunity to apply for these positions. Selections
of representatives by the Nominations Commission and their confirmation by
the Senate shall be by majority vote
E. Nomination through the Applicant Pool
If circumstances do not permit the announcement of a particular position for
which a representative of the Association is sought, then the Nominations
Commission may select a representative from a general applicant pool All
members of the Association shall be accorded equal opportunity to apply
for this applicant pool. The Senate shall confiim all such selections of the
Nominations Commission by a two-thirds vote
F. Removal of Representatives
X. The Nominations Commission may recommend to the Senate the re
moval of any representatives of the Association who do not regularly
attend meetings of their Committee or do not accomplish their legiti
mate portion of the Committee's work At least 48 hours notice must
be given to both the Association representative and the Chair of the
concerned Committee, and both shall be invited to speak on this issue
before the Commission
2. Upon this recommendation the Senate may remove, by a two thirds vote,
the Association representative from the concerned Committee At least
48 hours notice must be given to both the Association representative
and the Chair of the concerned Committee, and both shall be invited
to speak on this issue before the Senate Upon removal the Senate
shall direct the Nominations Commission to nominate one or more new
representatives as a replacement.
3. No one shall be replaced on a committee for political reasons
Section XL. Confirmation of Appointments
The Senate shall have the right to confirm appointments of representatives of
the Stanford student body, except in those cases where an alternate procedure
has been approved by two-thirds of the Association voting in a general election
Such confirmation shall be by majority vote of those regular members of the
Senate present and voting
Section X 2. Elections
The Senate shall have the power to make laws governing all student elections.
Section L 3. IJy-Laws
( ) j, i, . « i l . , - » • « » ...
The Senate may enact, amend, or repoal tire By Laws of the Association
.411 TIC L E 11. L EC IS LA Tl VE BR A NC II
upon approval by two-thirds of the members present and voting, provided
that notice has been given at the previous regular meeting
Section 14. Meetings
The Senate shall hold regular bi weekly meetings unless otherwise decided by
the Senate. Minutes shall be kept and shall be made available, upon request,
to all members of the Association
Article III: Executive Branch
Section 1. Council of Presidents
The Council of ['resident.s of the Association shall be the chief executives of
the Association
Section 2. Qualifications
Members of the Council shall, at the time of their election and during their
continuance in office, be members in good standing of the Association
Section 3. Election
The Council shall be clcctcd by a majority of the Association voting in elections
held during the third and fourth weeks of the spring quarter Provisions for
nominations shall be specified in the By-Laws of the Association
Section 4. Term
Upon certification of their election by the Senate, the members of the new
Council shall meet as the (■ouncil Elect. The Council Elect shall organize
itself in a manner similar to that of the Council Members of the Council
Elect shall sit as ex-officio members of the Senate Elect and as observers
on any body containing a member of the Council At a date specified in the
By Laws of the Association, or 14 days before the end of Spring quarter,
whichever comes first, the Council and Council Elect shall dissolve and the
former members of the Council Elect shall constitute the new Council.
Section 5. Powers
The Council shall serve an administrative role. They shall oversee and coor
dinate the day to day operations and activities of the Association They arc
also responsible for facilitating and coordinating independent student efforts
They shall be the chief representatives of the Association, both inside the
University community and outside.
Any member of the Council shall have the power to call special Meetings of
the Association, to establish committees and subgroups as deemed desirable
The Council shall have the right to veto any bill or resolution passed by the
Senate Any such veto must be signed by three members of the Council
The Council shall notify, in writing, the Senate of the veto and the reasons
therefore within seventy hours after the adjournment of the meeting during
which the bill was passed At the next meeting of the Senate a motion to
ovenide the veto shall be in order
Article IV: Judicial Branch
Section 1. Judiciary Authority
The Association shall recogni/e the authority of University judicial bodies <

over members of the Association only if those judicial bodies shall have been
approved by two-thirds of those members of the Association voting in a general
election.
Section 2. Rights of the Accused
The accused person shall have the following rights The judicial body hearing
the case shall inform the accused person of his rights guaranteed under this
section at the time he is notified of the charges against him.
1. To be informed of all the charges and of the alleged acts upon which
those charges are based
2. To be allowed a reasonable time in which to prepare a defense.
3. To hear all evidence upon which charges are based, and to answer this
evidence through rebuttal.
4. To call witnesses before the judicial body and to confront any other
witnesses before the judicial body.
5. To be assured that, trtless the defendant asks for an open hearing, any
matters of facts which would tend to identify the person or persons
involved in a case would be kept confidential.
6. To have an open hearing
7. To request that any member of the judicial body be disqualified because
of prejudice
8. To be informed of the above rights by proper summons.
9. To be considered innocent until proven guilty beyond a reasonable doubt
10. To be assured that no record of the case is placed on his transcript.
11. To have no person presenting evidence against him sit in judgment of
him.
12. In instances of conviction under State or Federal law. the judicial body
shall not assess penalties if the circumstances of the case indicate that
such penalties would be inequitable to the defendant when imposed
in addition to civil or criminal penalties This limitation shall not ap
ply when the judicial body s proceedings are deemed necessary by the
judicial body to protect the University community from risk or harm.
Nothing in this paragraph, however shall be interpreted as barring or
delaying action by the judicial body on a case because a similar charge
is pending before a civil court
Article V: Finances
Section 1. Association Fee
A. General
An Association Fee shall be levied by the Association upon its membership
us ee sla be used for the organizational and basic programming ex
penses. and minor capital improvements, of student organizations requiring
sma amounts of funding, including appropriate agencies of the Association
B. Authorization
1. By a date specified in the By Laws of the Association, but in any case
no ater than the day prior to the beginning of the Spring quarter general
e ection. the Senate shall enact legislation specifying the amount of the
ssociation Fee for the following fiscal year. Flic total amount may be
con in„uit | on t te success or failure of one or more Special Fee requests
inV rnnHiioo >'!' tI,C ( l' l,lrter general election, provided that both
y igent amounts and the non-contingent or base amount are
approved by the Senate prior to the election, in accordance with the
provisions of this Section
This legislation shall require notice at the previous regular meeting of the
Senate specifying the amount to be authorized, and must be approved
by a vote of two thirds of the membership of the Senate If no such
legislation is enacted by this deadline, then the Association Fee for the
following fiscal year shall be the same as that assessed during the current
fiscal year . < i ~
AUTICIK V. I'INAy( I'X
2. After the day prior to the first day of the Spring quarter general election,
the amount of the Association Fee for the following fiscal year shall be
changed only persnant to an initiative or referendum of the members of
the Association, provided that this is done either before the collection
schedule for the Association and Special Fees has been finally approved,
or with the consent of the University.
Section 2. Special Fees
A. Placement on the Ballot
Every Spring quarter, during the general elections held for the Senate and
Council of Presidents, the Association may levy one or more Special Fees via
a referenda Special Fees shall be sought by student organizations to cover
their organizational and basic programming expenses A student organization
shall have its request for a Special Fee placed on the ballot after following any
one of the following four procedures
1. Prepare a detailed budget for the student organization for the next fiscal
year, including the amount sought from the Special Fee. and submit this,
along with the current budget and a summary of actual expenditures, to
the Association in the form of a petition Such petitions bearing the sig
natures of 20 per cent of the members of the Association requesting to
place the Special Fee on the ballot for Association consideration shall be
presented to the Council of Presidents, who must examine for authen
ticity the signatures on the petitions within seven days after receiving
it. Upon verifying the petition, the Council of Presidents shall then au
thorize the placement of the Special Fee on the ballot for Association
consideration
2. Prepare a detailed budget for the student organization for the next fiscal
year, including the amount sought from the Special Fee. and submit this,
along with the current budget and a summary of actual expenditures,
to the Association in the form of a petition and to the Senate. Such
petitions bearing the signatures of 10 per cent of the members of the
Association requesting to place the Special Fee on the ballot for Associ
ation consideration shall be presented to the Council of Presidents, who
must examine for authenticity the signatures on the petitions within
seven days after receiving it. Upon verifying the petition, the Council of
Presidents shall then authorize the placement of the Special Fee on the
ballot for Association consideration, provided that this request has also
been approved by three-fifths of the members of the Senate.
3. Prepare a detailed budget for the student organization for the next fiscal
year, including the amount sought from the Special Fee, and submit this,
along with the current budget and a summary of actual expenditures,
to the Senate. Upon approval by three-fifths of the members of the
Senate, the Council of Presidents shall then authorize the placement
of the Special Fee on the ballot for Association consideration, provided
that the last time this student organization appeared on the ballot for a
Special Fee. of at least substantially the same amount presently sought,
those in favor of the Special Fee constituted at least 60 per cent of the
members of the Association voting on the Special Fee
4. Prepare a detailed budget for the student organization for the next fiscal
year, including the amount sought from the Special Fee. and submit this,
along with the current budget and a summary of actual expenditures, to
the Association in the form of a petition Such petitions bearing the sig
natures of 10 per cent of the members of the Association requesting to
place the Special Fee on the ballot for Association consideration shall be
presented to the Council of Presidents, who must examine for authen
ticity the signatures on the petitions within seven days after receiving
it Upon verifying the petition, the Council of Presidents shall then au
thorize the placement of the Special Fee on the ballot for Association
consideration, provided that the last time this student organization ap
peared on the ballot for a Special Fee. of at least substantially the same
amount presently sought those in favor of the Special Fee constituted
at least 60 per cent of the members of the Association voting on the
Special Fee
One of the above procedures must be completed by a deadline specified in
the By Laws of the Association, but no later than 21 days before the general
election The Council of Presidents shall give public notice in the Stanford
Daily of the Special Fee requests which will appear on the ballot and their
amounts at least 1 days before the general election
The Senate shall have the authority to specify the form in which the detailed
budget and summary of actual expenditures must be presented and the in-'

formation tlicy must contain, and to establish regulations defining the proper
form for petitions and governing the circulation thereof.
B. Placement on I lie Ballot. in ICxtenuat ing Circumstances
If a student organization has completed one of the above procedures within
21 days of the general election then the Council of Presidents and the Senate
may. if they determine that extenuating circumstances prevented an earlier
completion of one of these procedures, authorize the placement of a Special
Fee 011 the ballot for Association consideration. In this case within two days
after authorization, the Council of Presidents shall give public notice in the
Stanford Daily of the Special Fcc(s) and their amount(s) to be placed on the
ballot for student consideration.
C. Financial Information
During the general election a summary of all financial information submitted
by the student organization seeking a Special Fee shall be made available to
all members of the Association.
D. Division of Special Fee Requests
Regardless of which procedure for placement of a Spccial Fee request on the
ballot was followed, the detailed budget for the next fiscal year of a student
organization seeking a Special Fee may be divided into two sections by a vote
of three fifths of the members of the Senate Each section, along with an
appropriate amount sought from the student organization's initial Special Fee
request, its current budget, and the summary of actual expenditures to date,
shall be considered as a separate and independent Special Fee request, shall
appear separately on the ballot, and shall require separate approval by the
members of the Association as provided herein. The sum of the two Special
Fee requests appearing on the ballot shall equal the amount sought in the
organization's initial Special Fee request.
E. Approval l»y I lie Association
During the general election each member of the Association may cast one vote
either in favor of or in opposition to each Special Fee A Spccial Fee shall be
deemed to have passed if a majority of those voting on the it were in favor
and if those in favor constituted at least 15 per cent of the members of the
Association
F. Approval by the University
Upon certification of the appropriate election result, the Council of Presidents
shall submit all those Spccial Fee requests which were approved by the Asso
ciation. and th'e Assocation Fee authorized by the Senate, to the President of
the University for his or her approval.
Section 3. Collection of the Association Fee and Spe
cial Fees
A. Collection Schedule
After the Spring election results have been certified by the Senate, the Finan
cial Manager shall devise and submit to the Senate for approval a schedule
for the levying of the Association and Spccial Fees which must conform to
the following four principles
1. The amount levied during each of Autumn. Winter, and Spring quarters
shall be substantially the same, while that levied during Summer quarter
shall be approximately one half this amount
2. The amount levied each quarter shall be an integral amount of dollars
3. fhe amount levied each quarter shall be apportioned among the Associ
ation and Special Fees in a manner that shall provide an adequate cash
flow for the concerned student organizations
4. All costs incurred by the Association in administering the approval dis
burscmcnt, and refund processes, and in enforcing compliance by the
recipients of such funds with their authorized budgets, along with an
appropriate portion of the general election costs, shall be paid by a sur
charge levied on the Association Fee and the authorized Spccial Fees.
This surcharge shall be rt uniform |Vr ; rcbnfage of <e.V.h Fee
ARTICLE V. FINANCES
13. Collection ol Fees
The University sli.ill collectjhc appropriate amount every quarter at the same
time it collects charges for tuition The University shall transfer all collected
monies to the Financial Manager, who shall then distribute them into the
appropriate financial accounts.
Sec tion 4. Refunds of the Association Fee and Spe
cial Fees
Any member of the Association who voted during the election in which the
Special Fee(s) were authorized, and any present member of the Association
who was not. at the time of this general election, a member of the Association,
shall be entitled to a refund of at least the amount assessed in support of
the the entire, or any portion of. the Association or .my Special Fee. This
amount shall be specified in the collection schedule for the Fees, and should
be as close as practical to the actual per capita amount collected for the Fee
in question.
Obtaining this refund may deprive the member of the Association of some or
all of the services offered by the student organizations receiving these monies.
Section 5. Distribution of t lie Association Fee and
Special Fees
A. Distribution of the Association l'ee
The Association Fee shall be distributed by one or more bodies of the As
sociation as authorized in the By-Laws of the Association. The Senate shall
retain ultimate authority over the distribution of the Association Fee
B. Deviations from Special I'Ve Budgets
The Financial Manger shall notify the Senate and the Council of Presidents
whenever a student organization who has obtained a Special Fee significantly
deviates from their budget. Either the Senate or the Council of Presidents
may then direct the Financial Manager to halt any distribution of funds from
the concerned student organization's account that would force it outside of
its budget
C. Modifications of Special Fee Budgets
Any student organization who has obtained a Special Fee may modify their
budget, subject to the approval of the Financial Manager. 1 he Senate shall
retain ultimate authority over the approval of such modifications.
Section G. Budget.
A. Cleiieral
1. All Association funds shall be expended within the purposes of the
Association, and within the educational purposes of the University. All
funds derived from fees levied upon members of the Association shall
be expended within the educational purposes of the University
2. No funds shall be received or expended by the Association or its agen
cies unless authorized by the Operating Budget or Capital Budget of the
Association or by the budget of the relevant Association agency Au
thorization shall consist of the appioval by the Senate of the appropriate
budget or a modification thereof
B. Operating Budget
1. The Operating Budget of the Association shall be used for the basic
operating expenses of the Association, including but not limited to the
Senate. Council of Presidents. Financial Office. Association Office. Stu
dents Organizations Fund. Nominations and Elections Commissions,
and such other activities and expenses as are so classified by the Sen
ate, The Operating Budget Khali be divided into two parts, representing

those expenses funded by the Operating Budget Allowance provided by
the University, and those expenses not so funded.
2. Sources of funds for the Operating Budget shall include but not be
limited to the Operating Budget Allowance provided by the University,
income earned from the investment of funds owned by or in the custody
of the Association, the net operating profit of the profit-making agencies
of the Association, indirect cost recovery charges, and gifts. The Senate
shall adopt policies governing the rates of reinvestment, if any. out of
income from different sources Solicitation of gifts from sources outside
the University shall be undertaken in accordance with University policies
regarding gift solicitation and acceptance, and in consultation with the
appropriate University officers.
3. The Association shall annually negotiate with the University an Oper
ating Budget Allowance. The funds in this allowance are to be used for
the basic operating expenses of the Association, including but not lim
ited to all or part of the expenses of the Senate. Council of Presidents.
Financial Office. Association Office. Students" Organizations Fund, and
the Nominations and Elections Commissions. The procedures by which
the Association formulates and approves its annual request for this al
lowance. negotiates this request with the University, and accepts the
results of these negotiations, shall be specified in the By-Laws of the
Association.
4. By a date specified in the By-Laws of the Association, but in any case no
later than the beginning of the new fiscal year, the Senate shall approve
the operating budget for that fiscal year. If no budget is approved by
the Senate by this deadline, the budget for the new fiscal year shall
be identical to that of the previous fiscal year. All modifications to
the operating budget shall be approved by the Senate before becoming
effective.
5. Upon approval by the Senate, but in any case no later than the beginning
of the new fiscal year, the Financial Manager shall submit the operating
budget approved by the Senate, or the previous year's budget if no
new budget has been approved, to the President of the University or
designee. Within 14 days after the receipt of this budget, the President
or designee shall either approve the Operating Budget, or shall return
it to the Senate with a statement of the modifications necessary for it
to be approved Any adjustments to that part of the operating budget
funded by the Operating Budget Allowance shall require the approval of
the President or designee
C. Other Budgets
The budgets of all Association agencies shall be prepared in accordance with
procedures provided in the By-Laws of the Association, and shall be approved
by the Senate prior to the beginning of each fiscal year. All modifications to
the these budgets shall be approved by the Senate before becoming effective.
D. Capital Expenditures
All capital expenditures of the Association and its agencies shall be contained
either in the Operating Budget of the Association or the budgets of such
agencies, or in a separate Capital Budget. This Capital Budget, and all mod
ifications to it. shall be approved by the Senate before becoming effective.
Section 7. Students' Organizations Fund
A. General
1. The Students Organizations Fund (herein after referred to as "the
und ) shall be the depository for the receiving, holding, disbursing.
and accounting for the monies of the various organizations using the
Fund.
2. The Financial Manager si,all have the power to make rules and regula
lions governing the operation of the fund and the handling and protection
of the monies deposited with it. including the powers to make a charge
against any organization to cover the expense of handling that organi
zation s funds and to determine the disposition of funds deposited in
ZfZ °' aCCO " ntS The Sen ' lte sh ?" «*'<"> the ultimate
authority over all rules and regulations of the Fund
A RTICLE V. FINA ,V( 'ES
3. The Financial Manager shall be responsible for the enforcement of the
rules of the Fund.
B. Banking Requirement
1. Any student organization which receives funds from fees assessed upon
the members of the Association shall be required to deposit all funds of
that organization with the Students Organizations Fund and to comply
with its rules and regulations. This requirement shall be independent of.
and in addition to. any University regulations concerning the handling
of student organizations' monies.
#
2. The Senate shall have the authority to specify the conditions and terms
under which, and the process by which, exemptions from this require
ment may be made, and to provide for the enforcement of this require
ment through appropriate sanctions. No exemption shall be approved
for a period longer than one fiscal year, nor earlier than during the fiscal
year preceding the one for which the exemption is valid The Senate
shall retain the ultimate authority over the approval, modification, and
termination of all exemptions.
3. Any other student organization recognized by the University may deposit
its monies with the Fund, provided that it complies with the Fund's rules
and regulations.
Scction 8. Financial Manager
A. Duties
Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and of the By-Laws of the
Association, the Financial Manager shall be directly responsible to the Senate
for the performance of the following duties:
1. As chief financial officer of the Association, the Financial Manager shall
exercise control over the budget and finances of the Association and its
agencies on a day-to-day basis, and shall report on their condition to
the Senate
2. As comptroller of the Association, the Financial Manager shall ensure
that all expenditures of funds from the Association, its agencies, or
the Students' Organizations Fund, are duly authorized and documented
and within the purpose, functions, and budget of the specific agency or
organization.
3. The Financial Manager shall supervise the disbursement and refunding
of funds derived from the Association and Special Fees, and shall ensure
that organizations receiving such funds remain in compliance with their
authorized budgets.
4. The Financial Manager shall assume such additional responsibilities as
are provided in this Constitution and the By-Laws of the Association,
or by the Senate.
B. Selection
1. The Financial Manager Selection Committee shall consist of the current
Financial Manager or designee, one member of the Council of Presidents,
and two members of the Senate, one graduate and one undergraduate,
chosen by the Senate By a date specified in the By-Laws of the Asso
ciation. but in any case no later than the beginning of the sixth week
of Winter quarter, the Selection Committee shall nominate an individual
to serve as Associate Financial Manager. This nomination shall require
confirmation by a two-thirds vote of the Senate.
2. Once confirmed by the Senate, the Associate Financial Manager shall
undertake such responsibilities as are assigned by the Financial Man
ager. in order to become familiar with the duties and responsibilities of
the Financial Manager and with the finances and operations of the As
sociation and its agencies During this period, the Associate Financial
Manager shall be a non-voting ex-officio member of all bodies on which
the Financial Manager serves.
3. By a date specified in the By-Laws of the Association, but in any case
no later than the beginning of the sixth week of Spring quarter, the
Financial Manager Selection Committee shall reconvene and evaluate
the performance of the Associate Financial Manager The Selection
Committee shall then decide either to nominate the Associate Financial

Manager as Financial Manager, or to interview additional candidates
before making a nomination. The final nomination shall be transmitted
to the current Senate before it dissolves, where it shall require a two
thirds vote for approval.
4. On a date specified in the By-Laws of the Association, but in any case nd
later than the last day of Spring quarter, the new Financial Manger shall
take office, provided that his or her appointment has been confirmed by
the Senate. The Financial Manager shall serve until a successor has
taken office.
5. In the event of a vacancy in the office of Financial Manager, the Finan
cial Manager Selection Committee (excluding the Financial Manager or
designee) shall convene and nominate a replacement for confirmation by
the Senate, such confirmation requiring a two-thirds vote.
During this process, the Council of Presidents may nominate an Act
ing Financial Manager, who shall take office immediately upon nomi
nation. but whose office shall terminate upon the adjournment of the
next meeting of the Senate unless confirmed at that meeting by a two
thirds vote. Following confirmation by the Senate, the Acting Financial
Manager shall serve for a period of no more than 30 days, not count
ing days between quarters, but may be re-appointed for an additional
term of fourteen days if no replacement has been found, such reappoint
requiring prior approval of the Senate by a two-thirds vote.
C. The Financial Manager shall not. during his or her term of office, serve
as an elected member of the Senate or of the Council of Presidents.
However, provided that he or she is not reapplying for the position
of Financial Manager, the current Financial Manager may run in the
Spring quarter general election for election to the new Senate or Council
of Presidents and. if elected, may serve on that body throughout the
normal term of office.
7. At the time that it approves the nomination of the Financial Manager,
the Senate shall also approve a contract or letter of appointment spec
ifying the terms and conditions under which he or she shall hold office.
C. Removal
The Financial Manager may be removed by a vote of two-thirds of the mem
bership of the Senate. The Financial Manager must be notified in writing of
the intent to introduce such a motion not Jess than forty-eight hours prior to
the opening of the Senate meeting at which the motion will be considered,
and must be given an opportunity to speak in opposition to the motion at
that meeting
D Financial Office
1. The Financial Manager shall have the power to appoint one or more
assistants, subject to approval by the Senate All persons appointed as
assistants shall require confirmation by a two-thirds vote of the Senate
before their appointments become effective.
2. The Senate shall have the power to create additional positions subordi
nate to the Financial Manager, to specify their responsibilities, and to
provide for the selection of persons to fill them. All persons appointed
to such positions shall require confirmation by a two-thirds vote of the
Senate before their appointments become effective All such positions
shall be under the supervision and direction of the Financial Manager
3. The Financial Manager, together with the assistants and such additional
subordinate positions, shall collectively be referred to as the Financial
Office.
E. Association Ollice
The Association Office shall provide administrative and financial services for
the Association, its agencies, the Students' Organizations Fund, and student
organizations designated by the Senate The Office shall function under the
supervision of the Financial Manager. Secretarial and other staff members of
the Office shall be employees of the University, and their employment shall
be under the Financial Manager, who for these purposes shall function as a
department head in the appropriate .University administrative .Structure, 'and'
the Council of Presidents
A R TICL E V. FIN A NCES
Section 9. General Provisions
A. Fiscal Year
The fiscal year of the Association and its agencies shall begin on September
1 and end on August 31. All student organizations receiving funds from fees
assessed upon members of the Association shall be required to use this fiscal
year.
B. Annual Aml it
The financial records of the Association, its agencies, and the Students' Or
ganizations Fund shall be reviewed annually by an independent outside auditor
accepted by the Financial Manager and the President of the University.
C. Contracts
1. Any agreement or contract proposed to be entered into by the Associa
tion or any of its agencies shall be presented to the Financial Manager
for prior approval and signature. The Financial Manager shall retain
copies of all approved contracts The Association, its agencies, and the
Students' Organizations Fund will not be held responsible for contracts
not signed by the Financial Manager, such contracts shall be the per
sonal responsibility of the persons signing them The Senate shall have
the ultimate authority over the approval of all contracts.
2. No agent, officer, employee, or other person shall make any contract,
agreement, promise, or undertaking in the name of or on behalf of the
Association or its agencies, except persuant to authority contained in
this Constitution or otherwise granted by the Senate
D. borrowing
The Association shall have the power to borrow money. The Senate shall
have the ultimate authority over the approval of all borrowing.
Article VI: Initiative,
Referendum, and Recall
Section I. Initiative and Referendum
The membership of the Association shall have the power to initiate any act
within the power of the Senate, including By-Law amendments, or to annul any
act of the Senate, including By-Law amendments, provided that five percent of
the membership of the Association shall sign a petition calling for an election
on either a bill or a proposition annulling a bill. The petition, along with
the bill or proposition, shall be submitted to the Council of Presidents. The
Council of Presidents shall, if they determine the petition to be in good order
within the limitations of the Constitution, direct the Elections Commission to
conduct an election on the bill or proposition in not less than six nor more than
fifteen days after they shall have received the petition. Public notice of such
an election shall be given in the Stanford student newspaper not less than
four days before it shall take place. The bill or proposition shall be adopted
upon approval by a majority of the members of the Association voting in the
election Any proposals made within twenty-five days of the end of the quarter
may. at the discretion of the Senate, be postponed for vote until not more
than fifteen days after the opening of the following quarter, provided that any
such postponement in the Spring Quarter shall be until the following Autumn
Quarter
Section 2. Recall and Dissolution
The membership of the Association shall have the power to recall the Council
of Presidents, the Financial Manager, and members and officers of the Senate
It shall also have the power to dissolve the Senate and to call for elections for
the Senate.

A. Recall of the Council of Presidents or the F* inaiici.il Manager
A petition to recall the Council of Presidents or the Financial Manager shall
be submitted to the Senate and shall not be valid unless it contains the sig
natures of at least fifteen percent of the membership of the Association. The
Senate shall, if it determines the signatures 011 the petition to be authentic
and sufficient in number, direct the Elections Commission to conduct a recall
election on two consecutive days, not less than six nor more than 15 days after
it has made its determination If the Senate does not make a determination
as to the authenticity of the signatures and their sufficiency in number within
seven days after the petitions have been submitted to the Chairman or the
Deputy Chairman of the Senate, its responsibilites devolve to the Elections
Commission, which must make its determination as to the authenticity of the
signatures and their sufficiency in number within five days after such respon
sibility has devolved to it from the Senate. If the petitions are determined to
be in order, the Elections Commission shall conduct a recall election 011 two
consecutive days not less than six nor more than 15 days after the petitions
were determined to be in order. Public notice of such election shall be given
in the Stanford Daily not less than four days before it shall take place. The
officer shall be removed from office with the concurrence of two-thirds of the
members of the Association voting in the recall election, as determined by
the Elections Commission. The election 011 any petition for recall submitted
within twenty-five days of the end of the quarter may. at the discretion of the
Senate or the Elections Commission, be postponed for vote until not more
than 15 days after the opening of the following quarter, providing that any
such postponement in the Spring Quarter shall be until the following Autumn
Quarter.
B. Recall of the Officers or the Members of the Senate
A petition to recall officers or members of the Senate shall be submitted to
the Council of Presidents. In the case of officers of the Senate, the petition
shall not be valid unless it contains the signatures of at least fifteen percent
of the members of the Association In the case of members of the Senate,
the petition shall not be valid unless it contains the signatures of at least
fifteen percent of the members of the constituency the Senator in question
represents. The Council of Presidents shall, if they determine the signatures
on the petition to be authentic and sufficient in number, direct the Elections
Commission to conduct a recall election 011 two consecutive days not less than
six nor more than 15 days after the petitions were determined to be in order. If
the Council of Presidents does not make a determination as to the authenticity
and sufficiency in number of the signatures within seven days after they were
submitted to them, their responsibilities devolve to the Elections Commission,
which must make its determination as to the authenticity and sufficiency
in number of the signatures within five days after such responsibility has
devolved to it from the Council of Presidents. If the petitions are determined
to be in order, the Elections Commission shall conduct a recall election on two
consecutive days not less than six nor more than 15 days after the petitions
were determined to be in order. Public notice of such election shall be given
in the Stanford Daily not less than four days before it shall take place The
officer shall be removed from office with the concurrence of two-thirds of the
members of the Association voting in the recall election, as determined by
the Elections Commission. All members of the Association may vote in recall
elections for officers of the Senate, but in recall elections for members of the
Senate, only members of the constituency the Senator in question represented
may vote. The election 011 any petition for recall submitted within 25 days of
the end of the quarter may., at the discretion of the Council of Presidents or the
Elections Commission, be postponed for vote until not more than 15 days after
the opening of the following quarter, providing that any such postponement
in the Spring Quarter shall be until the following Autumn Quarter.
C. Dissolution of the Senate
A petition to dissolve the Semite shall be submitted to the Council of Presi
dents and shall not he valid unless it contains the signatures of at least twenty
percent of the members of the Association The Council of Presidents shall if
they determine the signatures on the petition to be authentic and sufficient in
of Scnitc dis'sVlmion'o!! 0 .! 5 . Co """ iss !°" "> conduct an election on the matter
ot Senate dissolution on two consecutive days not less than six nor more lli.ni
15 days after the petitions were determined to be in order. Public notice of
such election shall be given in the Stan/,ml DaUy not less than four days
C | orC ' . SUI . 1,1 K0 lc cloct 'on on any petition for Senate dissolution
submitted withm 25 days of the end of the quarter may. at the discretion of
the Council of Presidents, be postponed for vote until not more than 15 days
alter the opening of the following quarter, providing that such postponement
n the Spring Quarter .shall be until the following Autumn Quarter. If the Elec
tions Commission determines that at least two-thirds of the members of the
ARTICLE VI. INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM, AND RECALL
Association voting supported the dissolution of the Senate, the Senate shall
be dissolved, and may not meet or conduct business and the Council of Presi
dents of the Association shall direct the Elections Commission to conduct new
elections for the Senate on two consecutive days not less than seven nor more
than fifteen days after the dissolution of the Senate was voted If dissolution
was voted less than 25 days before the end of Spring Quarter, elections for a
new Senate shall be postponed until the third week of the following Autumn
Quarter.
Article VII: Amendment
Section 1. Submission
Amendments to this Constitution shall be submitted to the membership of
the Association for ratificaton upon approval by two-thirds of the membership
of the Senate, provided that notice has been given at the previous regular
meeting, or upon petition by five percent of the membership of the Association.
Section 2. Petitions
Petitions proposing amendments shall be submitted to the Council of Presi
dents. who shall direct the Elections Commission to conduct an election on
the amendment in not less than six nor more than twenty-four days after
the opening of the following quarter. Any such postponement in the Spring
Quarter shall be until the following Autumn Quarter.
Section 3. Notice
All proposed amendments, together with the part of the Constitution affected
thereby, shall be published in the Stanford student newspaper during the week
prior to the ratification election on the amendment.
Section 4. Ratification
Proposed amendments shall be adopted upon approval by two thirds of the
members of the Association voting in the ratification election and by the Board
of Trustees.
Article VIII: Disposition of
Assets in the Event of
Dissolution of the Association
Section 1. Property of the Association
Should this Association cease to exist, all its property shall be held in trust by
the University for a period of not less than five years. If any general student
association be formed and recognized within a five-year period by a majority
vote of registered students at the University during an election in which over
15 per cent of said students voted for recognition, then all such property so
held shall remain and belong to this successor organization. If no such general
student organization succeeds to the present Association within the specified
five years, unqualified title to all the property of the Association shall then be
vested in the University.
Section 2. Property in the Custody of the Associa
tion
Should this Association cease to exist, property in the custody of the As
sociation. including monies deposited in the Students' Organizations Fund,
shall, if the owner organization continues in existence, be held by the Univer
sity for the owner organization upon the same terms and conditions as the
Association held such property

Selected Letters of Acceptance
Tin- following arc sclcclcil letters of acceptance of amendments to this Constitution. These letters arc as binding
us the text of the Constitution itself. However, some of their provisions have been superceded by the text of later
amendments and/or their letters of acceptance. In addition, references to specific sections in the Constitution
may not be accurate due to periodic renumbering of sectious after their amendment.
Section 1. Initial Acceptance of the Constitution
September 20, 1009
Mr. Patrick (3. Shea, President
Associated Students of Stanford University
Stanford, Cn. 0-1305
Dear Mr. Shea:
In a resolution passed at their regular meeting on Mny IS, 1000, the Doard of Trustees delegated to me their
authority to approve the new ASSU Constitution, "with the understanding that tin? President will introduce
it suitable preamble or include other statements of interpretations or reservations as may be appropriate."
This letter is to inform yon of my approval of the Constitution, together with such items of interpretation
and reservation as I believe are relevant and necessary to provide first for iui orderly transition from student
government under the old system to the new, and second for orderly development of the new system in the spirit
set forth in its Constitution.
It is appropriate that a general statement of approval be made, and the following is that statement:
ny approval of this Constitution, Stanford University authorizes the Associated Students of Stanford
University to assume and discharge major obligations in the governance of student affair* and activities within
tlie educational purposes of the University, and within the structure of policies and regulations established
through the President of the University and the lloard of Trustees.
In addition to the general statement, my approval of the Constitution is made with the following comments:
1. hi Article 11, Section 2, D-l, I interpret the words "Gerund ,S'f m/ic.i" to mean "without a declared
major." This is consistent with the intent of the Constitution and it allows for whatever rhanges iu
nomenclature may result from adoption of recommendations of the Study of Kducatiou at Stanford and
other proposals. ,
3. Although there is no express provision for reapportionment of the Senate, I interpret the care evideut
in the apportioning of representation to imply that reasonable diligence will be exercised in maintaining
fairness of apportionment iuuoug the various constituencies.
3. It seems clear that the Committee on Nominations as described in Articic 11, Scction 9 cannot be
brought into being this fall because of the Constitution's provisions for its stalling. The important work of
that con unit lee must not lie allowed to go undone. I think that the A3SIJ President and Senate should
devise an appropriate interim nomination process subject to the reservation that it reflect the spirit of the
arrangements provided for iu Article 11, Scction 0.
4. Articic 11, Section 0, E is interpreted as applying only to Committee* of the ASSU.
5. Since the.present Legislative and Judicial Charter, as amended, was approved by more than two-thirds of
those students voting in a referendum, I interpret nothing in the new Constitution as disestablishing any
existing judicial process.
8. Although various matters of riglit and procedure arc embodied in Article IV of the new Constitution,
these do not preclude the S.IC mid SCLC from establishing others which arc consistent with their Charter
and Constitution.
7. The authority to collect fees accrues to the Controller from the President; and thus the President bears
ultimate residual and responsibility for the equitable assessment of fees, and for their use being consistent
with the educational purposes of the University. I therefore think it important to establish early agreement,
after implementation of Article 11, on funding For the essential operating expenses of the Association and
the total fees, and tlieir assessment and collection. Also, I think it is important to assure that any
referendum for the purpose of establishing fees have approval by a large enough percentage of the student
conuiiunity to be a convincing expression of the will of the entire body being taxed. It is also necessary to
clarify the inyiortant matter of the University's fiscal obligations to ASSU under tlie terms of the new
Constitution and independent fee structure. I am, therefore, designating the Proviwt, Dean of Students,
and Controller, or their designees, to act iu my behalf with the ASSU President, Financial Manager, and
two members of the Student Senate as a committee to consider and develop a general consensus concerning
these points, after which the committee will be discharged.
8. For the year IOG'J-70. JI 23,(MX) of University general funds are allocated to the Association for the conduct
of its business. Until such time ;is the Senate has approved the ASSU budget in detail, the Dean of Stu
dents, Student Financial Manager, and ASSU President are authorized collectively to approve allocations
from this sum. In doing (his, they should take into account the special needs of those organizations whose
program expenditures occur primarily during Autumn Quarter, and those prior items of budget that were
tentatively approved by the old Legislature of the ASSU.
9. When the ASSU budget has been passed by the Senate, atid subsequently approved by the University
President, luid when the committee named in (7.) has reached agreement on funding, fee arrangements,
anil questions of fise;il responsibility, the stewardship of the Dean of Students as Financial Director of the
Ashociation will cease.
10. It is my opinion that the new Constitution fails to provide sufficient time before the end of the regular
ncademic year for the training of a successor Financial Manager by the incumbent. The responsibilities of
this position are such that a greater " is desirable. I wish to express a general reservation about
existing arrangements, and state that it is my hope that this defect will receive prompt attention from
the ASSU President and Senate.
11. Secretarial and other stair members of tlie Association Office shall be employees of the University, and the
Association shall be charged for their services at a rate which shall equal the cost to the University of their
salaries plus stair benefits. As provided in the Constitution, they shall function under the supervision of
the Association President.
12. I trust that the ASSU President ami Senate will give early attention to the question of liability for
libel, and will establish such mechanisms its are necessary for the protection of the Association and the
University from charges arising from statements in publications printed by ASSU or published under its
auspices.
13. As the representative legislative body of the Association, I think it is appropriate for the Senate to
interpret itself as replacing the old LASSU where LASSU involvement has been defined in other areas
of University governance.
Finally, I am happy to express my best wishes to the Association for its vitality And prosperity under its new
Constitution. ( , ( , , , ( , . , , v< t ii ' > ■ >
Very Sincerely Yours,
K.S. PiUer
President
SELECTED LETTERS OF ACCEPTANCE
Section 2. Elaboration on Association Finances
March 3, 1070
Mr. David Edwards
Mr. John Grube
Mr. Patrick Shea
Associated Students
Stanford University
205 Treaidder Memorial Union
(lentlcmcn:
On the basis of tlie recommendations of the a<l hoc Coiinuittcc on ASSU Finances and consultation with
University officers and other interested persons, 1 am writing to inform yon of my approval of the new ASSU
Constitution's provisions on finance, with the establishment of the following arrangements and procedures:
1. Funding
The University will provide general funds support for the basic operating costs of the ASSU. Activities
considered to be included in operations are the expenses of the ASSU Ollice and the Students' Orga
nisations Fund, the senior olficers of the Association, and the elections and judicial aide apparatus. A
suggested budget which provides for these categories has been developed by the ad hoc group, iuid it is
appended to this letter. Oiicc the operating budget lias been approved by the ASSU Senate, it will be
augmented l>y annual University maintenance increases to reflect costs of living, as arc regular University
departments. Renegotiation of tlie basic budget, apart from these yearly adjustments, will take placc on a
not more than biaiiuuiU biisis, heginniug with the operating budget for the year 1972-73. Such negotiations
will be incorporated into the regular University budget cycle.
Funds for programs sponsored by the ASSU, such as commissions, publications, or other member groups,
arc to be paid directly by the student body as a supplement to the University's regular tuition. The
amount of this ASSU "program fee" will be determined by members of the Association, via referendum.
The mechanics of the fee referendum were developed by the ad hoc Committee, iuid arc detailed below.
1 am asking the ASSU Senate to establish an audit committee, to be composed of at least three members
of the Association and at least one University representative nominated by the Controller. This group
will be responsible for
n. the selection of the required independent auditor fur ASSU;
b. such interim reviews of procedures or financial status as it deems necessary; and
c. regular reporting to the Association oil its financial position.
The audit committee will receive monthly reports from the ASSU Financial Manager showing the status of
all authorized budget accounts (funding, expenses, balances, etc.), and will have iiccess to all bookkeeping
mid financial records of the Association and the Students' Organizations Fund. I shall continue to approve
the fees, assessments, audits, animal Imdget and selection of the auditor :vs provided by tin 1 Constitution.
2. Fee Referendum
The general spring election of ASSU will be considered the official referendum for determination of ASSU
program fees. In order to provide adequate notice ;uid information to the student body, the following steps
will be observed:
a. the ASSU Senate will set the date(s) of the spring election not later than the end of February each
year;
b. the University will insert with spring registration materials a notice that I) the referendum is sclu-d
-uled for the indicated date(s) and that 2) the Controller will consider the referendum results binding
ou all students who enroll during the suliscquciit autumn, wiuter, spring, and/or summer quarters;
c. the ASSU Senate will <-stablish a referendum task force in February which will review financial
requirements of member organizations and prepare a detailed report of the mechanics and program
implications/options of the student vote. Priorities for spircific programs and any special-item ques
tions (the Unify or the Student Center, for example) would be listed iu this report. The document
must be made available to students at least fifteen days prior to the lint day of voting. The ASSU
Senate will nlsO be responsible for seeing that referendum information is published in the Stanford
Daily well iu advnnce of the election. The University will aildil the results of the program fee voting.
3. Selection of Financial Manager
In my earlier letter, I called attention to the lack of adequate training time for incoming financial managers
under the terms of the new Constitution. The ail hoc Committee has made a recommendation in this
regard, which I endorse. They call for the*establishment of the position of Associate Financial Manager.
The AFM would serve from mid-February to mid-June each year. His selection would be made by the
committee of four which chooses the Financial Manager, save substitution of the incumbent President for
tin- President-elect. The AFM would be expected to become familiar with the duties and responsibilities
of the Financial Manager's ollice, and would be the prime candidate for the successor position when the
committee of four (including the President-elect) could meet in May to name the new Financed Manager.
4. Residual (Scncrnl Funds for 1070-71
The recommended basic operating budget for ASSU for 1070-71 is below the current level of University
support for the Association. Since tuition for the coming year has been widely announced, it is not possible
to make an adjustment in that rate to reflect the reduction of University funds provided ASSU. bistead,
the University will contribute the residual amount as a program base for the Association for this one year.
Rased on the proposed basic operating budget, this contribution should approximate $34,000. Starting in
1071-72, general funds will be used only for operating category purposes.
5. Summer Session Funding
The fee established in the spring election will also be assessed from students who enroll during the summer
term. Summer ollicers of ASSU will be expected to expend funds so collected on programs held during
the summer school quarter. Anticipating this, it is my hope that the ASSU Senate will give more than
ensuid attention to its approval of summer government ofliccrs.
0. Compensation for ASSU Officers
It was the recoiiunendatioii of the ad hoc Committee that somewhat more realistic salaries (and ill some
cases tuition grants) be paid to the senior ollicers of the Association. A parallel recouuiiendation was that
the ASSU President, Vice President, and Senate Chairman be permitted to enroll on a half-time basis.
The principle is one of recognizing the commitment of energy and time that such service entails, and of fa
cilitating participation in ASSU governance when there may be a ease of financial hardship. Should there
be an instance where an ASSU ollicer is also the recipient of University financial support, his combined
funding from the ASSU position and University funds will be limited to $1000 above the established cost
of education for the given academic year. I am happy to endorse all of these recommendations.
7. Support for the Stanford Daily
The ml hoc Committee categorized publication subsidies as a program cost of the Association. There will
not be any provision for student support of the Daily in the basic operating budget allocation from the
University.
8. Fiscal Responsibility
Ollicers and staff of the ASSU who are responsible for the disbursement of funds will be required to post
a fidelity bond prior to assuming their duties.

This concludes, with one exception noted below, the lint of orange,nents and procedures. By copy of th.,. letter.
I am asking ,«nbm of the .1 hoc Committee to he available tu ,tan., he re, W om„ B behind any o t „*e
decisions I hope that members of tl.e Aviation and the Senate w.ll av.ul themselv.* of the Committee « help
in the event that there .ire «tio..H ahont any aspects of the report or th.-sc procedures.
The one exception mentioned ha, to <h, will, tl.e control- exercised over expcdiluro. of funds derived from
benefits 1.e1.l hy student organization,. I a,., not persuad"" that our prm,,l'fj
intend in the near future to have then, examined in detail. Of course, the ASSU w.ll he ...volved n. that
proccus.
Finally I wish to express ...y hope that the ASSU will work to become a financially independent an,l self
sustaining student association in the fnture. There Li much to commend such a posture, ...eluding greater
responsibility and flexahility. I believe that it is a goal which we can work together to realise.
Yours very sincerely,
K. 3. Pit*er
President
Section 3. Letter Accepting 1972 Amendments
November 28, 1972
Mr. Scott Burke
President
Associated Students of Stanford University
Tresidder Memorial Union
Stanford, California
Dear Mr. Burke:
The President, by delegation fro.u the Board of Trustees, is empowered to approve all amendments to the ASSU
Constitution. This letter is to inform you of my approval of the an.c.ubnoiits to the ASSU Constitution passed
|,y the student body on October 5 and 0, 1072, and to describe procedures for their implementation which I
believe are rehviu.t :uid necessary to ensure that the procedures of the ASSU are in accord will. University
procedures. I risk that this letter be incorporated with the text of the Constitution.
The amendments concerning changes in the Student Senate ;uid new recall procedures for ASSU officers are
accepted without interpretation. I hope that these cl.ai.Res will help the ASSU Senate to be an elective voice
in tl.e Stanford community.
I accept the revision to Articlo 11, 9 A with the understanding that it applies to the "nomination" of student
members, with appointment made by the Doard of Trustees as has been the practice.
The amendments to the ASSU fee assessment procedures must be implemented so that they mesh with the
University procedures for the collection of approved fees. There .'ire two administrative requirements. 1 irst, the
results of the referendum authorizing a fee, properly certified in accordance with the ASSU Constitution and
Ily-Laws, must be approved by the President. Second, the Registrar must be notified of any such approved fee
at a time sufficiently in adviu.ee of the end of a quarter so that he can iucludo information about the fee in
the advance registration materials if the fee is to be collected in the following quarter. At present these two
requirements make it necessary that the President be given the certilii-d results of a fee referendum no later than
three working days prior to forty days before the end of the quarter preceding the quarter in which the fee is to
l>e collectcd. This tune requirement may be cluu.ged if the Registrar agrees that he needs less than forty days
notice, the time now required, in order to get the fee information into the advance registration materials, hi the
event of siirh an agreement the certified results should be provided the President three working days before the
deadline established by the Registrar.
It should be recognized that these time requirements necessitate the initiation of any fee referendum very early
in any cp.arter if it is intended that the fee is to be collected in the following quarter. Indeed, it seems that
tin: ASSU Constitutional requirements or notice, plus the requirements of certification, approval and notice to
tl.e Registrar could (given the current needs of the Registry), most likely be met only if the process leading
lo n referendum were begun two quarters in iulviu.ee of the quarter iu which the fee is to be collected. In
this connection, attention should be paid to the fact that Spring Quarter is usually the shortest quarter, about
seventy-three days. It would thus be difficult at best to meet tin? ASSU notice requirements and the Registrar 9
current ne«-ds if the process for collection of a f<-e in Autumn Quarter dill not commence until the Ix-giuninß
of Spring Quarter. I understand that you are presently in consultation with the Dean of Student Alfairs with
regard to how best to schedule referenda for the remainder of this year. It would be prmle.it if each year the
ASSU officers agreed with administration representatives on the scheduling requirements. This could avoid
niLHiiiiderslanding at some later time.
I wish lo emphasize that the burden of complying with these amendments rests solely with tl.e officers of the
ASSU. We will not consider tl.e results of a referendum until they are formally transmitted to the President by
the appropriate ASSU officer, certified in accordance with ASSU procedures. Tl.e Registrar will not include
any notice of the fees, and the University will not collect said fees unless the officers of the ASSU meet the
neccssary time requirements. Tliis stipulation supports the autonomy which is fundamental to the effective
functioning of the ASSU.
Finally, I am happy to express my bent wishes to the Association in its new attempts for vitality and prosperity.
Sinccrely,
William F. Miller
Vice President and Provost
and Acting President
Section 4. Letter Accepting 1982 Amendments
August 21, 1082
Dear Presidents Derkstrom, Epstein, Matl.ewson, an.l Townsend:
SELECTED LETTERS OF ACCEPTANCE
I write to approve the amendments to the ASSU Constitution which passed in the general election of Inst Spring
and as subsequently presented to me in your letter of June 1, 1982. Specifically:
SENATE DILL XII-SEN-DIL-RU-1G which amends Article II to provide for the constitutional structure of the
Nominations Commission;
SENATE DILL XII-SEN-DIL-RU-18 which amends Article# II ami 111 to provide iu the Constitution for the
transition during Spring Quarter of the Senate and Council of Presidents;
SENATE DILL XII-SEN-DILL-FA-23 which amends Article V to provide for the reform of the fee assessment
system; and
SENATE DILL XII-SEN-DIL-11U-20 which amends Article VII to provide in the Constitution for the disposition
of assets iu the event of the dissolution of the Association.
My approval of the fee assessment reforms is with the understanding that:
The governing board of each of the three.components of the Association Fee (Publications Doard,
Program Doard, and Academic Organisations Doard) will establish guidelines that help organisn*
lions know who is eligible to receive funds, how and when funds arc applied for and allocated, and
what such funds may and may uot be used for.
That there will be n full and open accounting to students of how the respective boards allocated the
funds (to what organizations, in what amounts, and for what purposes); and how the funds were
nctually spent.
That there is no change in the collection processes agreed upon by the University and the Association
whereby feet arc voted in the spring election only and approved in a timely manner shortly thereafter.
I know something about the great amount of work aud patience that wcut into seeing these amendments through
the political, electoral, and approvnl processes. It was done with skill, good motive, aud making well the case
for each to the ASSU legislature, to members of the Association, and inc.
Sincerely,
Donald Kennedy
President
t
Section 6. Letter Accepting Spring 1984 Amendment
July 24, 1084
Ms. Melissa Auchard
Chair, ASSU Council of Presidents
Associated Students of Stanford University
Tresidder Memorial Union
Stanford, California 0-1305
Dear Melissa:
I write to approve the... amendment of the ASSU Constitution which passed in the general election this spring
and which |was| subsequently presented to mc iu your letter of June 15, 1084.
My approval of the amendment is with the following understandings:
I. The amendment states that in the event of a vacancy in the position of Financial Manager, the Council of
Presidents' could appoint an Acting Financial Manager to serve until a permanent appointment is made
(Article V, Section 8, D-5). I interpret the limitation of allowing this Acting Financial Manager to serve
for no inorc than 14 days to mean without confirmation by the Senate. It may take more than 14 days to
advertise the vacancy, receivc application, couduct interviews, and otherwise conduct a proppr search.
3. The amendment forbids the Financial Manager from accepting any regular outside employment outside
the Association unless the Senate consents (Article V, Section 8, D-7). I can only support the intent of
this provision, not the method or the lauguage by which the intent is carried out. You have every right
to take steps to insure that a Financial Manager performs llie job according to fair standards which you
set, including the right to know what other major tune commitments a candidate has which could affect
the ability to do this job. Dut the ASSU should not restrict what a student does on his or her own tunc
unless there is a conflict of iuterest. Accordingly, the amendment embodied by Article V, Section 8, D-7
is not accepted. I suggest you consider a new amendment during your next regular election in which you
fiud a way to meet your purposes without undue intervention in the personal activities of employees.
3. I know that the provision requiring an annual audit was not chaugcd (Article V, Section 0-D). I simply want
to reiterate that the request in President Pitxcr's Letter of Acceptance of March 3, 1070--• namely, that
an audit conuiiittee should be established- - still holds. The Committee should include a representative
or the Controller's Ofllce, but its exact charge should be defined in a way that makes sense today, given
the existence of a Senate Finauce Committee.
4. My acceptance of the amendment to Article V, Section t, is with the understanding that the total amount
of the Association Fee set by the Senate may l>c contingent oil the success or failure of one or more Special
Fee requests ou the ballot in the Spring quarter general election, provided that both any contingent
amounts and the uon-contingcnt or base amount nre approved by the Senate prior to the election, in
accordance with the provision# of this Section.
Sincercly,
Donald Kennedy
President
