# The 						Proposed Constitution
## 
### 
Sponsor: Mike Collins
BE IT ENACTED BY THE ASSOCIATED STUDENTS OF
STANFORD UNIVERSITY: That the New Constitution replaces
the current Constitution.
Preamble
✓
Now that this Constitution is the governing document of the Associated Stu
dents of Stanford University, may all who read it be reminded that a sense of
humor is more important than any rule or law.
Article I: Name and
Membership
Section 1. Name
The name of the organization under this Constitution will be the Associated
Students of Stanford University, hereafter referred to as the "ASSU."
Section 2. Membership
All registered students of Stanford University and those who have been reg
istered for three of the previous four quarters and intend to register again
after a lapse of one quarter, and only such persons, will be members of this
Association. All persons having valid permits to attend will be considered reg
istered. All members, and only members, will excercise all rights and privileges
of membership, and will be liable for the fees the ASSU may assess.
Section 3. Representative of the Student Body
The ASSU will be the sole representative of the entire Stanford student body.
Article II: Legislative Branch
Section 1. Final Representative Authority
The final representative authority of the ASSU will be vested in the Senate of
the ASSU. The Senate will be composed of thirty-one members.
Section 2. Membership in the Senate
A. General
I
1. Fifteen members will of the Senate be elected by and will represent the
undergraduates of the ASSU, and fifteen members of the Seriate will be
elected by and will represent the graduate members of the ASSU. The
thirty first member will be the Senate Chair.

2. The members of the Senate will be chosen each year in the ASSU i/ciierai
elation. This election will be held on two consecutive weekdays during
the second, third, or fourth week of Spring Quarter.
3. Only members of the ASSU are eligible to serve on the Senate, and
each Senate member must be a member of the constituency he or she
represents.
4. Members and officers of the Senate may be removed from office through
resignation, disqualification, recall, or expulsion. Vacant seats will be
filled by the ranking runner-up from that constituency of the Senate.
5. For the purposes of voting, the number of members on the Senate will be
the number of filled seats. The quorum of the Senate will be a majority
of the membership.
B. Election of Senate Members
1. The fifteen undergraduate members of the Senate will be elected at
large by all undergraduate members of the ASSU. Each undergraduate
member of the ASSU voting may vote for ten undergraduate Senate
candidates. The fifteen candidates who receive the largest number of
votes will become members of the Senate.
2. The fifteen graduate members of each Senate will be elected at-large by
all graduate members of the ASSU in the same manner as the under
graduate members.
C. Chair of the Senate
The Senate will elect a Chair, who will vote when that vote would be decisive.
D. Ex-Officio Members
The Council of Presidents, the Financial Manager, and the Administrative
Manager will be ex-officio members, without vote, of the Senate. The Senate
may create other ex-officio members, without vote, in the By-Laws of the
Association.
Section 3. Term
A. Senate Elect
Member of the newly-elected Senate will, within one week after certification
by the Senate, meet as the Senate Elect and organize themselves and elect
1 heir officers in a manner similar to that of the Senate.
B. Transition from the Senate Elect to the Senate
No later than 14 days before the end of Spring quarter, the Senate and Senate
Elect will dissolve and the former members of the Senate Elect will constitute
the new Senate.
C. Initial Meeting of the New Senate
The new Senate will meet at least once in Spring quarter to formalize the
membership of any committees and the appointment of its officers.
Section 4. Procedure
The Senate will have the power to choose its own officers, to determine its
rules of procedure, to constitute committees, to judge the credentials of its
members, and to discipline or expel its members.
Section 5 Constitutional Interpretation
The Senate will have the power to interpret this Constitution and the By-Laws
of the ASSU.
ARTICLE 11. LEGISLATIVE BRANCH
Section 6. Rudgctnry mid Financial Policy
The Senate will have the-ultimate authority to determine the budget of the
ASSU and its agencies and their budgetary, financial, investment, business,
and operating policies.
Section 7. Agencies of the ASSU
The Senate will have the power to create, modify, and abolish agencies of
the ASSU. The functions, structure, officers, and finances of all such agencies
except corporate subsidiaries will be specified in the By-Laws of the Senate.
Section 8. Nominations Commission
*
The Senate will have the right to nominate through the Nominations Commis
sion members of the Association to positions on the following bodies: com
mittees and commissions of the University President and the Academic Coun
cil, other University committees and administrative panels, committees of the
Board of Trustees of the University, sub committees of each of these com
mittees, and additional bodies as may be agreed to by the President of the
University and the Senate.
Other procedures for nominations may be specified in agreements approved by
the Seriate and the President of the University, either of whom may terminate
such an agreement at any time.
A. Membership
1. The size of the Nominations Commission will be specified in the By-Laws
of the ASSU. It will consist of at least seven members of the ASSU, and
such ex-officio members without vole as may be provided in the By-Laws
of the ASSU. Absolute priority will be given to graduate members of the
ASSU for half the seats and to undergraduates for the remaining half
the seats.
n. At least three members of the Commission will be appointed by the
Senate by a two-thirds vote.
l». At least three members of the Commission will be nominated by the
Council of Presidents and confirmed by the Senate by a two-thirds
vote.
2. The By-Laws of the ASSU will specify the qualifications for members of
the Commission, procedures for their nomination, and the rules of the
Commission itself. A quorum will be a majority of the voting members
of the Commission.
3. Members of the Nominations Commission will serve a one-year term of
office whose dates will be specified in the By Laws of the ASSU. They
will continue to serve until their successors have taken office, or until
they have resigned or been removed by the Senate.
4. Members of the Commission may be removed from office by a majority
vote of the Senate either upon the recommendation of a majority of
the Commission or upon the joint recommendation of the Chair of the
Commission and the Council of Presidents, or by a two-thirds vote of
the Senate.
5. If a position on the Commission becomes vacant, the Senate may, by a
two-thirds vote, appoint a new member to serve the remainder of that
term.
6. If a quorum of the Commission is unable to meet after attempting to
do so for two weeks or more, the Senate may establish another body to
carry out the duties of the Commission until the Commission is able to
resume meeting.
B. Chair
One of the members of the Commission will be designated by the Senate as
Chair of the Commission, at the time of his or her appointment. The Senate
may, by a two-thirds vote, remove the chair and designate another member of
the Commission as chair.

C. Normal Nomination Procedure for Representatives
The Nominations Commission will announce to the entire ASSU all positions
for which it seeks representatives. All members of the ASSU will be given
equal opportunity to apply for these positions. They will be selected by the
Commission and confirmed by the Senate by majority vote.
D. Nomination through the Applicant Pool
The Nominations Commission may select students from a general applicant
pool. All members of the ASSU will be accorded equal opportunity to apply
for this applicant pool. The Senate will confirm all such selections of the
Nominations Commission by a two-thirds vote.
E. Removal of Students
1. The Nominations Commission may recommend to the Senate the re
moval of any student representatives who do not regularly attend meet
ings of their body or do not accomplish their legitimate portion of the
body's work. At least 48 hours notice must be given to both the ASSU
representative and the Chair of the concerned Committee, and both will
be invited to speak on this issue before the Commission.
2. Upon this recommendation the Senate may remove, by a two-thirds vote,
the ASSU representative from the concerned Committee. At least 48
hours notice must be given to both the ASSU representative and the
Chair of the concerned Committee, and both will be invited to speak on
this issue before the Senate.
3. No one may be replaced on a committee for political reasons.
Section 9. Confirmation of Appointments
The Senate will have the right to confirm appointments of representatives of
the Stanford student body, except in those cases where an alternate procedure
has been approved by two-thirds of the members of the ASSU voting in a
general election.
Section 10. Elections
The Senate will have the power to make laws governing all student elections,
and to call elections by a two-thirds vote.
Section 11. Elections Commission
The Elections Commission will be responsible for carrying out all student elec
tions in an unbiased manner.
A. Selection and Removal
The Elections Commission will be selected and may be removed by the Senate.
B. Elections Commission
The Elections Commission may appoint assistants to till subordinate positions
in the same manner as the Financial Manager.
Section 12. By-Laws
The Senate may enact, amend, or repeal the By-Laws of the ASSU by a two
thirds vote if notice has been given at the previous regular meeting.
Section 13. Meetings
The Senate will hold regular meetings. Minutes will be kept and will be made
available for review, upon request, to all members of the ASSU.
Article III: Executive Branch
Section 1. Chief Representatives and Spokespersons
The members of the Council of Presidents of the ASSU will be the chief
representatives and spokespersons of the ASSU.
Section 2. Qualifications and Election
Members of the Council of Presidents must, at the time of their election and
during their service in office, be members of the ASSU. They will be elected
at-large.
Section 3. Term
The members of the new Council will meet as the Council Elect, which will
organize itself in a manner similar to that of the Council of Presidents. No
later than 14 days before the end of Spring quarter, the Council and Council
Elect will dissolve and the former members of the Council Elect will become
the new Council.
Section 4. Powers
A. Assembly
Any member of the Council of Presidents will have the power to call spe
cial Meetings of the members of the ASSU and to establish committees and
subgroups.
B. Veto
A majority of the Council of Presidents will have the right to veto any bill or
resolution passed by the Senate. The Council will notify, in writing, the Senate
Chair of the veto and the reasons for it within seventy-two hours after the
adjournment of the meeting during which the legislation was passed, and the
veto may only be overridden by a vote cf the Senate.
Section 5. Administrative Manager
The Administrative Manager will be directly responsible to the Council of
Presidents and to the Senate.
A. Duties
1. The Administrative Manager will oversee the administration of ASSU
services to students as specified in the By-Laws of the ASSU.
2. The Administrative Manager will assume other responsibilities as del
egated by the Council of Presidents. The Senate will retain ultimate
authority over the delegation of tasks not specified in the By-Laws of
the ASSU.
B. Selection and Removal
The Administrative Manager will be selected and may be removed in the same
manner as the Financial Manager.
C. Administrative Office
The Administrative Manager may appoint assistants to fill subordinate posi
tions in the same manner as the Financial Manager. The Administrative Office
will provide administrative services for the ASSU, its agencies, student groups,
and students in general, within the functions of the ASSU.

Section 6. Jester
The Council of Presidents will appoint a Jester, who will be responsible for
maintaining the spirit of the Preamble in the ASSU's activities.
Article IV: Judicial Branch
Section 1. Judiciary Authority
The ASSU recognizes the Legislative and Judicial Charter as the judicial au
thority over the members of the ASSU. The ASSU will recognize alterations
to this charter only if:
1. Those alterations have been approved by two-thirds of those members
of the ASSU voting in a general election; or
2. Authority to accept specific alterations has been delegated to the Sen
ate by a two-thirds of those members of the ASSU voting in a general
election, and the Senate accepts such alterations by a two-thirds vote.
Article V: Finances
Section 1. Association Fee
A. General
An Association Fee will be levied by the ASSU upon its membership. This Fee
will be used for the organizational and basic programming expenses, and mi
nor capital improvements, of recognized student organizations requiring small
amounts of funding, including appropriate agencies of the ASSU.
B. Authorization
No later that the day prior to the beginning of the Spring quarter general elec
tion, the Senate will enact legislation specifying the amount of the Association
Fee for the following fiscal year. The amount of the total fee may be con
tingent on the success or failure of Special Tee requests on the ballot in the
Spring quarter general election.
This legislation will require notice, specifying the range of the amount to be
authorized, at both the previous regular meeting of the Senate and in the
Stanford student newspaper, and must be approved by a vote of two-thirds
of the membership of the Senate . If such legislation is not enacted by this
deadline, then the amount of the Association Fee for the following fiscal year
will be the same as that during the current fiscal year.
Only an initiative or referendum may change the amount of the Association Fee
after this deadline. The amount of the Association Fee may not be changed
without the consent of the University after the collection schedule for Fees has
been approved.
Section 2. Special Fees
A. Gcnonil
Every Spring quarter, during the general election, the ASSU may levy one or
more Special Fees via a referenda. Special Fees will be sought by student
organizations to cover their organizational and basic programming expenses,
and capital improvements.
ARTICLE V. FINANCES
B. Placement on the Ballot
In order to have its Special- Fee request placed on the ballot, a student organi
zation must prepare a detailed budget request for the next fiscal year, including
the amount sought from the Special Fee, the current budget, and a summary
of actual expenditures. It must then follow either one of these two procedures:
1. Submit the same budget request to the Senate, and also to the Elections
Commissioner in the form of a petition which must contain the signatures
of:
a. Five percent of the members of the ASSU, if the student organi
zation's last Special Fee request of at least substantially the same
amount passed;
b. Ten percent of the members of the ASSU, if the student organiza
tion's last Special Fee request failed or was for less than substan
tially the same amount; or
c. Fifteen percent of the members of the ASSU, in all other cases.
Before circulating the petition, it must be submitted to the Financial
Manager and the Elections Commissioner for approval of the format.
They will have seventy-two hours tD approve an appropriate format for
the budget. The Elections Commissioner must examine for authenticity
the signatures on the petitions within seven days after receiving it. If the
petition is validated, including verification, the Elections Commissioner
will then authorize the placement of the Special Fee on the ballot.
2. Submit the same budget request to the Senate. A vote of three-fifths of
the membership of the Senate, will place the Special Fee on the ballot.
One of the above procedures must be completed no later than 21 days before
the general election. The Elections Cominssioner will give public notice in the
Stanford student newspaper of the Spec al Fee requests which will appear on
the ballot and their amounts at least 7 days before the general election.
The Senate will have the authority to specify the form in which the detailed
budget and summary of actual expenditures must be presented and the in
formation they must contain, and to establish regulations defining the proper
form for petitions and governing the circulation thereof.
C. Placement on the Ballot in Extenuating Circumstances
If a student organization has completed one of the above procedures within 21
days of the general election then the Elections Commissioner and the Senate
may, if they determine that extenuating circumstances prevented an earlier
completion of one of these procedures, authorize the placement of a Special Fee
on the ballot. Within two days after authorization, the Elections Commissioner
will publish in the Stanford student newspaper the Special Fee budget to be
placed on the ballot.
D. Financial Information
During the general election a summary of all financial information submitted
by the student organization seeking a Special Fee will be made available to all
members of the ASSU.
E. Division of Special Fee Requests
Regardless of the procedure followed in placing the Special Fee request on the
ballot, the detailed budget for the next fiscal year of any student organization
seeking a Special Fee may be divided into two sections by a two-thirds vote
of the Senate. Each section, along with an appropriate amount sought from
the student organization's initial Special Fee request, its current budget, and
the summary of actual expenditures to date, will be considered as a separate
and independent Special Fee request, will appear separately on the ballot, and
will require separate approval by the members of the ASSU as provided herein.
The sum of the two Special Fee requests appearing on the ballot will equal the
amount sought in the organization's initial Special Fee request.
F. Approval l»y the ASSU
During the general election each member of the ASSU may cast one vote either
for or against each Special Fee. A Special Fee will be passed if a majority of

those voting on the it were in favor and if those in favor constituted at least
15 per cent of the members of the ASSU.
G. Approval by the University
After certification of the appropriate election results by the Senate, the Council
of Presidents will submit all those Special Fee requests which were approved by
the ASSU, and the Assocation Fee authorized by the Senate, to the President
or designee for his or her approval.
Section 3. Collection of the Association Fee and Spe
cial Fees
A. Collection Schedule
After the Spring election results have been certified by the Senate, the Financial
Manager will devise and submit to the Senate for approval a schedule for
the levying of the ASSU and Special Fees which must conform to these four
principles:
1. The amount levied during each of Autumn, Winter, and Spring quarters
will be substantially the same, while that levied during Summer quarter
will be approximately one half this amount.
2. The amount levied rach quarter will be an integral amount of dollars.
3. The amount levied each quarter will be apportioned among the Associ
ation and Special Fees in a manner that will provide an adequate cash
flow for the concerned student organizations.
4. All costs incurred by the ASSU in administering the approval, disburse
ment, and refund processes, and in enforcing compliance by student
organizations with their authorized budgets, along with an appropriate
portion of the general election costs, will be paid by a surcharge levied
on the ASSU Fee and the authorized Special Fees. The amount of this
surcharge will be approved by the Senate and the President of the Uni
versity.
B. Collection of Fees
The University will collect the appropriate amount every quarter at the same
time it collects charges for tuition. The University will transfer all collected
monies to the Financial Manager, who will then distribute them into the ap
propriate financial accounts.
Section 4. Refunds of the Association Fee and Spe
cial Fees
Any member of the ASSU who voted during the election in which the Special
Fees were authorized, and any present member of the ASSU who was not,
at the time of that general election, a member of the ASSU, will be entitled
to a refund of at least the amount assessed in support of the entire, or any
portion of, the Association or any Special Fee. This amount will be specified
in the collection schedule for the Fees, and should be as close as practical to
the actual per capita amount collected for the Fee in question.
Obtaining this refund may deprive the member of the ASSU of some or all of
1 he services offered by the student organizations receiving these monies.
Section 5. Distribution and Policies of the Associa
tion Fee and Special Fees
The Senate will retain ultimate authority over the distribution of the Asso
ciation Fee and Special Fees and of the budgetary policies to be used by
organizations receiving funds from the Association Fee or Special Fees.
A. Deviations from Budgets
The Financial Manger will notify the Senate and the Council of Presidents
whenever a student organization who has obtained a Special Fee or an allo
cation from the Association Fee significantly deviates from its budget. Either
the Senate or the Council of Presidents may then direct the Financial Manager
to halt any distribution of funds from the concerned student organization's
account that would force it outside of its budget.
ABTICLE V. FINANCES
B. Modifications of Foe Budgets
Any student organization which has obtained a Special Fee or an allocation
from the Association Fee may modify its budget, subject to the approval of
the Senate.
Section 6. Budget
A. General
1. No funds will be received or expended by the ASSU or its agencies unless
authorized by the Opeiating Budget or Capital Budget of the ASSU or
by the budget of the relevant ASSU agency. Authorization will consist of
the approval by the Senate of the appropriate budget or a modification
of it.
2. Modifications of any budget of the ASSU or its agencies will require
approval by the Senate before becoming effective.
B. Operating Budget.
1. The Operating Budget of the ASSU will be used for the basic Operating
expenses of the ASSU. The Operating. Budget will be divided into two
parts, representing those expenses funded and those not funded by the
Operating Budget Allowance provided by the University.
2. Sources of funds for the Operating Budget will include but not be limited
to the Operating Budget Allowance provided by the University, income
earned from the investment of funds owned by or in the custody of the
ASSU, the net revenue of the revenue-generating agencies of the ASSU,
indirect cost recovery charges, and gifts. The Senate will adopt policies
governing the rates of reinvestment, if any, out of income from different
sources. Solicitation of gifts from sources outside the University will
be in accordance with University policies regarding gift solicitation and
acceptance, and in consultation with the appropriate University officers.
3. The ASSU will annually negotiate with the University an Operating Bud
get Allowance to be used for the basic operating expenses of the ASSU.
The procedures by which the ASSU formulates and approves its annual
request for this allowance, negotiates this request with the University,
and accepts the results of these negotiations, will be specified in the
By-Laws of the Senate.
4. By the beginning of the new fiscal year, the Senate will approve the
operating budget for that fiscal year. If no budget is approved by the
Senate by this deadline, the budget for the new fiscal year will be identical
to that of the previous fiscal year.
5. Upon approval by the Senate, but in no case no later than the beginning
of the new fiscal ye.ir, the Financial Manager will submit the operating
budget approved by the Senate, or the previous year's budget if no new
budget has been approved, to the President of the University or designee.
Within 14 days after the receipt of this budget, the President or designee
will either approve the Operating Budget, or will return it to the Senate
with a statement of the modifications necessary for it to be approved.
Any adjustments to that part of the operating budget funded by the
Operating Budget Allowance will require the approval of the President
or designee.
C. Other Budgets
The budgets of all ASSU agencies will be approved by the Senate prior to
the beginning of each fiscal year. The Administrative Manager will supervise
the preparation of budgets by the service agencies; the Financial Manager will
supervise the preparation of budgets by the revenue-gereating agencies.
D. Capital Expenditures
All capital expenditures of the ASSU and its agencies will be contained either
in the Operating Budget of the ASSU or the budgets of such agencies, or in a
separate Capital Budget approved by the Senate.

Section 7. Students' Organizations Fund
A. Getieral
1. The Students' Organizations Fund, hereafter referred to as the SOF, will
be the depository for the receiving, holding, disbursing, and accounting
for the monies of the various organizations using the Fund.
2. The Financial Manager will have the power to make rules and regulations
governing the operation of the fund and the handling and protection of
the monies deposited with it, including the powers to make a charge
against any organization to cover the expense of handling that organi
zation's funds and to determine the disposition of funds deposited in
inactive or unclaimed accounts. The Senate will retain the ultimate au
thority over all rules and regulations of the SOF.
3. The Financial Manager will be responsible for the enforcement of the
rules of the SOF.
B. Banking Requirement
1. Any student organization which receives funds from fees assessed upon
the members of the ASSU will be required to deposit all funds of that
organization with the SOF to comply with its rules and regulations. This
requirement will be independent of, and in addition to, any University
regulations concerning the handling of student organizations' monies.
2. The Senate, subject to the approval of the appropriate University offcials,
will have the authority to specify the conditions and terms under which,
and the process by which, exemptions fiom this requirement may be
made, and to provide for the enforcement of this requirement through
appropriate sanctions. No exemption will be approved for a period longer
than one fiscal year, nor earlier than during the fiscal year preceding
the one for which the exemption is valid. The Senate will retain the
ultimate authority over the approval, modification, and termination of
all exemptions.
3. Any other student organization recognized by the University may deposit
its monies with the SOF, provided that it complies with the SOF's rules
and regulations.
Section 8. Financial Manager
A. Duties
Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and of the By-Laws of the Sen
ate, the Financial Manager will be directly responsible to the Senate for the
performance of the following duties:
1. As chief financial officer of the ASSU, the Financial Manager will exercise
control over the budget and finances of the ASSU and its agencies on a
day-to-day basis, and will report on their condition to the Senate.
2. As comptroller of the ASSU, the Financial Manager will ensure that all
expenditures of funds from the ASSU, its agencies, or the SOF, are duly
authorized and documented and within the purposes and budget of the
specific agency or organization.
3. The Financial Manager will supervise the disbursement and refunding of
funds derived from the Association and Special Fees, and will ensure that
organizations receiving such funds comply with their authorized budgets.
4. The Financial Manager will assume additional responsibilities as provided
in this Constitution or by the Senate.
B. Selection
1. The Financial Manager Selection Committee will consist of the current
Financial Manager or designee, one member of the Council of Presidents,
and two members of the Senate, one graduate and one undergraduate,
chosen by a joint session of the Senate. By the beginning of the sixth
week of Winter quarter, the Selection Committee will nominate an in
dividual to serve as Associate Financial Manager. This nomination will
require confirmation by a two-thirds vote of the membership of a joint
session of the Senate.
2. Once confirmed by a joint session, the Associate Financial Manager will
undertake apprentice responsibilities as assigned by the Financial Man-
ARTICLE V. FINANCES
ager. During this period, the Associate Financial Manager will be an
ex-officio member, without vote, of all bodies on which the Financial
Manager serves.
3. By the beginning of the sixth week of Spring quarter, the Financial Man
ager Selection Committee will reconvene and evaluate the performance
of the Associate Financial Manager. The Selection Committee will then
decide either to nominate the Associate Financial Manager as Financial
Manager, or to interview additional candidates before making a nomi
nation. The final nomination will be transmitted to a joint session of
the current Senate before they dissolve, where it will require a two-thirds
vote of the membership for approval.
4. By the last day of Spring quarter, the new Financial Manger, if confirmed,
will take office. The Financial Manager will serve until a successor has
taken office.
5. In the event of a vacancy in the office of Financial Manager, the Finan
cial Manager Selection Committee (excluding the Financial Manager or
designee) will convene and nominate a replacement for confirmation by
a joint session of the Senate, such confirmation requiring a two-thirds
vote of the membership.
During this process, the Council of Presidents may nominate an Acting
Financial Manager, who will take cftice immediately upon nomination,
but whose office will terminate upon the adjournment of the next meeting
of the Senate unless confirmed at th;il meeting by a two-thirds vote of the
membership. Following confirmation, the Acting Financial Manager will
serve for a period of no more than 30 days, not counting days between
quarters, but may be re-appointed for an additional term of fourteen
days if no replacement has been found.
6. Neither the Financial Manager nor the Associate Financial Manager may,
during his or her term of office, serve as an elected member of either
Senate or of the Council of Presidents.
7. At the time that it approves the nomination of the Financial Manager,
the joint session of the Senate will also approve a contract or letter of
appointment specifying the terms and conditions under which he or she
will hold office.
C. Removal
The Financial Manager may be removed by a vote of two-thirds of the member
ship of a joint session of the Senate. The Financial Manager must be notified
in writing of the intent to introduce such a motion not less than forty-eight
hours before the opening of the meeting at which the motion will be consid
ered, and must be given an opportunity to speak in opposition to the motion
at that meeting.
D. Financial Office
1. The Financial Manager will have the power to appoint one or more
assistants, subject to approval by the Senate. All persons appointed as
assistants will require confirmation by a two thirds vote of the Senate
before taking office.
2. The Senate will have the power to create additional positions subordinate
to the Financial Manager, to specily their responsibilities, and to provide
for the selection of persons to fill them. All persons appointed to such
positions will require confirmation by a two-thirds vote of the Senate
before taking office. All such positions will be under the supervision and
direction of the Financial Manager.
E. ASS 11 Office
The ASSU Office will provide administrative and financial services for the
ASSU, its agencies, the SOF, and student organizations designated by either
Senate. The Office will function under the supervision of the Financial Man
ager. Professional staff of the ASSU will be Unversity employess, and for the
purposes of handling staff the ASSU will function as an employing department
of the University under the Dean of Student Affairs.

Section 9. General Provisions
A. Fiscal Year
The fiscal year of the ASSU and its agencies will begin on September 1 and
end on August 31. All student organizations receiving funds from fees assessed
upon members of the ASSU will be required to use this fiscal year.
D. Annual Audit
The financial records of the ASSU, its agencies, and the Students' Organiza
tions Fund will be reviewed annually by an independent outside auditor ac
cepted by the Financial Manager and the President of the University.
C. Contracts
1. Any agreement or contract proposed to be entered into by the ASSU or
any of its agencies will be presented to the Financial Manager for prior
approval and signature. The Financial Manager will retain copies of all
approved contracts. The ASSU, its agencies, and the SOF will not be
held responsible for contracts not signed by the Financial Manager; such
contracts will be the personal responsibility of the persons signing them.
The Senate will have the power to approve all contracts.
2. No agent, officer, employee, or other person will make any contract,
agreement, promise, or undertaking in the name of or on behalf of the
ASSU or its agencies, except persuant to authority contained in this
Constitution or otherwise granted by the Senate.
D. Borrowing
The ASSU will have the power to borrow money. The Senate will have the
power to approve all borrowing.
Article VI: Initiative,
Referendum, and Recall
Section 1. Powers of the Membership of the Associ
ation
A. Initiative
hul.ial.ivv. is the power of the membership of the ASSU to enact, modify, or
repeal any substantial motion within the power of the Senate, hereafter referred
to as legislation, including By-Law amendments, except for: appointment
or removal of officers or employees; the calling of, placement on the ballot
of items for, or the certification of the results of, any ASSU election; or the
internal procedure of the Senate.
A measure adopted by initiative may be amended or repealed by the Senate,
unless otherwise provided in the text of the measure. Such provisions in the
text may not extend beyond the end of the fiscal year in which the measure
takes effect.
B. Referendum
Referendum is the power of the members of the ASSU to overturn any legis
lation approved by the Senate, except that legislation not subject to initiative
is also not subject to referendum.
C. Recall
ReraH is the power of the the member of the ASSU to remove from office one
or more members of the Council of Presidents or of the Senate, the Financial
Manager, or the Chair or Deputy Chair of the Senate, hereafter referred to as
the "officers" of the ASSU.
ARTICLE VI. INITIATIVE. REFERENDUM, AND RECALL
Section 2. Placement on the Ballot and Timing of
Elections
A. Initiative
An initiative measure will be submitted to the members of the ASSU for a vote
by one of the following procedures:
1. For resolutions, advisory referenda, or other initiatives whose only pur
pose is to express an opinion, or to take symbolic action in order to
express that opinion:
a. If that resolution is placed on the ballot by a majority vote of the
Senate; or
b. If a petition of 5 percent of the membership of the ASSU, containing
the text of the resolution, is submitted to the Elections Commission
at least 21 days prior to the Spring quarter general election, or at
least 14 days prior to a previously-called special election in which
all members of the ASSU are entitled to vote. If the petition is
validated, the Elections Commission will place the resolution on
the ballot for the specified election.
2. For all other initiative measures,
a. In one of the two ways provided for the placement of resolutions or
advisory referenda on the ballot; or
b. If a petition containing the signatures of at least 15 percent of
the members of the ASSU, containing the text of the initiative,
is submitted to the Elections Commission, the Commission will,
within 48 hours after the petition was validated, call an election
on the initiative, unless the Senate determines the petition not to
be valid. The Senate may amend the call of this election if it acts
within 7 days after the petition was validated. The election will
held not less than 7 nor more than 21 days after the Commission
has validated the petition.
B. Referendum
1. If a petition of 10 percent of the me mbers of the ASSU, stating the Sen
ate legislation on which the referendum is requested, is submitted to the
Elections Commission within 21 days after the Senate has enacted the
legislation in question, not counting days between quarters, the Commis
sion will, within 48 hours after the petition was validated, call an election
on the question. The Senate may amend the call of this election if it
acts within 7 days after the petition was validated. This election will be
held not less than 7 nor more than 21 days after the Commission has
found the petition to be validated.
2. Once a petition seeking a referendum on a piece of legislation enacted by
the Senate has been validated, that piece of legislation will be suspended
until outcome of the referendum election. In particular, funds budgeted
or allocated by the Senate which had not been expended or encumbered
before the referendum qualified for the ballot will be frozen until the
outcome ol the election. However, any action taken by officers of the
ASSU persuant to an item of legislation approved by the Senate after
it was initially approved, and before a referendum had qualified for the
ballot, will continue to be valid, even if such a referendum later qualifies
for the ballot.
C. Recall
1. Petitions
A petition seeking a recall election will be submitted to the Elections
Commission, as follows:
a. A petition to recall one or more members of the Council of Presi
dents, the Financial Manager, and/or the Chair or Deputy Chair of
the Senate will not be valid unless it contains the signatures of at
least 15 percent of the membership of the ASSU.
b. A petition to recall one or more members of the Senate who rep
resent the same constituency will not be valid unless it contains
the signatures of at least 15 per cent of the members of that con
stituency.

c. A petition to recall two or more members of the Senate who rep
resent different constituencies will not be valid unless it contains
the signatures of at least 15 per cent of the members of each con
stituency represented.
2. Validation of Petitions
The Elections Commission will, if it determines the petitions to be valid,
call and conduct a recall election on two consecutive days, not less than
10 nor more than 21 days after it has made its determination.
If the Commission does not make a decision as to the validity of the
petition within 7 days alter the petitions have been submitted, its re
sponsibilities devolve upon the Council of Presidents, or, in the case of a
petition to recall one or more members of the Council of Presidents or the
Financial Manager, upon the Senate. A determination as to the validity
of the petition must be made within 5 days after such responsibility has
devolved from the Elections Commission. If the petitions are determined
to be in order, the Elections Commission will call and conduct a recall
election on two consecutive days not less than 10 nor more than 21 days
after the petitions were determined to be valid.
D. General
1. Petitions will be verified if the signatures are authentic and sufficient in
number. Petitions will be validated if verified and also in proper form
and circulated properly according to the By-Laws of the ASSU.
2. An election on any petition seeking an election on an initiative, refer
endum, or recall which was submitted within 35 days of the end of the
quarter may, at the discretion of the Senate, be postponed for vote until
not more than 21 days after the opening of the following quarter, pro
vided I hat any such postponement in the Spring Quarter will be until
the following Autumn Quarter.
3. The Senate may, by a two-thirds vote, schedule an earlier election for
any item which has qualified for the ballot by petition.
4. No initiative, referendum, or recall election will be conducted except
during the Autumn, Winter, or Spring quarters.
5. The Senate will have the authority to establish regulations defining the
proper form for petitions and governing the circulation thereof.
Section 3. Election Procedure
A. Notice
The text of each resolution or other initiative measure, and of each item of
Senate legislation which is the subject of a referendum, will be made avail
able to all members of the ASSU at least seven days prior to the ratification
election on the amendment, either through publication in the Stanford student
newspaper, or through inclusion in an election pamphlet distributed to mem
bers of the ASSU. The title of the proposed initiative or referendum measure,
the dates of the election on that measure, and a statement explaining how to
obtain a copy of the text of the measure, must be published in the Stanford
student newspaper at least seven days prior to the election.
Public notice of a recall election, including the names of the officer(s) whose
recall has been sought and the office(s) they hold, will be given in the Stanford
student newspaper at least 7 days prior to the election.
B. Voting
1. Initiative
Each member of the ASSU may cast one vote in favor of or against each
initiative measure. An initiative measure will be adopted if it is approved
by a majority of those members of the ASSU voting on it.
2. Referendum
Each member of the ASSU may cast one vote in favor of or against
each item of Senate legislation for which a referendum was sought. The
action of the Senate will be rejected with the concurrence of a majority
of those members of the ASSU voting on the referendum; otherwise, it
will be approved.
ARTICLE VI. INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM, AND RECALL
3. Recall
Each member of the ASSU may cast one vote either in favor of or against
the recall of each officer on whose recall they are eligible to vote, as
follows:
a. All members of the ASSU may vote on the recall of members of
the Council of Presidents, the Financial Manager, or the Chair or
Deputy Chair of the Senate.
b. In recall elections for members of the Senate, only members of the
constituency the Senator in question represents m:iy vote.
The officer or officers will be removed from office with the concurrence
of two-thirds of the members of the ASSU voting on his or her recall,
as determined by the Elections Commission. Any office which becomes
vacant as a result of a recall election will be filled according to the
relevant sections of this Constitution.
Article VII: Amendment
Section 1. Submission of Amendments for Ratifica
tion
A. General
Proposed amendments to this Constitution will be submitted to the mem
bership of the Association for ratification after approval by two-thirds of the
membership of the Senate, provided that written notice containing the text of
the proposed amendment and indicating the parts of the Constitution affected
thereby had been given at the previous regular meeting, or upon petition by
members of the Association, as provided herein. All elections for the ratifi
cation of amendments to this Constitution will be held during the Autumn,
Winter, or Spring quarter.
4
B. Petitions
Any member of the Association wishing to propose an amendment to the
Constitution will submit the text of that amendment to the Senate Chair, along
with a statement specifying whether the amendment is intended for placement
on the ballot in the Spring Quarter gensral election, or in a special election.
The Chair will then give notice of that amendment at the next regular meeting
of the Senate which begins at least 24 hours after the proposed amendment
was received.
If the Senate has not placed the proposed amendment on the ballot for the
specified election by the end of the regular meeting of the Senate following the
meeting at which notice was given, then petitions proposing that amendment
may be circulated by members of the Association. All such petitions will con
tain the text of the proposed amendment and of the parts of the Constitution
to be affected thereby.
1. If such a petition containing the signatures of at least 5 percent of the
members of the Association is submitted to the Elections Commission
at least 21 days prior to the Spring Quarter general election, or at least
14 days prior to a previously-called special election in which all mem
bers of the Association are entitled to vole, the Commission will place
the amendment on the ballot in the election for which the petition was
submitted, provided that il linds the petition to be valid.
2. If such a petition containing the signatures of at least 15 percent of the
members of the Association is submitted to the Elections Commission,
the Commission will, within 48 hours after the petition was validated, call
an election on the amendment. The Senate may subsequently amend the
call of this election, provided that it acts within 7 days after the petition
was validated. The election on the amendment will be held not less than
7 nor more than 21 days after the opening of the following quarter. For

the purposes of this section, the quarter following the Spring Quarter
will be the Autumn Quarter.
3. The Senate may, by a vote of two-thirds of the membership, schedule
an earlier election for any proposed amendment which has qualified for
the ballot by petition.
The Senate will have the authority to establish regulations defining the proper
form for petitions and governing the circulation thereof.
C. Notice
Each proposed amendment, together with the parts of the Constitution af
fected thereby, will be made available to all members of the Association at
least seven days prior to the ratification election on the amendment, either
through publication in the Stanford student newspaper, or through inclusion
in an election pamphlet distributed to members of the Association. The title
of the proposed amendment, the dates of the ratification election, and a state
ment explaining how to obtain a copy of the text of the amendment, will be
published in the Stanford student newspaper at least seven days prior to the
election.
Section 2. Ratification
A proposed amendment will be adopted upon its approval by two-thirds of the
members of the Association voting on the amendment and its acceptance by
the Board of Trustees. The Board of Trustees may designate the President
of the University or other University officer to act on their behalf in accepting
such amendments.
A. Unconditional Acceptance
Should the Board of Trustees or their designee accept the proposed amend
ment without condition, it will take effect immediately, unless the amendment
specifies a later effective date.
B. Acceptance with Conditions
Should the Board of Trustees or their designee accept the proposed amend
ment subject to conditions or interpretations, then the amendment will take
effect only upon the approval of those conditions or interpretations by a vote
of two-thirds of the membership of the Senate. The amendment will take
effective immediately upon such approval, unless the amendment specifies a
later effective date.
Article VIII: Disposition of
Assets in the Event of
Dissolution of the ASSU
Section 1. Property of the ASSU
Should this Association cease to exist, all its property will be held in trust by
the University for a period of not less than five years. If any general student
association is formed and recognized within a five-year period by a majority
vote of registered students at the University during an election in which over
15 per cent of those students voted for recognition, then all such property so
held will remain and belong to this successor organization. If no such general
student organization succeeds to the present ASSU within the specified five
years, unqualified title to all the property of the ASSU will then be vested in
the University.
Section 2. Property in the Custody of the ASSU
Should this Association cease to exist, property in the custody of the ASSU.
including monies deposited in the SOF, will, if the owner organization continues
in existence, be held by the University for the owner organization under the
same terms and conditions as the ASSU held such property.
Article IX: Enactment Clauses
Section 1. Timing
A. Accoptance
This Constitution will take effect immediately when either of these two proce
dures for acceptance are completed:
1. Unconditional acceptance by the President or designee.
2. Acceptance by the President or designee with conditions accepted by the
Senate.
At the time that it takes effect, this Constitution will not affect the results of
any election for Special Fees. It will affect the election of officers of the ASSU
only in that all members elected to sea';s in the Senate will become voting
members.
B. Other AiiK'iuliticuts
If the amendment "To Let Students Set the Association Fee" is also approved
.by the student body and by the above process, it will take effect in the ap
propriate sections of this New Constitution and as outlined in its enactment
clauses.
C. By-Laws
All existing By-Laws which conflict in any way with this Constitution are hereby
repealed. The Senate will enact By-Laws to implement this Constitution.

You must vote in order to
receive refunds. See the
refund policy on page 32.
To Modify the Process for Amending the
Constitution
BE IT ENACTED BY THE ASSOCIATED STUDENTS OF
STANFORD UNIVERSITY:
That Article VII of the Constitution of the Association, which
currently read as follows:
ARTICLE VII: AMENDMENT
Section 1. Submission
Amendments to this Constitution shall be submitted to the membership of the
Association for ratificaton upon approval by two-thirds of the membership of
the Senate, provided that notice has been given at the previous regular meeting,
or upon petition by five percent of the membership of the Association.
Section 2. Petitions
Petitions proposing amendments shall be submitted to the Council of Presi
dents, who shall direct the Elections Commission to conduct an election on the
amendment in not less than six nor more than twenty-four days after the open
ing of the following quarter. Any such postponement in the Spring Quarter
shall be until the following Autumn Quarter.

Section 3. Notice
All proposed amendments, together with the part of the Constitution affected
thereby, shall be published in the Stanford student newspaper during the week
prior to the ratification election on the amendment.
Section 4. Ratification
Proposed amendments shall be adopted upon approval by two thirds of the
members of the Association voting in the ratification election and by the Board
of Trustees.
be, nud hereby is, replaced by the following:
ARTICLE VII: AMENDMENT
Section I.* Submission of Amendments for Ratifica
tion
A. General
A proposed amendments to this Constitution shall be submitted to the mem
bership of the Association for ratification upon approval by two-thirds of the
membership of the Senate, provided that written notice containing the text of
and k '" d ' ca ""e parts of the Constitution affected
thereby had been given at the previous regular meeting, or upon petition by
members of the Association, as provided herein. All elections for the ratifi
cation of amendments to this Constitution shall be held during the Autumn
Winter, or Spring quarter. 6 '
B. Petitions
Any member of the Association wishing to propose an amendment to the
Constitution shall submit the text of that amendment to the Senate Chair,
along with a statement specifying whether the amendment is intended for
placement on the ballot in the Spring Quarter general election, or in a special
election. The Chair shall then give notice of that amendment at the next
regular meeting of the Senate which begins at least 24 hours after the proposed
amendment was received.
If the Senate has not placed the proposed amendment on the ballot for the
specified election by the end of the regular meeting of the Senate following the
meeting at which notice was given, then petitions proposing that amendment
may be circulated by members of the Association. All such petitions shall con
tain the text of the proposed amendment and of the parts of the Constitution
to be affected thereby.
1. If such a petition containing the signatures of at least 5 percent of the
members of the Association is submitted to the Elections Commission
at least 21 days prior to the Spring Quarter general election, or at least
14 days prior to a previously-called special election in which all mem
bers of the Association are entitled to vote, the Commission shall place
the amendment on the ballot in the election for which the petition was
submitted, provided that it finds the petition to be valid.
2. If such a petition containing the signatures of at least 15 percent of the
members of the Association is submitted to the Elections Commission,
the Commission shall, within 48 hours after the petition was found to be
valid, call an election on the amendment. The Senate may subsequently
amend the call of this election, provided that it acts within 7 days after
the petition was found to be valid. The election on the amendment shall
be held not less than 7 nor more than 21 days after the opening of the
following quarter. For the purposes of this section, the quarter following
the Spring Quarter shall be the Autumn Quarter.
3. The Senate may, by a vote of two-thirds of the membership, schedule
an earlier election for any proposed amendment which has qualified for
the ballot by petition.
The Senate shall have the authority to establish regulations defining the proper
form for petitions and governing the circulation thereof.
C. Notice
Each proposed amendment, together with the parts of the Constitution af
fected thereby, shall be made available to all members of the Association at
least seven days prior to the ratification election on the amendment, either
through publication in the Stanford student newspaper, or through inclusion
in an election pamphlet distributed to members of the Association. If the lat
ter option is chosen, the title of the proposed amendment, the dates of the
ratification election, and a statement explaining how to obtain a copy of the
text of the amendment, shall be published in the Stanford student newspaper
at least seven days prior to the election.
Section 2. Ratification
A proposed amendment shall be adopted upon its approval by two-thirds of
the members of the Association voting on the amendment and its acceptance
by the Board of Trustees. The Board of Trustees may designate the President
of the University or other University officer to act on their behalf in accepting
such amendments.
A. Unconditional Acceptance
Should the Board of Trustees (or their designee) accept the proposed amend
ment without condition, it shall take effect immediately, unless the amendment
specifies a later effective date.
B. Acceptance with Conditions
Should the Board of Trustees (or their designee) accept the proposed amend
ment subject to conditions or interpretations, then the amendment shall take
effect only upon the approval of those conditions or interpretations by a vote
of two-thirds of the membership of the Senate. The amendment shall take
effective immediately upon such approval, unless the amendment specifies a
later effective date.

BE IT FURTHER ENACTED:
That the following enactment clauses shall govern tin* implemen
tation of this amendment:
1. This amendment to the Constitution shall take effect immediately upon
the completion of one of the following procedures:
a. unconditional acceptance by the University; or
b. acceptance by the University with conditions, provided that those
conditions are then accepted by a vote of two thirds of the mem
bership of the Senate.
2. All existing By-Laws, rules, and regulations which are inconsistent with
this amendment are hereby repealed.
3. The Senate is authorized to enact By-Laws and other legislation to give
full effect to this amendment.
To Strengthen the Constitutional Provisions
for Initiative
and Referendum and Modernize the Provi
sions for Recall
HE IT ENACTED BY TIIE ASSOCIATED STUDENTS OF
STANFORD UNIVERSITY:
That Article VI of the Constitution of the Association, which
currently read as follows:
Article VI: Initiative, Referendum, and Recall
Section 1. Initiative and Referendum
The membership of the Association shall have the power to initiate any act
within the power of the Senate, including By-Law amendments, or to annul any
act of the Senate, including By-Law amendments, provided that five percent of
the membership of the Association shall sign a petition calling for an election
on either a bill or a proposition annulling a bill. The petition, along with
the bill or proposition, shall be submitted to the Council of Presidents. The
Council of Presidents shall, if they determine the petition to be in good order
within the limitations of the Constitution, direct the Elections Commission to
conduct an election on the bill or proposition in not less than six nor more
than fifteen days after they shall have received the petition. Public notice of
such an election shall be given in the Stanford student newspaper not less than
four days before it shall take place. The bill or proposition shall be adopted

upon approval by a majority of the members of the Association voting in the
election. Any proposals made within twenty-five days of the end of the quarter
may, at the discretion of the Senate, be postponed for vote until not more
than fifteen days after the opening of the following quarter, provided that any
such postponement in the Spring Quarter shall be until the following Autumn
Quarter.
Section 2. Recall and Dissolution
The membership of the Association shall have the power to recall the Council
of Presidents, the Financial Manager, and members and officers of the Senate.
It shall also have the power to dissolve the Senate and to call for elections for
the Senate.
A. Recall of the Council of Presidents or the Financial Manager
A petition to recall the Council of Presidents or the Financial Manager shall
be submitted to the Senate and shall not be valid unless it contains the sig
natures of at least fifteen percent of the membership of the Association. The
Senate shall, if it determines the signatures on the petition to be authentic
and sufficient in number, direct the Elections Commission to conduct a recall
election on two consecutive days, not less than six nor more than 15 days after
it has made its determination. If the Senate does not make a determination
as to the authenticity of the signatures and their sufficiency in number within
seven days after the petitions have been submitted to the Chairman or the
Deputy Chairman of the Senate, its responsibilites devolve to the Elections
Commission, which must make its determination as to the authenticity of the
signatures and their sufficiency in numbei within five days after such respon
sibility has devolved to it from the Senate. If the petitions are determined to
be in order, the Elections Commission shall conduct a recall election on two
consecutive days not less than six nor more than 15 days after the petitions
were determined to be in order. Public notice of such election shall be given
in the Stanford Daily not less than four days before it shall take place. The
officer shall be removed from office with the concurrence of two-thirds of the
members of the Association voting in Ihe recall election, as determined by
the Elections Commission. The election on any petition for recall submitted
within twenty-five days of the end of the quarter may, at the discretion of the
Senate or the Elections Commission, be postponed for vote until not more
than 15 days after the opening of the following quarter, providing that any
such postponement in the Spring Quarter shall be until the following Autumn
Quarter.
B. Reciill <»112 the Officers or the Members of the Senate
A petition to recall officers or member?, of the Senate shall be submitted to
the Council of Presidents. In the case of officers of the Senate, the petition
shall not be valid unless it contains the signatures of at least fifteen percent
of the members of the Association. In the case of members of the Senate, the
petition shall not be valid unless it contains the signatures of at least fifteen
percent of the members of the constituency the Senator in question represents.
The Council of Presidents shall, if they determine the signatures on the petition
to be authentic and sufficient in number, direct the Elections Commission to
conduct a recall election on two consecutive days not less than six nor more
than 15 days after the petitions were determined to be in order. If the Council of
Presidents does not make a determination as to the authenticity and sufficiency
in number of the signatures within seven days after they were submitted to
them, their responsibilities devolve to the Elections Commission, which must
make its determination as to the authenticity and sufficiency in number of the
signatures within five days after such responsibility has devolved to it from
the Council of Presidents. If the petitions are determined to be in order, the
Elections Commission shall conduct a recall election on two consecutive days
not less than six nor more than 15 days after the petitions were determined
to be in order. Public notice of such election shall be given in the Stanford
Daily not less than four days before it shall take place. The officer shall be
removed from office with the concurrence of two-thirds of the members of
the Association voting in the recall election, as determined by the Elections
Commission. All members of the Association may vote in recall elections for
officers of the Senate, but in recall elections for members of the Senate, only
members of the constituency the Senator in question represented may vote.
The election on any petition for recall submitted within 25 days of the end of
the quarter may, at the discretion of the Council of Presidents or the Elections
Commission, be postponed for vote until not more than 15 days after the
opening of the following quarter, providing that any such postponement in the
Spring Quarter shall be until the following Autumn Quarter.
C. Dissolution of the Senate
A petition to dissolve the Senate shall be submitted to the Council of Presidents
and shall not be valid unless it contains the signatures of at least twenty
percent of the members of the Association. The Council of Presidents shall, if
they determine the signatures on the petition to be authentic and sufficient in
number, direct the Elections Commission to conduct an election on the matter
of Senate dissolution on two consecutive days not less than six nor more than
15 days after the petitions were determined to be in order. Public notice of
such election shall be given in the Stanford Daily not less than four days
before it shall take place. The election on any petition for Senate dissolution
submitted within 25 days of the end of the quarter may, at the discretion of
the Council of Presidents, be postponed for vote until not more than 15 days
after the opening of the following quarter, providing that such postponement
in the Spring Quarter shall be until the following Autumn Quarter. If the
Elections Commission determines that at least two-thirds of the members of
the Association voting supported the dissolution of the Senate, the Senate
shall be dissolved, and may not meet or conduct business and the Council of
Presidents of the Association shall direct the Elections Commission to conduct
new elections for the Senate on two consecutive days not less than seven
nor more than fifteen days after the dissolution of the Senate was voted. If
dissolution was voted less than 25 days before the end of Spring Quarter,
elections for a new Senate shall be postponed until the third week of the
following Autumn Quarter.
be, and hereby is, replaced by the following:
Article VI: Initiative, Referendum, and Recall
Section 1. Powers of the Membership of the Associ
ation

A. Initiative
Initiative is the power of the membership of the Association to enact any bill,
resolution, order, or other original main motion within the power of the Senate
(referred to in this Article as "legislation"), including By-Law
except for the following: appointment or removal of officers or employees of
the Senate or the Association; the calling of, placement on the ballot of items
for, or the certification of the results of, any Association election; or the exercise
of the authority granted to the Senate by Article 11, Section 5 ("Procedure")
of this Constitution. Subject to these exceptions, the initiative power shall
include the power to modify or repeal any legislation previously approved by
the Senate.
A measure adopted by initiative may be amended or repealed by the Senate,
unless otherwise provided in the text of the measure; however, any initiative
measure may be amended or repealed by the Senate after the end of the fiscal
year in which it was adopted, any contrary provisions in the text of the measure
notwithstanding.
B. Referendum
Referendum is the power of the members of the Association to overturn any
legislation approved by the Senate, except that those types of legislation which
are defined in this Constitution as not being subject to initiative shall also not
be subject to referendum.
C. Recall
Reeall is the power of the the membership of the Association to remove from
office one or more members of the Council of Presidents or of the Senate, the
Financial Manager, or the Chair or Deputy Chair of the Senate (referred to in
this Article as "officers" of the Association).
Section 2. Placement on the Ballot and Timing of
Elections
A. Initiative
An initiative measure shall be submitted to the members of the Association
for their approval or rejection according to one of the following procedures:
1. For resolutions, "advisory referenda", or other initiatives whose only pur
pose is to express an opinion, or to take such symbolic action as may be
incidental to the expression of that opinion:
u. If that resolution is placed on the ballot by a majority vote of the
Senate; or
l>. If a petition of 5 percent of the membership of the Association,
containing the text of the resolution, is submitted to the Elections
Commission at least 21 days prior to the Spring quarter general elec
tion, or at least 14 days prior to a previously-called special election
in which all members of the Association are entitled to vote. The
Commission shall, unless they or the Senate determine the petition
not to be in good order within the limitations of this Constitution,
place the initiative on the ballot for the specified election.
2. For all other initiative measures,
a. In one of the two ways provided by this Constitution for the place
ment of resolutions or "advisory referenda" on the ballot; or
b. If a petition containing the signatures of at least 15 percent of the
members of the Association, containing the text of the initiative,
is submitted to the Elections Commission, the Commission shall,
within 48 hours after the petition was found to be valid, call an elec
tion on the initiative, unless it or the Senate determines the petition
not to be in good order within the limitation of this Constitution.
The Senate may subsequently amend the call of this election, pro
vided that it acts within 7 days after the petition was found to be
valid. The election shall held not less than 7 nor more than 21 days
after the Commission has found the petition to be valid.
B. Referendum
1. If a petition of 10 percent of the members of the Association, stating
the Senate legislation on which the referendum is requested, is submit
ted to the Elections Commission within 21 days after the Senate has
enacted the legislation in question, not counting days between quarters,
the Commission shall, within 48 hours after the petition was found to be
valid, call an election on the question, unless it determines the petition
not to be in good order within the limitation of this Constitution. The
Senate may subsequently amend the call of this election, provided that it
acts within 7 days after the petition was found to be valid. This election
shall held not less than 7 nor more than 21 days after the Commission
has found the petition to be valid.
2. Once a petition seeking a referendum on a piece of legislation enacted
by the Senate has been found to be valid, that piece of legislation shall
be suspended pending the outcorre of the referendum election. In par
ticular, any funds budgeted or allocated by the Senate which had not
been expended or encumbered before the referendum qualified for the
ballot shall be frozen pending the outcome of the election. However,
any action taken by officers of the Association persuant to an item of
legislation approved by the Senate after it was initially approved, and
before a referendum had qualified for the ballot, shall continue to be
valid, even though such a referendum Inter qualifies for the ballot.
C. Recall
1. Petitions
A petition sacking a recall election shall be submitted to the Elections
Commission, as follows:
a. A petition to recall one or more members of the Council of Presi
dents, the Financial Manager, and/or the Chair or Deputy Chair of
the Senate shall not be valid unless it contains the signatures of at
least 15 percent of the membership of the Association.
b. A petition to recall one or more members of the Senate who rep
resent the same constituency shall not be valid unless it contains
the signatures of at least 15 per cent of the members of that con
stituency.
c. A petition to recall two or more members of the Senate who rep
resent different constituencies shall not be valid unless it contains
the signatures of at least 15 per cent of the members of each con
stituency represented.
2. Verification of Petitions
The Elections Commission shall, if it determines the signatures on the
petition to be authentic and sufficient in number, call and conduct a
recall election on two consecutive days, not less than 10 nor more than
21 days after it has made its determination.
If the Commission does not make a determination as to the authenticity
of the signatures and their sufficiency in number within 7 days after
the petitions have been submitted, its responsibilities devolve upon the
Council of Presidents, or, in the case of a petition to recall one or more
members of the Council of Presidents or the Financial Manager, upon the
Senate. The Council of Presidents (or the Senate, if the responsibility
devolves upon it) must make its determination as to the authenticity of
the signatures and their sufficiency in number within 5 days after such
responsibility has devolved upon it from the Elections Commission. If
the petitions are determined to be in order, the Elections Commission
shall call and conduct a recall election on two consecutive days not less
than 10 nor more than 21 days after the petitions were determined to
be in order.
D. General
1. An election on any petition seeking an election under the provisions of
this Article which was submitted within 35 days of the end of the quarter
may, at the discretion of the Senate, be postponed for vote until not more
than 21 days after the opening of the following quarter, provided that
any such postponement in the Spring Quarter shall be until the following
Autumn Quarter.
2. The Senate may, by a two-thirds vote, schedule an earlier election for
any item which has qualified for the ballot by petition.
3. No such election conducted under the provisions of this Article shall be
conducted except during the Autumn, Winter, or Spring quarters.
4. The Senate shall have the authority to establish regulations defining the
proper form for petitions and governing the circulation thereof.

Section 3. Election Procedure
A. Notice
The text of each resolution or other initiative measure, and of each item of
Senate legislation which is the subject of a referendum, shall be made available
to all members of the Association at least seven days prior to the ratification
election on the amendment, either through publication in the Stanford student
newspaper, or through inclusion in an election pamphlet distributed to members
of the Association. If the latter option is chosen, the title of the proposed
initiative or referendum measure, the dates of the election on that measure,
and a statement explaining how to obtain a copy of the text of the measure,
shall be published in the Stanford student newspaper at least seven days prior
to the election.
Public notice of a recall election, including the names of the officer(s) whose
recall has been sought and the office(s) they hold, shall be given in the Stanford
student newspaper at least 7 days prior to the election.
B. Voting
1. Initiative
Each member of the Association may cast one vote in favor of or against
each initiative measure. An initiative measure shall be adopted upon
approval by a majority of the members of the Association voting on that
measure.
2. Referendum
Each member of the Association may cast one vote in favor of or against
each item of Senate legislation for which a referendum was sought. The
action of the Senate shall be rejected with the concurrance of a ma
jority of those members of the Association voting on the referendum;
otherwise, it shall be approved.
3. Recall
Each member of the Association may cast one vote either in favor of or
against the recall of each officer on whose recall they are eligible to vote,
as follows:
a. All members of the Association may vote on the recall of members
of the Council of Presidents, the Financial Manager, or the Chair
or Deputy Chair of the Senate.
b. In recall elections for members of the Senate, only members of the
constituency the Senator in question represents may vote.
The officer or officers shall be removed from office with the concurrence
of two-thirds of the members of the Association voting on his or her
recall, as determined by the Elections Commission. Any office which
becomes vacant as a result of a recall election shall be filled according
to the relevant sections of this Constitution.
BE IT FURTHER ENACTED:
That the following enactment clauses shall govern the implemen
tation of this amendment:
1. This amendment to the Constitution shall take effect immediately upon
the completion of one of the following procedures:
a. unconditional acceptance by the University; or
b. acceptance by the University with conditions, provided that those
conditions are then accepted by a vote of two-thirds of the mem
bership of the Senate.
2. All existing By-Laws, rules, and regulations which are inconsistent with
this amendment are hereby repealed.
3. The Senate is authorized to enact By-Laws and other legislation to give
full effect to this amendment.
4. In Article VI, Section 2.C.1.C, the phrase "the members of each con
stituency represented" shall be interpreted as referring to all of the grad
uate, or all of the undergraduate, members of the Association, and not
to any sub-divisions of the graduate or the undergraduate membership.
Elsewhere in Article VI, the "constituency" of a member of the Senate
shall be interpreted as referring to the members of the Association who
would be eligible to cast votes in an election to fill the Senate seat held
by that member.
To Let Students Set The Association Fee
BE IT ENACTED BY THE ASSOCIATED STUDENTS OF STANFORD
UNIVERSITY:
THAT Article V, Section 1 of the Constitution of the Association, which
currently reads:
Section 1. Association Fee
A. General
An Association Fee shall be levied by the Association upon its
membership. This Fee shall be used for the organizational and basic
programming expenses, and minor capital improvements, of student
organizations requiring small amounts of funding, including appropriate
agancies of the Association.
B. Authorization
1. By a date specified in the By-Laws of the Association, but in any case
no later than the day prior to the beginning of the Spring quarter
general election, the Senate shall enact legislation specifying the
amount of the Association Fee for the following fiscal year. The total
amount may be contingent on the success or failure of one or more
Special Fee requests on the Ballot in the Spring quarter general
election, provided that both any contingent amounts and the non
contingent or base amount are approved by the Senate prior to the
election, in accordance with the provisions of this Section.
This legislation shall require notice at the previous regular meeting of
the Senate specifying the amount to be authorized, and must be
approved by a vote of two-thirds of the membership of the Senate. If
no such legislation is enacted by this deadline, then the Association
Fee for the following fiscal year shall be the same as that assessed
during the current fiscal year.
2. After the day prior to the first day of the Spring quarter general
election, the amount of the Association Fee for the following fiscal
year shall be changed only persuant to an initiative or referendum of
the members of the Association, provided that this is done either
before the collection schedule for the Association and Special Fees has
been finally approved, or with the consent of the University.
is replaced by the following:
Section I. General Fees
A. General
The Association may levy one or more General Fees upon its
membership. These Fees are to be used for the organizational and basic
programming expenses, and minor capital improvements, of student
organizations requiring small amounts of funding, including appropriate
agencies of the Association. Each General Fee must have an explicit
statement of purpose, and funds may be disbursed from a General Fee only
in accordance with its purpose.

B. Setting Amounts of General Fees
Each year, in the Spring quarter general election, the students will set the
amount of each General Fee for the coming fiscal year in the following
manner. For each General Fee:
1. The Senate must approve a list of percentages by which the General
Fee may be raised and lowered; these percentages must specifically
include zero and ten percent, and must fall in the range from zero to
100 percent. Senate approval requires a two-thirds vote and notice at
the previous regular meeting of the Senate, and must occur no later
than the day before the beginning of the Spring quarter general
election. If approval does not occur in time, the percentages from the
previous year shall be used.
2. The base amount of a General Fee is the amount assessed for that Fee
in the current fiscal year.
3. The ballot shall include a list of specific dollar figures for the General
Fee, consisting of the base amount symmetrically raised and lowered
by the percentages approved by the Senate.
4. Each voter may select one figure from the list. The new Fee amount
will be set to the median of the voters' selections, if at least 15% of
the members of the Association cast ballots in the election.
Otherwise, the new Fee amount will be set to the current base amount.
C. Creation, Abolition, and Large Modfications of General
Fees
The Senate may, by a two-thirds vote of its membership, place a proposal
to create, abolish, or modify the base amount of a General Fee on the
ballot of the Spring general election. Proposals to modify the base
amount must include the specific proposed new base amount. Such a
proposal will be adopted if two-thirds of the students voting are in favor,
and if those in favor make up 15% of the members of the Association.
The Senate may set a lower limit to General Fees, and any General Fee
that drops below this limit one year and is not raised above it by the next
year will be abolished.
THAT all references to one "Association Fee" in the Constitution be replaced by
references to multiple "General Fees".
THAT this amendment will take effect when one of the following two
procedures for acceptance is completed:
1. Unconditional acceptance by the University, or
2. Acceptance by the University with conditions accepted by the Senate.
THAT the Program Board and Publications Board are continued as seperate,
existing General Fees, with base amounts equal to their respective portions of
the Association Fee as authorized in the fiscal year this amendment takes effect.
THAT in the first year that the Program Board and Publications Board are voted
on by the students, the percentages referred to in Subsection B must not exceed
20%.
THAT all existing By-Laws, rules, and regulations which are inconsistent with
this amendment are hereby repealed, and that the Senate will write appropriate
By-Laws to implement this amendment.
