# Committee on Services to Students Report on Recruitment Policies
## 
### 
Following is the text of the Committee on
Services to Students report to Stanford President
Richard W. Lyman concerning recruitment policies at
the Career Planning and Placement Center.
Headed by Timothy C. Clark, a senior history major,
the committee includes Neil S. Bernstein, sophomore
undeclared major; Stanley E. Fischman, assistant profes
sor of psychiatry and pediatrics; Robert E. Freelen,
acting dean of students, ex officio without vote;
Suzanne E. Lewis, assistant professor of art history;
Ronald A. Rebholz, associate professor of English;
Thomas A. Rliue, assistant dean of graduate studies;
Fernando Sanchez, sophomore economics major; Peter
R. Van Petten, sophomore undeclared major; and
Christian F. Winkle IV, senior political science major.
1. RECOMMENDATIONS
In these recommendations, the phrase "formal place
ment facilities" includes the Career Planning and Place
ment Center, the Law School Placement Office, the
Placement Center at the Graduate School of Business,
and any similar facilities which may be established in the
future. It does not include White Plaza or the offices of
individual professors.
I. That more information be made available on com
panies recruiting at the formal placement facilities of
Stanford University through the maintenance of an open
file on each recruiting company. This file should contain
all information submitted by individuals or organiza
tions, including, of course, the company itself. Informa
tion submitted should be signed and have an address of
the person or organization submitting the information.
Copies of materials in this file should be submitted to
the companies which recruit so there will be a chance for
rebuttal and so recruiters may be prepared to answer
questions which interviewees may ask. The opportunity
for rebuttal of statements or allegations should be ex
tended to everyone, and all such rebuttals should also be
included in the file.
There are also a number of general studies or publica
tions on what companies are doing work in specific areas
which have come to the attention of the Committee.
These concern such topics as production of weaponry,
number, value, and nature of contracts with the Depart
ment of Defense, performance in areas of ecological
concern, and others. The Committee recommends that
these and other such publications which may appear in
the future be included in the materials available at the
Placement Center. The following is a partial list which
the Committee recommends:
Council on Economic Priorities Newsletter
Defense Marketing Service (DMS) Intelligence
Report
American Friends Service Committee publications
National Action Research on Military-Industrial
Complex (NARMIC) publications
(Approved unanimously)
2. That all companies recruiting at the formal place
ment facilities of Stanford University be required to fill
out a questionnaire which asks questions relating to
student concerns about company practices. Companies
should be required to complete this questionnaire as a
condition for its recruiting. The questionnaire should be
revised annually. (Approved unanimously)
3. That no policy review and recommending body in
addition to the Committee on Services to Students be
established for the Career Planning and Placement
Center. (Approved unanimously)
4. That military recruiters be barred from using the
formal placement facilities of Stanford University.
(Approved 8-1; Bernstein. Clark, Lewis, Rebholz, Rliue,
Sanchez, Van Petten and Winkle voted yes, Fischman
voted no.)
5. That a referendum of the student body establish
the policy of whether military recruiters and recruiters
from companies falling within specific legislative guide
lines relating to their production of weapons of war
should be barred from the formal placement facilities of
Stanford University.
The Committee recommends that this referendum be
conducted differently from an ASSU referendum. We
suggest some method by which all registered students
receive a ballot, as well as a summary of the arguments
which this Committee found most important on both
sides of the issue. We suggest that either mailing ballots
to all registered students or distributing ballots through
the registration procedures would be appropriate. Be
cause opinions change, we further recommend that the
referendum be repeated in two years. (Approved 5-4;
Bernstein, Clark, Rebholz, Sanchez and Van Petten
voted yes; Fischman, Lewis, Rliue, and Winkle voted
no.)
The following proposed recommendation was de
feated 5-4:
That, on principle, some companies producing
weapons of war should be barred from using the formal
placement facilities of Stanford University. (Defeated
4-5; Bernstein, Rebholz, Sanchez, and Van Petten voted
yes; Clark, Fischman, Lewis, Rhue, and Winkle voted
110.)
11. LIMITATION OF SCOPE
The Committee has limited the scope of its recom
mendations to the formal placement facilities of Stan
ford and specifically excluded White Plaza and individual
professors' offices for a number of reasons:
1. The arranging of interviews and providing of office
space for those interviews amounts to a direct University
subsidy of a private business transaction between re
cruiter and interviewee. Thus, the University may make
a decision on whether it wishes to continue subsidizing
certain of these business transactions.
2. To include White Plaza in any exclusionary policy
would be to infringe on White Plaza's de facto status as a
place where a wide range of activities takes place in an
unregulated fashion.
3. To include an individual professor's office within
any exclusionary policy would require the regulation of
essentially private conversations between a professor and
a representative from a recruiting organization. One can
imagine that a professor might invite a former student
who is working for a particular organization to talk with
the professor while other students were present and
participating in the conversation. A policy which
included conversations in professors' offices would in

volve difficulties both in enforcement and in definition
of precisely what constituted a recruiting interview.
4. In general, the problems of enforcement are
greatly reduced by limiting any exclusionary policy to
those facilities which are established specifically for
recruitment.
5. Nothing in these recommendations should be
construed as limiting access to campus by anyone for
purposes other than recruitment. Members of excluded
organizations should be allowed and encouraged to come
to Stanford to discuss the activities and policies of their
organization, even though barred from recruiting in the
formal placement facilities.
111. DISCUSSIONS OF
UNANIMOUS RECOMMENDATIONS
1. More information and open file.
This recommendation is aimed at correcting the pre
sent situation where generally the only information
available to a student who is interested in a particular
company is the public relations brochures put out by the
company itself. Dr. Keller emphasized to the Committee
the inadequacy of the information available to students,
and urged that a Career Information Service be funded
and established.
A number of suggestions were made to the Commit
tee on how to make this information available, and we
recommend that an open file on each company be
maintained for a number of reasons:
A. Financial: It was suggested that the University
sponsor an extensive examination of companies
recruiting at Stanford, a task which would require much
effort and expense. Maintaining an open file on each
company would require only someone to establish the
files and then file whatever information is submitted, as
well as making the contents of the file available to the
company periodically. It seems that initially this could
be accomplished by one work-study student who would
have responsibility for doing these relatively simple
tasks. The Committee urges that the funding for one
additional work-study position at the Placement Center
for this purpose be made available.
B. Legal: It has been suggested that having the Uni
versity publish a report on a company's activities would
make it liable for erroneous information contained in
the report. Our hope is that a policy of accepting
whatever signed information is submitted will avoid any
sanction of these materials by the University and hence
avoid the legal difficulties.
C. Censorship: Accepting all information submitted
would remove the danger that some information would
be censored for being inappropriate, insignificant, in
accurate, or whatever. Allowing the opportunity for
rebuttal should reduce the possibility of misinformation
being perpetuated.
Some set of procedures or guidelines will have to be
developed by the Placement Center staff as to how such
an open file system will be handled. Procedures should
include a comple'e review of the files every two or three
years. The Commit tee requests that whatever procedures
are decided upon be submitted to COSS for approval
before they are put into operation.
The Committee supports giving the Placement Center
whatever additional funding or space is necessary to
carry out this policy.
2. Mandatory questionnaire
The questionnaire is a means to get information
which may be valuable to students and which can be
gotten most easily from the company itself. We believe
the questionnaire should be mandatory; otherwise it is a
meaningless or half-hearted gesture.
It is not our intent that questions be so numerous or
detailed that the questionnaire would serve as a de facto
exclusionary device.
If this recommendation is accepted, the Committee
will send a letter to Dr. Keller suggesting questions
which we feel should be included on such a question
naire. Generally, we would include questions about De
partment of Defense contracts (dollar amounts, percent
of total and general categories of materials or
services supplied), classified contracts (number and
dollar amount), affirmative action programs for minor
ities and women, overseas operations, degree of involve
ment in community programs, plans for preserving the
environment, and whether the company is presently or
has been recently involved in criminal court actions
involving company actions.
The questionnaire should be returned to the Place
ment Center several weeks prior to the scheduled re
cruiting interviews so that interviewees can look at the
answers before their interviews. Because student inte
rests and concerns change over time, we recommend that
the questionnaire be revised annually. Again, the Com
mittee requests that the questionnaire be submitted to
COSS for approval before it is used.
3. No further advisory board
The Committee believes establishing a policy review
board for the Career Planning and Placement Center is
unnecessary. Most of the Center's activities are routine
administrative tasks or individual counseling, and there is
general agreement that these are performed in a compe
tent and friendly fashion. Dr. Keller stated that while he
would welcome such a board if the Committee felt it
necessary, he believed that the Placement Center had
adequate student input already. The Placement Center
seems to be quite responsive to student needs, and we
believe that this Committee is a sufficient body to
review policies at the Placement Center. A further body
would be an unnecessary pyramiding of the bureaucracy.
IV. MAJORITY STATEMENT ON MILITARY
RECRUITMENT
The decision to favor the exclusion of all military
recruiters from the formal placement facilities of Stan
ford University was reached by the Committee with a
vote of 8 to I. This was the only area of restrictive
recruitment upon which a substantial majority of Com
mittee members could agree, primarily because it was
the single case where individual students would not be
denied an essential service. A student's access to military
positions or training programs in the armed forces would
in no way be curtailed by a policy banning military
recruiters from using the form 1 Maccment facilities at
Stanford because the military i : ces maintain recruit
ment facilities in close proximity to the campus.

Furthermore, competition for jobs in the armed services
does not operate at levels comparable or equal to that
for jobs in the civilian labor market. Thus, the policy we
recommend would neither limit services available to stu
dents in any significant way nor would any students be
denied important opportunities in seekingjobs.
For those on the Committee who favored maintaining
a policy of open recruitment for companies with DOD
contracts, the decision to ban the military was based on
a fundamental belief that the University should divorce
itself from military functions, whether it be DOD con
tracts, ROTC training or military recruiting. The military
has no proper place within the fabric of the University as
an independent private and domestic institution. The
degree of coercive involvement with the DOD insofar as
military recruiting is concerned may be observed in the
fact that military recruiting on campus is demanded by
the DOD as a condition for the awarding of its research
contracts to the University. Again, private companies do
not and indeed should not create similar erosions of the
University's right to function as a free and independent
institution.
Neil S. Bernstein Thomas A. Rhue
Timothy C. Clark Fernando Sanchez
Suzanne E. Lewis Peter Van Petten
Ronald A. Rebholz Christian F. Winkle IV
Bernstein, Rebholz, Sanchez, and Van Petten add to
the reasons above the following argument for barring
military recruiters from formal placement facilities:
Recruitment of talented and trained people by the
armed forces is the first act in a clearly definable process
that results in the unwarranted and hence immoral
killing of people in Indochina. Stanford University, by
lending its placement facilities and the prestige of its
name to military recruiters, aids that process. It should
stop doing so, primarily because aiding the agents of an
immoral act is itself immoral and theref ore incompatible
with the nature of the university. Furthermore, barring
military recruiters from formal placement facilities will
be a political gesture that announces the opposition of
Stanford students to the war and invites imitation by
students at other universities.
The arguments that should be weighed against this
line of reasoning are analogous to those raised against
barring certain companies from formal placement facili
ties. Those arguments are discussed in the minority re
port on barring companies and should be considered
there.
V. MINORITY STATEMENT ON MILITARY
RECRUITMENT
As I have mentioned frequently in our meetings, 1
feel I understand and sympathize with the thoughts and
feelings that lie behind the advocacy of abolition of
certain organizations from utilizing the University Place
ment Services. However, the very act of judging, espe
cially on a moral basis, who may and may not have
access to the University and its facilities is potentially a
very dangerous act which seems antithetical to the very
nature of a University. Morality, in particular, changes
from generation to generation; witness the current
approaches to some of the very accepted and cherished
values of generations of students who graduated but a
few short years ago.
I fully realize that this University (and most other
"great universities") fall somewhat short of this ideal,
but I do not believe that past inadequacies and mistakes
should justify the cessation of efforts directed toward
the ideal. The forces of repression are ever around us,
both within the University community and without.
Indeed, if the University were to go along with the
barring of military recruiters from the Stanford campus
because of the precedent that it has set regarding exclu
sion of certain corporations (Goldman-Sachs) and
barring our basketball team from playing B/igham
Young University, we would, at once, continue to estab
lish precedents that will in the long run be inimical to
the concept of the University as a sanctuary of reason
and discourse.
Yes, it is true that the military's role on the campus is
out of proportion. This is true on many levels of the
University and, in my opinion, has had a definite, delete
rious effect. However, to deal with that issue will take a
considerable amount of soul-searching, hard work, and
reevaluation of the University within our society rather
than an impulsive, finger-waving symbolic gesture
directed at a very minor symptom. Indeed, it is my
opinion that even if this act were effective, the cost to
our personal integrity and freedom, in the long run, will
be excessive.
Stanley E. Fischman, M.D.
VI MAJORITY STATEMENT ON REFERENDUM
It is in some ways unfortunate that the question of
whether a referendum is a valid method of decision
making is intertwined here with the specific issue of the
recruitment policy at the Placement Center. However,
the question of what a referendum means never comes
up except in the context of a specific referendum on a
subject of controversy. The arguments used against stu
dent referenda arc generally similar no matter what the
issue, and'reduce themselves to three propositions:
1. The referenda which have been conducted are
flawed in a variety of ways.
2. Students are only one constituency of the Uni
versity; student referenda should therefore be only
one input into a decision.
3. A referendum is always an unsatisfactory way
to make a decision, and this is especially true in a
University.
A. Flaws in past referenda
We recognize the problems which there have been
with past ASSU referenda, and for this reason our re
commendation specifies some differences between this
referendum and an ASSU referendum. The objections to
past referenda generally refer to vague wording of propo
sitions, insufficient publicity, little public discussion of
the issues, the fact that only in retrospect is a referen
dum regarded as anything but advisory, and actual irre
gularities in voting. We believe that the referendum we
have recommended meets these objections.
Appendix C contains the wording which we propose
for the referendum. It would be appropriate for the
elected representatives of the student body, the Student

Space paid for by University Relations
Senate, to approve the final wording of the propositions.
(If some restrictions are adopted, potential recruiters
would be required to submit a statement that they
qualify under the regulations before being allowed to
recruit at Stanford. Any person could submit evidence
that a potential recruiter does not qualify, with disputes
to be resolved by the Committee on Services to Students
after an investigation.)
There has certainly been ample publicity and discus
sions of recruitment policies at the Placement Center.
However, in an attempt to provide each voter with the
arguments made on both sides of the issue, we urge that
a statement from each side accompany the ballot which
each student receives. Members of this Committee are
willine to submit these arguments to be included with
the ballots. Of course, there would undoubtedly be
further discussion of the issue in the Daily and probably
from organized groups on both sides of the issue.
Clearly there will be no ambiguity about the role of
the referendum in decision making if our recommenda
tion that it be binding is accepted. Voting irregularities
should be reduced by mailing each individual student a
ballot and a stamped envelope for its return. Using
numbered ballots should guarantee ballots would not be
duplicated.
The recommendation includes a provision that the
referendum be repeated in two years. We subscribe to
the belief that recruitment policy should reflect commu
nity sentiment, and clearly that sentiment is subject to
change over time. Others assert that recruitment policy
should be based on some kind of principle which is
immune to variation over time. A principle exists only as
long as it is supported by some kind of consensus;
obviously the consensus which existed at one time in
regard to recruitment policy no longer exists. Until it
becomes clear that a consensus on principle once again
exists, we see no alternative but to review the policy
periodically. Such review necessarily makes the issue
both recurring and political. However, falling back on a
principle which is no longer supported by a consensus is
unlikely either to put the issue to rest nor to reduce the
political controversy surrounding it.
B. Students only one constituency
The Career Planning and Placement Center exists be
cause it provides a service which benefits students. Other
persons or groups benefit as well, but these benefits are
secondary and do not in themselves justify the existence
of a Placement Center. In simplest terms, our argument
is that students should set policy for a student service.
Certainly there are other affected constituencies, but
their interests are not primary and their rational con
cerns can as well be considered by the student body as a
whole as by an official University committee or a Uni
versity administrator.
Certainly it is not always appropriate for a student
referendum to establish University policy, even on
matters pertaining strictly to student services. When
there are policies which affect the Constitutional rights
of an individual or other rights which have been speci
fically guaranteed, these should not be subject to refer
enda. However, there is no question of rights involved in
recruitment policy, at least in the ordinary definition of
that word.
It may be that the real reason there is so much
resistance to allowing students to make decisions about
policy for the Placement Center is that it simply is
politically unfeasible. It may be that certain elements of
the Stanford community which have some power object
to having students making such decisions. If such is the
case, if faculty, Trustees, perhaps some administrators,
are using their power to prevent the establishment of a
mechanism by which students set policy for a student
service, then this obstacle to change should be publicly
discussed as the real reason why a referendum is
opposed.
C. Referendum an unsatisfactory mechanism
We regard the referendum as an improved il imperfect
tool for making the decision on recruitment policy at
the Placement Center. Wc are forced back to our basic
assertion on control of the Placement Center: students
should establish policy for this student service. Of the
available ways for students to democratically decide
policy, at this time the referendum seems the most
desirable. The other alternative which comes to mind is
some sort of representative system, like the Student
Senate. However, the issues concerning Placement
Center policy are basically questions of values, and the
most direct way to ascertain the values of the student
community is by referendum.
Those opposed to referenda as a decision-making
device generally believe that there are other adequate
channels for student input into the decision-making
process. The fact that students comprise a majority of
this Committee is sometimes cited as evidence of student
input into decision-making. This argument ignores the
very fundamental difference between giving advice and
making decisions. Persons without power are rarely
satisfied with merely giving advice, and persons with
power usually regard the giving of advice as sufficient
input for those without power. Yet if we imagine a
situation where students had the power to make this
decision, it seems highly predictable that other constitu
encies would object that they were only giving advice.
There would be fear that the decision would go the
"wrong way" and that interests of the Administration,
for instance, were not adequately considered in the final
decision. The question is not one of adequate channels
for student input, but of the ultimate decision-making
power.
A companion argument of lelcrcndum opponents is
that those who will be held accountable for a decision
should have the power to make the decision. However, if
the power to make a decision is transferred to a different
constituency, the students in this instance, then the
former possessor of that power (the Administration)
should no longer be held accountable for the decision.
Certainly the effects of whatever decision students might
make on Placement Center recruitment policy would
change the situation which administrators must work
with, but these effects would be similar toother factors
which change the environment in which administrators
must operate at present.
It is true that the President would probably be held
accountable for the decision to give the power to stu
dents to set Placement Center policy. We are arguing
that such a power shift is justified and desirable in
principle and believe that should be sufficient reason for
carrying it out.
One would not expect that such a constitutional
revolution in internal University governance would meet
with universal acceptance. What we are recommending is
analogous to a change from a monarchy to a democracy.
The present system of internal University governance
concentrates ultimate power in one individual, that indi
vidual surrounding himself with counselors and advisers,
some of whom he delegates responsibility to. The Ameri
can political tradition historically puts more trust in the
mass of citizens than in a monarch. We believe that
tradition could well be applied to the case at hand, and
therefore urge that a student referendum conducted in
the manner described establish recruitment policy at the
formal placement facilities of Stanford University.
Neil S. Bernstein Fernando Sanchez
Timothy C. Clark Peter Van Petten
Ronald A. Rebholz
VII. THE MINORITY OPINION: REFERENDUM
Members of the minority opinion resist referring the
recruitment issues to the student body through referen
dum for the following reasons.
1. We believe that government by referendum is
weaker than government by representation, and prefer
that this issue be settled through the University's re
presentative forms of government. We recognize that
COSS does not have final authority on the decision, but
believe that the committee, with a student majority,
does have legitimate input.
Moreover, we believe that accepting the responsibility
to make a clear recommendation to the President within
the COSS structure strengthens the representative form
of the decision-making process.
Referenda on Stanford's campus are shown primarily
to reflect student sentiment which varies on a single
issue over time. Policy is stronger when it is established
on principles which are operative over a long period of
time rather than opinion, which is both malleable and
temporal.
Governance is further diluted by referendum when it
shifts the responsibility from those who must carry out
the policy to those without direct responsibility for
policy.
2. Generally, the public is less well informed on an
issue than its representatives. In this case we could not
expect the student body to review the issues as com
pletely as COSS has with its hearings and testimonies
from spring 1971 and winter 1972 and could not, there
fore, make as well educated a judgment.
3. In the case of the Placement Center, the service is
predominantly but not entirely a student service. The
Center serves other constituencies as well, including
alumni and faculty or staff. In one sense, university
teaching is a student service, yet we would not expect to
decide on who teaches or what courses he would teach
by student referendum—though we are quick to recog
nize that student sentiment and judgment should be
seriously reviewed when such decisions are made.
VIII. THE MAJORITY OPINION: WAR RELATED
ISSUE
While we do not condone or endorse private indus
try's contractual arrangements with the military, we
reject the proposal of limiting recruiters from such com
panies from several differing views:
One view holds that the very act of judging, especially
on a moral basis, who may and may not have access to
the University and its facilities is potentially a very
dangerous act which seems antithetical to the very
nature of a University. Morality, in particular, changes
from generation to generation; witness the current
approaches to some of the very accepted and cherished
values of generations of students who graduated but a
few short years ago.
Another view recognizes that most objections to war
related industrial recruitment stems from the fact that
weapons and profits from weapons are made.
The proposal would not ban all such companies but
only those which make substantial profits or those
which make products which can only be used for killing,
as opposed to produces which indirectly support war,
such as food, clothes, or trucks. Most large corporations
are extremely diversified and the University, therefore, is
forced to make some judgment as to the tolerance level
for companies producing materiel designed to kill. There
seems to be no domestic legal principles or cases which
can justify the policy barring companies from the cam
pus. The economic consequences to the University, un
like the probable consequences of barring the military,
are not clear in that companies may or may not cease
contributing to the University. The strength of the
socio-political impact of such a policy is dubious, par
ticularly as that impact may relate to national attitudes
relating to the war and industrial profits made from war.
No one can predict with confidence if such a policy
would have any impact at all.
We believe that students should be fully informed of
the war-related activities of the companies, but that
attempts to develop a policy which relates to certain
dollar amounts of DOD contracts (or types of products
which support war) are basically arbitrary and uneasy to
live with.
The military's influence on the campus is more than
we would like it to be. This is true on many levels of the
University and has had a deleterious effect. However, to
deal with that issue will take a considerable amount of
soul searching, hard work, and reevaluation of the Uni
versity within our society rather than an impulsive,
finger-waving symbolic gesture directed at a very minor
symptom.
IX. MINORITY STATEMENT ON RECRUITING BY
WAR-RELATED INDUSTRIES
We recommend that those companies which produce
weapons of the kind used in the Indochina war and
components used primarily in such weapons be barred
from using the formal placement facilities of Stanford
University. The term "weapons" includes weapons deliv
ery systems, electronic surveillance equipment, and
target acquisition equipment. We recommend that an
exception be made in the case of those companies'
divisions which do not produce such weapons.
The crucial strategies of the United States armed
forces in the Indochina war clearly violate international
law and make that war a criminal act. Even if there were
no international law, the wanton and indiscriminate
taking' of life in the Indochina war would violate the
moral sense of any civilized person. The companies
which make and supply weapons for the conduct of the
war, while perhaps not accessories to the crime in the
strict construction of international law, willingly con

tribute, for profit, to the committing of the crime and
are therefore as culpable as a person who sells a gun to a
known killer.
Those companies' use of placement facilities to
recruit talented and trained people is the first act in a
process that results in the illegal and immoral killing of
people in Indochina. Stanford University, by allowing
those companies to use its placement facilities, lends its
services and the prestige of its name to that process. It
should stop doing so, primarily because aiding a process
that culminates in the illegal and immoral killing of
people is itself immoral. Furthermore, barring those
companies from the placement facilities would be a
political gesture indicating that Stanford University has
taken at least one step to extricate itself from its rela
tionship with the companies that profit from the making
c f war-a gesture that may be imitated by other univer
sities. Finally, making it more difficult to be recruited
by a representative from one of those companies might
effectively channel students away from those who trade
in death.
In the course of the Committee's hearings and discus
sions, several arguments have been advanced against
barring any companies from the use of formal placement
facilities. We do not ultimately find them persuasive, but
we do think they deserve serious consideration.
First, it it true that the university community must
be very careful about making legislation on the basis of
the moral views of the majority lest the rights of minor
ities be trampled. But we insist on the classical distinc
tion between acts which are considered immoral by the
majority but which do no harm to others (such as
various sexual acts between consenting adults or the
smoking of marijuana) and should therefore not be
prohibited by legislation, and acts which are considered
immoral by the majority, in fact harm others, and might
therefore be prohibited by legislation. We think that
recruitment by companies which make weapons of the
wind used in the Indochina war falls into the latter
category because it is an act which has as one of its
consequences the killing of people.
Furthermore, we do not see that the "rights" of any
students are being abridged. Since the use of the place
ment facilities is a service to students, and since the
university does not have an "obligation" to make all
possible services available to all students, denial of easy
access to certain recruiters does not constitute a denial
of a "right."
On the other hand it is true that in this case a service
would be denied to some students—those that want
particularly to be recruited by the barred companies—on
moral grounds. But the university has already established
the precedent for such an action by denying the place
ment facilities to Goldman, Sachs because the company
admitted that it discriminated on the basis of race.
It has been argued that the restriction in this ease is
not analogous to the one proposed because Goldman,
Sachs committed an illegal act in discriminating and
because the restriction was made in the interest of in
creasing opportunities for students, not narrowing them.
But the fact that Goldman, Sachs had not been prose
cuted for, much less found guilty of discrimination indi
cates that the university's opposition to discrimination
in hiring rests finally on moral grounds.
Also, denying access to companies like Goldman,
Sachs does not in fact increase job opportunities: more
white students would have had a chance to be recruited
if Goldman, Sachs had access to the placement facilities,
and its being denied access did not increase recruitment
opportunities for students from minority races.
A further precedent has been established in the uni
versity's refusal to play Brigham Young University in
basketball on the grounds that Mormon theology dis
criminates against black people; those students that
particularly want to watch or play BYU have been
denied that opportunity on moral grounds.
In our view the University's responses to Goldman,
Sachs and BYU were proper limitations on services to or
opportunities for students, as would be barring from
placement facilities those companies that produce
weapons of the kind used in the Indochina war.
Barring some companies from placement facilities
does not in our view constitute an abridgement of the
openness and the freedom to speak that should charac-

Space paid for by University Relations

terize the university. Anyone, including the recruiters
from the barred companies, should continue to be
welcomed to give public statements of their views to the
members of the University. The recruiters should, if they
wish, have access to White Plaza to conduct their busi
ness transaction-which is the nature of recruitment-in
the same way that everyone has access to White Plaza to
conduct business transactions (such as the sale of
candles). But the University should stop helping them do
their work.
Finally, it has been argued that the University should
be morally and politically neutral in the use of its
facilities and talents. But in fact the University is not
morally or politically neutral.
The desire of many of its faculty and administrators
that the University grow in size and "quality" through
the use of federal money has biased its research and
teaching toward the interests of the federal government,
leaving many possible issues unresearched and untaught
because of the unavailability of federal support. That
bias may be the result of moral or immoral attitudes, but
it is not amoral or apolitical.
However desirable neutrality might be as an institu
tional position, it can never be achieved by Stanford
University unless it chooses to become a small liberal
arts and sciences college supported by tuition and
endowment income.
Since neutrality is impossible, the best alternative is
to use the University's facilities and talents on behalf of
life-or at least not on behalf of death.
Neil S. Bernstein Fernando Sanchez
Ronald A. Rebholz Peter Van Petten
APPENDIX A: LIST OF SPEAKERS HEARD BY THE
COMMITTEE
May Meetings:
Mrs. Rachelle Marshall, Stanford Community Women
for Peace
Dr. Ralph W. Keller, director, Career Planning and
Placement Center
John Kerns, director, humanities placement, Career
Planning and Placement Center
David Josephson
January Meetings:
Hubert Marshall, Department of Political Science
James Douglas, Department of Civil Engineering
Jackie Dowles, student
Larry Diamond, Council of Presidents
Mrs. Frank Bonilla, faculty wife
Gerald Arnold, Stanford Veterans Club
Dan Higgins, Stanford Veterans for Peace
Dwain Fullerton, General Secretary's Office
Jim Lee, General Secretary's Office
Robert Barkan, alumnus
Earl Martin, Concerned Asian Scholars
Dean Joe Pettit, School of Engineering
Howard Alford, graduate student in education
Dr. Ralph W. Keller, director. Placement Center
Peter Munk, student
Jim Robinson, student
Ron Miller, graduate student in education
Bill Munselle, graduate student in political science
Paula Johnson, student
David Josephson, ASSU guest professor
Ed Jackson, student
Pierre Noyes, SLAC
Halsted Holman, School of Medicine
Mick Goldstein, student, Law School
APPENDIX B: DOCUMENTS RELATING TO
ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF A RESTRICTIVE
POLICY (Editor's note: these have been excerpted in
the interests of brevity.)
NASA Authorization Act of 1971
Pub. Law 91-303, 84 Stat. 370 (h) adopted July 2,
1970, states "No part of the funds appropriated
pursuant to subsection (a) of this section may be used
for grants to any nonprofit institution of higher learning
unless the Administrator or his designee determines at
the time of the grant that recruiting personnel of any of
the Armed Forces of the United States are not being
barred from the premises or property of such institution
except that this subsection shall not apply it the Admin
istrator or his designee determines that the grant is a
continuation or renewal of a previous grant to such
institution which is likely to make a significant contribu

tion to the aeronautical and space activities of the
United States. The Secretary of Defense shall furnish to
the Administrator or his designee within sixty days after
the date of enactment of this Act and each January 30
and June 30 thereafter the names of any nonprofit
institutions of higher learning which the Secretary of
Defense determines on the date of each such report arc
barring such recruiting personnel from premises or
property of any such institution.
Armed Forces Appropriation Authorization Act
Pub. Law 91-441, 84 Stat. 914 adopted October 7,
1970, states "Sec. 510. No part of the funds appropri
ated pursuant to this Act may be used at any institution
of higher learning if the Secretary of Defense or his
designee determines that at the time of the expenditure
of funds to such institution recruiting personnel of any
of the Armed Forces of the United States are being
barred by the policy of such institution from the
premises of the institution except that this section shall
not apply if the Secretary of Defense or his designee
determines that the expenditure is a continuation or a
renewal of a previous grant to such institution which is
likely to make a significant contribution to the defense
effort. The Secretaries of the military departments shall
furnish to the Secretary of Defense or his designee
within 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act
and each January 31st and June 30th thereafter the
names of any institutions of higher learning which the
Secretaries determine on such dates are barring such
recruiting personnel from the campus of the institution.
The College Clearing House, Inc., College and Univer
sity Reporter, Volume 2, Section 337, 15,628, entitled
"Fiscal 1972 Military Procurement Authorization
Measure Signed" states that "a provision of the new law
would deny funds to any college or university which
bars military recruiters from their campus." As of Dec.
1, the Government Section of the University Libraries
had not yet received the Public Law 92-156 including
this provision.
*
During the fiscal year ending Aug. 31, 1971, the
University received $11,963,690 from the Department
of Defense and $3,888,661 from NASA in total direct
and reimbursed indirect expenditures.
*
Following is a memo to Neil Bernstein of COSS from
James V. Siena, legal adviser to the President:
This is in response to your request for my views on
the impact on NASA and DOD funding for the Univer
sity of a proposal which would bar military recruiters
from the use of the Placement Center facilities. The
answer to that 1 think depends on the details of such a
policy.
As 1 recited in an earlier memorandum on this sub
ject, if we were to bar recruiters from the use of any
facilities on campus we would I think be violating the
spirit of the statute if not the letter.
On the other hand, I think one can reasonably argue
that the prohibition of military recruiting in a particular
space on campus, so long as that recruiting is permitted
to go on elsewhere on campus with the University
providing the same services as are provided to recruiters
at the Placement Center, would not violate the
statute. . . .
If the denial of the use of the Placement Center were
coupled with limits on University cooperation in the
provision and use of other space, I am sure that there is a
point where those agencies would conclude that we have
made recruiting on campus so difficult that we have
effectively "barred" those recruiters and therefore a
cutoff of funds would be called for.
CORPORATE GIVING AND RECRUITING
1. In 1970-71, 270 companies requested scheduling for
on-campus interviews through the Placement Service.
In 1971-72, 199 companies have requested
on-campus interviews.
2. About half of these companies arc donors to
Stanford.
1969-70 - 51% (of which 86% gave $1,000 or more)
1970-71 - 55% (of which 93% gave $ 1.000 or more)
Amount given by companies recruiting, 1970-71:
$ 1.641,000
3. Total amount given by all corporations to Stantord:
1969-70 — $3.2 million
1970-71 — $2.8 million
A total of 550 corporations give to Stanford,
providing about 10 per cent of the University's total
gift income.
4. Purpose of Gifts:
1970-71 1969-70
Unrestricted 55.9% 49.5%
Student Aid 18.6% 24.5%
Instruction 5.3% 5.5%
Research 16.4% 15.5%
Other (Buildings, 3.8% 4.0%
Library, Assistance,
Travel, etc.)
5. Purpose of recruiting visits scheduled through
Placement Service: 1970-71 (estimate)
Liberal Arts 6.3%
MBA 46.5% )
Sciences I Technical 34.0% -93.7%
1 MBA/Teclmical 13.2% )
APPENDIX C: Proposed Wording
for Student Referendum
In these propositions, the phrase "formal placement
facilities" includes the Career Planning and Placement
Center, the Law School Placement Center, the
Placement Service at the Graduate School of Business,
and any similar facilities which may be established in the
future. It does not include White Plaza or the offices of
individual professors.
1. Should military services be denied the use of the
formal placement facilities for recruiting purposes?
yes no
2. Should at least some companies which engage in
research or production for the military services be
denied the use of the formal placement facilities for
recruiting purposes? yes no
3. If some companies are to be denied the use of the
formal placement facilities, which of the following
categories of companies should be barred? (Some
categories will overlap.)
a. All companies, yes no
b. All companies which annually sell more than
$100,000,000 worth of goods and services to the
military, yes no
c. Any division of a company which produces
components used primarily in the production of
anti-personnel weapons, fragmenting demolition
bombs, incendiary weapons, chemical and
biological weapons, and other such armaments.
Other divisions of such a company should not be
barred, yes no
d. Any division of a company which produces
weapons of the kind used in the Indochina war
and components used primarily in such weapons,
including weapons delivery systems, electronic
surveillance equipment, and target acquisition
equipment. Other divisions of such a company
should not be barred, yes no
Under all options except "3a," potential recruiters
would be required to submit statements that they
qualify under the applicable standard before being
permitted to recruit here. Any person could submit
evidence that a potential recruiter does not qualify, with
disputes to be resolved by the Committee on Services to
Students after an investigation.
APPENDIX I): President Lyman's Letter of Feb. 15,
1972, to Timothy Clark, COSS Chairman:
Thank you for informing me of the conclusions reached
by the Committee on Services to Students on the subject
of recruitment policy on the Stanford campus.
Quite clearly, you would not cxpect me to respond in
detail to the Committee's recommendations until I have
had an opportunity to reflect on the evidence and
arguments that produced those recommendations as well
as the reasons put forward by the Committee minority. I
understand that the Committee is now workinc on a

report and I shall look forward to receiving it when it is
completed.
Notwithstanding what I have just said, it occurs to me
that COSS might find it useful in writing its report to
know some particular points of concern its
recommendations raise in my mind. I do not raise these
with the expectation that they will change any votes,
but in the hope that the Committee report will address
them carefully.
1. In voting 8-1 to bar military recruiters from
using the formal placement facilities of the
University the Committee had before it the
knowledge that such a step would result, under
existing law, in the loss of research support from
NASA and the Department of Defense. In the
current year that amounts to a total of $16.4
million, and would affect directly 98 faculty
members, 306 students who are supported by
these funds, 144 senior research associates and 416
other staff whose employment is directly
dependent on the continuation or replacement of
these research funds. An additional 200-300
people would doubtless be affected by the loss of
indirect cost recovery. How did the Committee
balance that loss to the program of the University
and the more than 1,000 people involved with the
advantages it saw in making the recommendation?
2. I note from a press report your comment that
the existing legislation might be dropped through
lobbying or challenged in court. What is the basis
for that assessment? With whom did the
Committee consult and what advice did it receive
about the likelihood of a successful legislative or
judicial challenge to the law, and the time that
would be required even if such a challenge were
ultimately successful?
3. Is it the Committee's intention that only the
uniformed services would be barred, or does the
recommendation extend to civilian recruitment by
defense agencies?
4. Does the Committee intend only that
interviewing in the "formal placement facilities"
be prohibited or would the Placement Service also
be barred from other of its usual activities, such as
forwarding dossiers at the request of students to
the military services?
5. Does the Committee contemplate thai a simple
majority of those voting in a referendum be
binding, or is there a case to be made for another
arrangement, such as a majority of the student
body or a two-thirds vote of those voting?
6. Who would frame the question or questions to
be voted on?
7. If a vote of the student body is to be binding
how does the Committee propose to account for
the important interests of faculty, many of whose
research and graduate instructional programs could
be damaged or eliminated by a vote of the
students?
8. Mow has the Committee answered the
argument that the effect of putting this decision
solely in the hands of the student body would be
to vest decision-making authority in the group
least affected by the adverse consequences of its
decision and least accountable for them?
9. The Committee is, of course, aware of my view
that selective recruitment is undesirable and
impractical, and that the true choice lies between
open recruitment and no recruitment at all. How
would the Committee propose to put these
alternatives before the student body? More
fundamentally, if the Committee were faced with
those two choices only, what would its
recommendation be?
10. If the issue is to be put to a vote of students
in whatever form and with whatever intended
effect, is there a case to be made for recognizing
different perspectives and needs by counting the
vote by Schools?
These questions are perhaps only the most obvious. If
others should develop after further reflection on the
recommendations, I will bring them to your attention.

Space paid for by University Relations

APPENDIX E. COSS Feb. 22 response to President
Lyman's Feb. 15 Letter:
Your letter of February 15, 1972 arrived after most
of the Committee's report had been drafted, and the
Committee felt it best to address your questions in a
separate letter to be added to the report.
Most of your questions had been discussed at earlier
meetings of the Committee in one form or another, and
your letter was discussed at our meeting on Feb. 16. The
responses which follow reflect the thinking of the
majorities which favor the recommendations to bar
military recruiters and to decide the issue by a student
referendum.
1. Economic Consequences
The Committee had discussed the economic
conseuqences of any exclusionary policy. Copies of the
restrictions on NASA grants and Department of Defense
research funds are included in Appendix B with other
documents relating to economic consequences of an
exclusionary policy. According to Earl Cilley, Director
of Research Administration, Stanford presently has
about $3 million in NASA grants. For 1971, Stanford
had nearly $12 million in Department of Defense
contracts and grants. Substantial amounts of income to
the University may be affected by barring military
recruiters.
Members of the Committee subscribe to the following
positions on economic consequences to the University:
1. The economic consequences should be
considered, but the decision should be made on
principle.
2. The University should not allow itself to be
coerced into decisions regarding internal policy by
an agency outside the University, even if
substantial amounts of money are involved.
3. It is not clear that the restrictions would apply to
a policy of barring military recruiters from the
formal placement facilities of Stanford University.
The restrictions apply only when miliary recruiters
are barred from"the premises or property" and
the recommended policy only bars recruiters from
the formal placement facilities. Military recruiters
may still choose to come onto the campus.
Further, the restrictions are somewhat
discretionary in that renewals or continuations of
grants or contracts are allowed if the research "is
likely to make a significant contribution" to the
space program or defense effort respectively.
4. The existing restrictions should be challenged both
by court actions on the part of the University and
by lobbying efforts to prevent similar restrictions
from being included on future annual
appropriations. Note that the restrictions must be
renewed annually as the appropriations are
renewed.
The Committee notes that a policy of ending all
recruiting at the Placement Center would invite the same
economic consequences as a policy which would bar
only military recruiters, as military recruiters would be
included in a general ban.
2. Likelihood of successfully challenging restrictions.
The Committee solicited no advice as to the
likelihood of a successful legislative or judicial challenge
to the restrictions. The Committee believes the
restrictions should be challenged regardless of the
likelihood of success.
3. Definition of "military recruiters."
The Committee includes civilian recruitment by
detense agencies in its recommendation that military
recruitment be barred.
4. Forwarding of dossiers.
The Committee recommends that the Placement
Center continued to -forward dossiers to the military
services at the request of individual students, even if
military recruiters arc barred from the Placement Center.
If the Placement Center did not send a student's dossier
to the military services at his request, the student would
be substantially inconvenienced in getting his papers to
them. The forwarding of dossiers is much more a service
to studejits than to recruiters

5. Simple majority, majority of student body, or
two-thirds.
Although one member of the minority would feel
more comfortable with a referendum if it required a
two-thirds vote, the majority of the Committee believes
a simple majority of those students voting in the
referendum should determine recruitment policy. The
kind of referendum we have suggested attempts to insure
that every interested student will have the opportunity
to vote. Those students who have no opinion should not
be counted as favoring the present policy, which is the
effect of requiring a majority of the student body.
Requiring a two-thirds vote of those voting would
almost certainly assure the defeat of any proposition, as
most municipalities which require a two-thirs vote on
bond issues have discovered. Furthermore, it is not clear
that the present policy could muster eith a two-thirds
vote or a majority of the student body, and it is unfair
to require more demonstrated support for a change in
policy than for a continuation of the present policy.
6. Framing the propositions.
Appendix C contains the wording for the referendum
which the Committee suggests. The Student Senate
should approve whatever wording is used on the
referendum.
7. Interests of faculty.
8. Students least affected, least accountable
constituency.
Faculty members would in no way be muzzled or
prevented from articulating their concerns to students,
who presumably can be swayed by rational argument. In
addition, graduate students would be voting in the
referendum, and many of them would be as directly
affected as their teachers by cutbacks in research and
instructional programs.
The alternative to putting the decision on recruitment
in the hands of a relatively disinterested student body is
to put it in the hands of a group whose self-interest is
involved or of one particularly amenable to pressure
from self-interested groups. A decision made by a
self-interested group is certain to reflect that
self-interest, if not be dictated by it.
9. True choice open recruiting or no recruiting-
While the Committee member who voted against any
restrictions on recruiting agrees that the choice is
between open recruiting or no recruiting, the remainder
of the Committee believes that there are more than the
two possibilities which you pose. The Committee's
report argues for a selective recruitment policy, which it
believes to be a viable alternative. We hope you will
consider these arguments. If, after considering the
Committee's report, you wish us to discuss only these
two alternatives, the Committee is ready to proceed with
such a discussion. For us to discuss that choice now
would unnecessarily delay our report, as a thorough
consideration would involve such questions as how many
people benefit from the recruitment functions of the
Placement Center, whether only recruiting should be
ended or whether the entire Placement Center should be
closed, etc.
10. Counting votes by Schools.
The disadvantages of counting votes by School seem
to outweigh the advantages. We are unclear how
conflicts between Schools which voted differently would
be resolved. Conflicting resutls in different Schools
might result in different policies for the various
placement facilities on campus, a result we consider
undesirable. The administration of all the placement
facilities has been centralized under Dr. Keller, partly to
insure a consistency of policy between the different
branches. We consider this consistency to be desirable
and thus are opposed to a voting arrangement which
might result in varying policies at different facilities.
Finally, we recommend a referendum as a means to
make recruitment policy reflect student sentiment, and
we blieve all votes should be counted equally.
Your questions seem to imply a sense that the
Committee has failed to consider the implications for
the entire University of its recommendations. We
recognize that the implementation of these
recommendations might require a major change in the
institutional relationships between Stanford University
and other institutions of this society. We do not shrink
from making those institutional changes if they arc
necessary to implement these recommendations.
The Committee hopes these responses will clarify our
report.
