# Advisory Board Findings: The Old Union Rally
## 
### 
A. CHARGES
The University Administration's charge concerning
Professor Franklin's conduct during the Old Union
Courtyard rally on February 10th reads as follows:
10. On the eveing of February 10, 1971, beginning at
approximately 8:00 p.m., a rally was held in the Old
Union Courtyard to, among other things, discuss
methods of protesting developments in the war in
Indochina. Over two hundred students and other
persons attended the rally. During the course of the
rally Professor Franklin intentionally urged and
incited students and other persons present to engage
in conduct calculated to disrupt activities of the
University and of members of the University
community and which threatened injury to
individuals and property. Shortly thereafter students
and other persons were assaulted by persons present
at the rally, and later that evening other acts of
violence occurred.
B. NATURE OF THE CHARGE IN PARAGRAPH 10
The charge centers on intentional incitement that
threatened: (1) disruption of University activities, both
individual and institutional; and (2) injury to persons
and property. It implies that a rish of coercive or violent
behavior existed at the time of the rally and that
Professor Franklin further increased the risk by the
content and manner of his participation. In determining
whether the facts fit the charges, the Board must inquite
(1) What is the entire context surrounding the alleged
incitement? (2) What is being communicated to the
audience? (3) What would the speaker judge to be the
effect of his communication on the audience?
C. FINDINGS OF FACT 1. Prominent Themes in the
1. Prominent Themes in the Old Union Rally,
February 10
On Wednesday, February 10 at 8:00 p.m. about 350
people attended a rally in the Old Union Courtyard.
Speakers debated tactics and demands. Professor
Franklin spoke twice. The themes that emerged
prominently in the course of the rally may he
summarized as follows:
a. There was general agreement on opposition to the
war in Southeast Asia and a wish to protest against
American involvement.
b. There was a major difference of opinion on the
scope of demands and of tactics. A contingent of
students from Roble Hall favored a single demand, an
effort to reach out for the broadest possible support
and strict adherence to non-violent tactics. Another
and larger faction favored a broader set of demands,
even at the risk of losing community support; and
they favored a broader range of tactics, including
coercive and violent ones, depending on
circumstances. This distinction between the two
groups was not only apparent in the speeches, but
was emphasized by a KZSU broadcast interview with
representatives of the Roble contingent near the end
of the rally.

c. Five speakers emphasized Stanford's major war
complicity and severe political repression. This
viewpoint may be illustrated with the following
quotation from one of the speakers.
I work at the phone company and I realize that
everyday one out of every two calls that I place
goes from Stanford University or SRI directly to
the Pentagon, to SRI all over the country and all
over the world, and people realize that Stanford
University is integrally linked with Pacific
Telephone Company, that all the business, you
know, that the whole service which Pacific
Telephone puts out is for the benefit of the
financial interest in this area and people who are
against the war, people that I work with who are
against the war, who are very, very angry and
outraged by the expansion of the war into Laos
realize that, because they have brothers, brothers
and uncles and fathers who are over there fighting,
who have been forced to go over there, they don't
have any choice, they can't afford to go to school,
they are forced to be over there. They have
brothers and sisters who are locked up in the
prisons all over America and they realize that
Stanford University, that the kind of research
Stanford does, the kind of money Stanford has,
which controls the black and brown communities
in the mid-peninsula, is a very dangerous thing and
they:re willing to fight against that for their very
survival and I think that the people here should
respect that, should respect the fact that telephone
workers are getting organized, that we're thinking
now about what kind of support demonstration
we can have when Stanford gets itself together and
the issues become clear to the people that
Stanford University is key in the war, key in the
oppression of political prisoners and it's just got to
go. (applause)
d. Eight speakers were very hostile to the police
especially to their presence on campus. Police had
been called to the campus to terminate the
occupation of the Computation Center and had
remained in view of the likelihood of further illegal
acts. It will be recalled that arson and "trashing" had
occurred on the nights of February 6 and 7. Early in
the Old Union rally of February 10, the presence of
police on campus was announced. No witness
testified that a single uniformed policeman entered
the Old Union courtyard, despite the fact that
Professor Franklin, in his affidavit shortly after the
event, said there were many police there. In the
hearing, he corrected this error. Thus, the police were
not visible to the people at the rally, but their
presence on campus was a focus of deep resentment.
They were often referred to as "pigs" and as an
occupation army or occupying forces. In conjunction
with the previous criticism of Stanford's complicity
in the war. the struggle on campus and the struggle in
Southeast Asia were portrayed as different facets of a
single struggle. Parallels were drawn between the

police on campus and imperialist armies in Asia. The
all-one-war theme was emphasized by urging
resistance to the police as analogous to resistance to
occupying forces in Vietnam.
e. On two occasions, members of the Free Campus
Movement were pointed out in a context of hostility,
and were linked to the police on campus.
112. In response to these various instigations, there was
a desire for action — not merely verbal demands, but
concrete, tangible steps to implement them. There
was a clear preference for strong, vivid action, though
some speakers, including those from the Roble
contingent, put their main emphasis on education.
Little reference was made to "strike" in this rally.
The actions mainly preferred by the speakers may be
illustrated by (he following remarks by the chairman:
Okay, I think it's still pretty clear that we want to
keep the demands as they are. Okay, at this point I
think we should go on to specific proposals for
how we act now. We've had a few proposals; one
guy suggested that after the Comp Center thing
today that in order to escalate rather than
de-escalate we should zero in on SRI, Another
person, other people have proposed that we deal
now with the police state that's on this campus
because if we're going to move against the war,
one of the things we have to do to be able to move
against the war in atmosphere where we're not
intimidated by pigs coming through to surround
our meetings and that kind of thing and that one
of the ways to do that is to begin any kind of
action people want to take to get the pigs off this
campus. I think that people should speak to these
proposals and add more proposals that they have.
g. Five speakers explicitly expressed and several
others implicitly expressed anger, using words and
imagery of fighting. Three speakers suggested actions
to embarrass, humiliate, or confront the police,
particularly late at night, while others made more
general comments advocating resistance to
intimidation.
h. Two speakers favored off-campus protests.
2. Professor Franklin's First Speech at Old Union
(Second speech of February 10)
Professor Franklin's first Old Union speech
(Appendix III) began with an effort to persuade the
Roble contingent of the correctness of the majority
position favoring a broad set of demands, including the
freeing of all "political prisoners" and the end of
Stanford's complicity in the war — not merely
immediate withdrawal of US forces from Southeast Asia.
He spoke with concern about people who must spend
time in jail, emphasized solidarity within the
"movement", and opposed betrayal of political
prisoners. Then, in an intense delivery, he said:
And we get very upset when we find our beautiful
campus crawling with pigs who stop and harass
people and rip off and beat half of the people. Well
this is just a very, very mild taste of what life is like in
the black and brown communities of this country
where the pigs come by every night and if you're
young and you're black and brown they stop you and
ask your I.D. and rip you off for suspicion of
burglary and where there are dogs there and where
there's a helicopter overhead and that's part of the
same struggle, and where they shoot you and the pigs
who are here tonight, that's those San Jose pigs have
just mundered a black brother in San Jose, the same
San Jose pig just murdered a black brother down in
San Jose and that's normal life down there. People
murdered in the streets and that's why we call them
pigs. Although it's a little unfair to the four-footed
variety, because they don't do that kind of thing.
[Applause]
Continuing to speak in the same delivery, he next
alluded to the Black Panther party's leadership and made
the following remarks:
And the Black Panther Party teaches us that the
people of Laos and the people of South Vietnam are
not another separate nation state. That they are our
brothers and sisters because they are just other
oppressed communities of the same empire. The
Black Panther Party teaches us that today while this
meeting was going on brothers and sisters, blood
brothers and sisters of us, were killed in Laos, in
Vietnam and Cambodia, in the black and brown
communities of the United States of America. They
teach us this is all one struggle and the
interconnections are every place. Even if you thing
about what Laos is all about; what is the chief cash
export of Laos, who knows?
[crowd | Opium, heroin?
Opium, all the heroin on this coast comes from Laos.
And it's all brought in by the CIA. It is grown and
harvested by Meo tribesmen and flown out on Air
America, the CIA airline. And it is brought in to this
state as part of the oppression, particularly of black
and brown people here, but also of white youth. . . .
(brief KZSU interruption). . . . and is just as much a
part of the counter-insurgency system as the pigs are
war on this campus.
He urged that others be taught about such evils as
Stanford's complicity in the war and the necessity to
free all political prisoners. He expressed the view that
the student strike a year earlier had been a success. He
closed by restating the necessity to continue the struggle
to win others to his viewpoint.
3. Professor Franklin 's Second Speech at the Old Union
(Third speech of February 10)
This speech lasted about two minutes, but because
KZSU was conducting an interview at the time, it can
only be heard in the background on the tape recording.
The pitch of his voice is high, with only a few of his
words and intermittent responses from the crowd being
clearly discernible on the tape. The crowd responses
increase toward the end. The content of the speech can
only be reconstructed from testimony, but this poses
little difficulty. There is substantial agreement as to
what Professor Franklin said amont his witnesses, the
University Administration's witnesses, and Professor
Franklin's own affidavit and testimony. The differences,
as might be expected, are in the interpretation of his
speech.
a. Professor Franklin's interpretation of his second
Old Union speech.
In his affidavit he describes the speech as follows:
A number of speakers at the meeting rose to describe
specific instances of police harassment and brutality.
Several proposed that we go to the dormitories to
discuss die police state on campus and what to do
about it, as well as what to do about the situation in
Southeast Asia. One speaker said that many squads of
six to eight police were roaming the campus, and that
if we marched to the dorms some of these squads
would follow us, and that it would be a good
education for people in the dorms to see them. Two
speakers said that the police were attempting to keep
people from knowing what was happening, and that
they had temporarily confiscated a walkie-talkie from
a KZSU reporter and threatened to arrest him for
listening to police frequencies. Another speaker said
that if we march in one group it will be too easy for
the police and we should confuse them by dividing
into many groups. Another speaker siad "there are
pigs all over this campus and we have to show people
who the pigs are and who the people are, and we
cannot tolerate a police state here or any place else."
It was generally agreed that we would go back to the
dormitories to build support for the strike and to
raise consciousness about the police occupation of
the campus. I rose to speak again. 1 said that it was
unfortunate that the people from Roble had not felt
that they were really part of the movement and that
it was necessary to go into the dorms and discuss all
their questions further. I said that it was very
important for people to understand that this is a
united front, and that people will respond on
different levels of action and with different degrees of
consciousness to the war. I said that it was important
for people to accept these different levels, and that if
people are sincere it is correct for them to do their
own thing, to do whatever they think best, and that
that is how all of us learn. I pointed out that with the
police saturation on campus, however, it would be
suicide for people to engage in any militant action in
a large group. I said that we must learn from the
peoples of Southeast Asia that when confronted with
an occupation army, we must respond with the
methods of people's war. Then 1 explained that this
means thoroughly merging with the people. I gave
one and only one example of what I meant by this. I
said that I had been told that a few nights before,
during a similar police occupation, several people had
begun a game of touch football. They moved from
place to place on the campus, forcing the police to
follow them. Several police complained to them that
they were supposed to be in fixed positions, and that
this was preventing them from maintaining those
positions. Finally, when the football game
appraoched the area of the computation center, the
police had asked to examine the football. I said that I
wasn't sure whether this was because they thought it
was a bomb or because they just wanted to examine a
real pigskin. I ended by teliing people that people's

war meant that they should go back to the
dormitories, organize people into small groups, and
talk with them, or play football, or whatever, as late
into the night as possible.
b. Hearing witnesses' interpretation of Professor
Franklin's second Old Union Speech
(i) Administration witnesses-There is considerable
agreement among administration and defense
witnesses on the content (though not on the
interpretation) of this speech. This can be
illustrated by comparing Professor Franklin's
version of his speech after the event given above
with testimony of Robert Beyers, of the Stanford
News Service. He testified that he had attended
many rallies at Stanford over a period of years,
and had often heard Professor Franklin speak. He
described Professor Franklin's speech on this
occasion as very critical of the police. He testified
that Professor Franklin called specifically for
people's war against the occupation army-i.e., the
police. Professor Franklin suggested that people go
back to their dormitories, meet in small groups,
decide to do whatever they wanted to do as late at
night as possible so as to bring more police onto
the campus to help out their brethren in other
communities. At this point, in Beyer's view, the
nature of the meeting changed dramatically,
leading him to expect that illegal or disruptive
incidents would follow. Immediately after the
speech, the rally ended and Beyers said three FCM
students were badly beaten by some of the Old
Union crowd. Under cross-examination, he
indicated that Professor Franklin did not specify
the exact nature of the violent acts to be carried
out.
Brimelow felt there was much tension and
restlessness in the meeting, and that the crowd got
very excited as a result of the speech. After the
speech he saw the crowd stream off in all
directions and he heard "war cries" (something of
this sort is audible on the tape recording). Almas
heard the speech from the balcony of the Women's
Clubhouse, thought it was impassioned and was
startled by it. Almas had heard Professor Franklin
speak about a dozen times but had never heard
him encourage this level of action. Almas felt
Professor Franklin had not been as careful as
usual, and the witness had the expectation that
there was going to be violence.
R. Jacobs, also on the balcony, thought
Professor Franklin had made inflammatory
statements. Grav felt Professor Franklin was
playing the role of a leader giving instructions to
the group in a serious vein.
(ii) Professor Franklin's witnesses
Witnesses for Professor Franklin heard phrases
similar to those reported by Administration
witnesses but to some extent interpreted them
differently. This is well illustrated by an affidavit
of Bennion, who also testified at the hearing.
. . .It became clear that there was some opposition
forming, basically between going back into the
dorms for further discussion and staying in the
area the police were patrolling in order to show
them that the occupation of the campus would
not be tolerated. At this point Professor Franklin
spoke and tried to explain that these two
tendencies were not really opposed, but could be
carried out at the same time and could mutually
serve each other. He discussed at length the tenets
of "people's war" which is based on the concept
of a united front. In essence this means that
everyone can contribute what they can to a
movement, with one person's greater contribution
or risk should not be seen as invalidating another's.
This leads to many levels of action which mutually
reinforce other levels, rather than detracting from
each other. He pointed out that in advanced stages
of "people's war" such as in Vietnam, many
different levels of action are still employed, not
merely the military level of the National
Liberation Front. He also stated that in the
present case it would be suicidal to engage in any
large-scale militant action. He gave one example of
what "people's war" would mean that evening.
Some people could go back to the dorms and
persuade others to join the movement, while
others could play touch football in the area being
patrolled by the police to show that they were not
intimidated by the occupation of the campus. At
no time did say or even remotely imply or suggest
that he advocated a militant action that evening,
nor did his in-depth analysis of "people's war"
make such an interpretation possible for any
person who had ears to hear and a mind to think.
These witnesses were much preoccupied with the
presence of police. They expressed fear and anger,
and were inclined to expect trouble with the
police that night. They were determined not to be
intimidated by the police, and to harass them
where possible, by and large, Professor Franklin
was seen as speaking to these issues in a way that
fostered resistance but not violence. His task was
seen as uniting the people against the common
foe: putting together the university's complicity in
the war, the linkage of the struggle here iwth the
struggle in Asia, the necessity to respond
vigorously on many levels of action. For example
Pat Faulkner testified that he understood
Professor Franklin to mean that all levels of
actions are all right, even writing letters, and that
it is necessary to wage war on many levels to win.
He felt that Professor Franklin gave a speech in
which he approved a wide range of actions,
including trashing, but did not emphasize violent
responses.
Professor Franklin's witnesses gave the term
"people's war" a variety of emphases, but the
words were generally udnerstood to have a range
of connotations. These included (1) harassment of
police; (2) taking control of our own lives; (3)
brining the war home; (4) strike; (5) learning from
the peoples of Southeast Asia; (6) attention to our
war here, not only the one in Indochina; (7) doing
whatever conscience dictates, which might include
trashing; (8) determinationnot to be intimidated
by police, not to shrink from threats.
4. Post-Rally Events
In the course of the hearing, on October 28, the
Advisory Board made the following statement on
post-rally events:
With respect to the Old Union courtyard speech, the
Board is now in a position to give its view of the value
of testimony about events following the rally. We
admitted testimony on these matters because the

University Administration, in order to demonstrate
that there was a risk that prohibited conduct would
follow the speech, introduced evidence for the
limited purpose of showing that such conduct did in
fact occur. We now feel that this
evidence concerning the light on White Plaza, the
alleged false alarms, the shootings, and other
incidents-need not be rebutted. We have reached this
decision because, in our view, the existence of risk is
adequately shown by pre-and co-existing conditions,
and does not require demonstration by referring to
subsequent events.
It is a matter ol record that untoward events of the
sort mentioned above did in fact occur that night,
beginning immediately after the rally. We limited
testimony on these matters for two reasons: (1) the
charges did not contain any references to Professor
Franklin's post-rally conduct; (2) we had good reason to
believe that significant risk existed without reference to
post-rally events.
D. DEFENSES AND THEIR ANALYSES
1. Principal Points made in Defense Against Charges in
Paragraph 10.
Professor Franklin, in testimony and argument, made
several points in defending against these charges:
a. The speeches were brief, especially the second one
at the very end of the evening's program. Such brief
speeches could hardly have had the impact ascribed
to them by the University Administration.
b. It was difficult to hear the speeches. Except for
those near the speakers, consisting to a considerable
extent of Professor Franklin's close associates,
audibility was a problem. The testimony of several
witnesses who were not close to the speaker was
challenged by Professor Franklin.
c. What could be heard was innocuous. It was meant
to inform, educate, and persuade to a political
viewpoint. It was not intended to incite, inflame, or
cause violence.
d. Most of the people at the rally had already decided
what they were going to do by the time Professor
Franklin gave his second and closing spcech. In this
speech, he essentially gave them a political rationale
for what they had already decided to do.
e. Even if his speeches were taken as inflamatory by
some members of his audience, they were well
justified by Stanford's condition as a fascist and
imperialist institution, and by the presence on the
campus of an occupation army consisting of police
who frequently kill black and brown people, and
indeed had just killed a black brother.
112. In any event. Professor Franklin should be able to
give such speeches with impunity, since all speech
should be considered to be constitutionally
protected, even where appreciable risks are posed.
g. If speech is to be restricted at all, it must be done
within a very narrow band. Such a band could not
include general prescritpions for hostile actiona or
even for violence. Specific prescriptions for violent
acts would be required, and tchse must be confirmed
by specific evidence that individuals had been moved
to carry out those same specific acts by the speech in
question.
2. Analysis of the Defenses
The length of the speeches is much less important
than other characteristics: content, delivery, context,
audience. In any event, the first speech was not
particularly brief, and the second was in a crucial
position: at the very end of the rally.
In regard to audibility, we conclude that those who
wanted to hear the speeches could do so. This is
admitted by some defense witnesses, and to a certain
extent by Professor Franklin himself who testified that
at the time he felt he could reach those who really
wanted to hear him. The main variable seems to have
been attention; some members of the audience paid
close attention to his speeches, others little. Among
those who did pay attention, there is considerable
agreement as to content, though witnesses differe as to
interpretation.
There is no meaningful way to consider Professor
Franklin's behavior in the Old Union rally without a
firm grasp of the context in which the rally occurred.
The mood that evening was tense and angry. After the
passage of so many months it is difficult to recapture the
sense of anxious expectation that characterized the
campus that evening. The Old Union rally followed
several days of continually escalating events: threats of
coercion, actual coercion, arson, police action, and
hostile confrontations on campus. We have already
summarized recurrent themes of the immediately
preceding rallies at Dinkelspiel on February 9th and
White Plaza on February 10th. As the Board concluded
in its statement of October 28th, cited above, substantial
risk existed on the Stanford campus before and during
the Old Union rally.
There are additional aspects of the context for the
Old Union rally that deserve consideration. Professor
Franklin rose to speak as a well-known and respected
leader of the "movement". Defense witnesses testified
that he was viewed with admiration and his ideas were
taken seriously. Professor Franklin testified that the
time of these events in February was a crucial one for
the "movement", a time when the "movement" might
transcend itself.
Testimony in the hearing, mainly from defense
witnesses, brought out the fact that this occasion stirred
memories of other similar occasions which also provide
meaningful context for the Old Union rally. The events
approximately a year earlier at the time of the military
action in Cambodia came up repeatedly. Indeed, one of
Professor Franklin's main contentions is that he was
attempting to foster a "Cambodia-type strike". A
number of defense witnesses, including especially
Braumstein and Professor Franklin, discussed the events
of the Cambodian period and compared them with the
events during the Laotian invasion. It became clear that
the protest events of the Cambodian period, viewed with
approbation, included a spectrum of activities, some of
which were nonviolent, some of which were patently
coercive, and some of which were overtly violent. The
coercive and violent activities included: forcible blocking
of entries into buildings for sustained periods, large-scale
breaking of windows, bombings, and lire bombings.
The Old Union rally also brought back recollections
of other night rallies held in similar circumstances,
especially when police were on campus, not only during
the Cambodian protest but at other times in the past few

years as well. There lias been a clear tendency for such
occasions to be followed by violent behavior. This fact
was knwon to Professor Franklin, since several of the
defense witnesses commented on his participation in
these protests.
Two of the major themes permeating the three rallies
of February 9th and February 10, advanced by Professor
Franklin and many of his close associates, are especially
pertinent to his closing speech at the Old Union rally:
(1) all-one-war; (2) multiple-levels-of-action.
(1) All-one-war is the theme linking the struggle at
Stanford with the struggle in Southeast Asia. It is the
heart of the problem, emphasized by Professor Franklin
in his speeches, affidavit, testimony and argument.
The speeches attack Stanford's war complicity, draw
parallels between racial oppression in America and Asia,
and emphasize the necessity to learn from the peoples of
Southeast Asia how to resist oppression at home. By the
end of the Old Union rally, the cumulative weight of
these linkages suggests that one way to fight the war
now is to fight the police and administration here.
In his testimony Professor Franklin says:
. . .what I say there basically is that we can't separate
the war in Southeast Asia from the war at home. Now
on all these points, all four of these speeches that
were given in this 24-hour period -that is from the
night belore in Dink through this—all four of those
speeches are essentially saying-are saying the same
thing. They're expressing a set of ideas which 1
consider the most important ideas. . . . And then this
seems to me the most essential thing, both in this
speech and in the second speech, to try to show
people just as clearly as possible that in fact that
occupation army of police that was on the campus
was part of the same war that was being waged in
Southeast Asia and that was being waged in the Black
ghettos and in the barrios of the United States.
This point is further clarified in Braunstein's defense
testimony, under cross-examination:
And the people fighting the United States in South
east Asia are fighting the same battles that people
fighting the police.. .who were on campus in the Old
Union Courtyard one and two of the year before and
are fighting the same battle as the people trying to get
rotten research off this campus and are fighting all
these battles, and they're all the same battles.
Then if it's all one battle, the word 'opposing forces'
relates to all the people on the other side in this big
global battle.
I've later learned that that is what's known as
'People's War'; is part of what is known as 'People's
War'.
Q. I take it in the context in which you were speaking
you at least included the police in that reference?
A. Oh, certainly. Especially that night, yes. I also
included the University administrators.
(2) The war is to be waged with the
multiple-levels-of-action formula. Each person is to do
his own thing, whatever he can, whatever he thinks best,
using his imagination to find ways of resisting the
occupying forces. This theme has a familiar ring from its
recurrence during the preceding few days. We have
earlier quoted Braunstein's remarks on this subject at the
Dinkelspiel rally on February 9th. It is clear from a
variety of references in several rallies that this
formulation is meant to advocate a spectrum of activities
which might include contacting Congressmen,
persuading students in dormitories, being active on
campus at night, refusing to be intimidated by the
police, blocking doorways, occupying buildings,
breaking windows, putting the computer out of service
for a long time, destroying the computer, or doing other
things for which one might not wish to "take credit."
In his testimony Professor Franklin said he felt
impelled at the end of the rally to speak about:
. . .that action that was going to be taken, which
was essentially gpomg back to the dorms to talk
about the war in Southeast Asia and about the
police occupation of the campus and—for people
to be there and exercise their right. That it was
important for somebody to explain to people that
that action itself was, you know, just as legitimate
a part of this war as, say, the armed self defense of
the Vietnamese people or the people of Laos. . ..
And in that speech I mentioned using the methods
of people's war. And at that point I was speaking
very directly to the people there, I think, who
considered themselves revolutionaries. Because I
knew that they would have a basic understanding
of what that meant, and that that phrase summed
up a whole lot of experience.
Braunstein testified for Professor Franklin, 'There are
all sorts of actions on various levels, including people
breaking windows with rocks and people burning down
buildings, as yet unidentified people burning down
buildings, and so on, that sometimes have the same goals
in mind and sometimes don't."
Significant in this context was the term "people's
war." It was interpreted by various witnesses in different
ways. It seems to include a wide range of suggested
actions, some of which are nonviolent, and some of
which are violent. It can clearly include guerilla warfare.
Some witnesses interpreted this as its primary meaning,
others gave this meaning less prominence. Maoist
writings use the term "People's war" for all action, in
particular guerilla warfare, in which the warriors merge
with the masses. Professor Franklin acknowledge in his
testimony that guerilla warfare, including assassination
and bombings, is one important component of people's
war, but denied it was the one he had in mind when he
used the term in his spcech. Defense testimony indicated
that the concept of people's war extends beyond
military action, but did not deny that it prominently
includes military action. Given the repeated explicit
linkages of the struggle against the police occupation
army here and the war in Southeast Asia, in the context
of recent night violence on campus and an afternoon of
police confrontation, it is difficult to believe that most
listeners would be insensitive to the violent connotations
of this term. Why repeatedly use warlike terms and
images—such as Professor Franklin's "war on this
campus" if peaceful actions are intended?
Similar considerations apply to Professor Franklin's
advocacy of action to be taken against the occupation
army in small groups. It is clear that small groups can
conduct dormitory discussions and other peacefully
persuasive activities, and that this did in fact occur,
though we learned very little about the focus of such
discussions e.g., whether they were intended to foster
particular nonviolent or violent tactics of protest. In any
event, such dormitory discussions may well have been
one of the meanings of his alleged recommendation for
reliance upon affinity groups. He advised against mass
militant action, meaning essentially violent
confrontation with the police, on tactical grounds. Such
action was not feasible because the police were too
strong. It is alos clear that the smaller groups could
engage in violent activities as has often happened in
similar circumstances at Stanford during the past few
years-i.e., following night rallies permeated by angry
speech. Two days earlier, February 8, after a night of
"trashing", a sheet was distributed at a "movement"
rally under the title "Do It!" It endorsed the previous
night's activity and called for more of the same,
indicating that tight affinity groups can be helpful in
doing whatever people want to do.
Whatever the activities that Professor Franklin was
urging upon individuals and small groups, it appears that
lateness of the hour was positively desirable-"as late
into the night as possible". In view of the behavior ot
some individuals and affinity groups at Stanford in
similar circumstances during the past few years, it is
reasonable to suppose that lateness might be useful as a
cover for violent activities—though it could of course be
used for peaceful activities as well.
Professor Franklin's two Old Union speeches were
given in a hostile tone. This is apparent in the content of
the first speech, and the effect is heightened when one
listens to the tape and hears his tone of voice. Even
when the speech is briefly interrupted by a KZSU
interview, the angry tone and the emotional crowd
response can be clearly detected. Although thesecond
speech is covered over by a KZSU interview, similar
indications are available from the tape and from
testimony.
In the course of the hearing, both Professor Franklin
and Braunstein indicated that ambiguity about tactics
was desirable to these rally speeches because KZSU was
broadcasting them and the police would presumably
have tape recordings. To advocate violent tactics openly
in this context would have exposed the speaker to later
sanctions. We were informed in the hearing by Professor
Franklin of his "political decision" to keep his position
at Stanford, hence caution about open calls for
"revolutionary violence".
Thus, we are faced with a difficult problem: how to
interpret speech deliberately given in ambiguous terms.
But we have seen already that considerable clarification
emerges from a close examination of the text, from the
full context provided by preceding events, and from the
way in which the speech was delivered. In essence,
Professor Franklin came into a combustible situation,
focused hostility on certain targets, intensified existing
hostility toward those targets, and urged a spectrum of
actions against them: some peaceful, some coercive,
some violent. We must now turn our attention to his
audience in order to inquire whether they were likely to
understand him and whether Professor Franklin must
have expected the risk of prohibited conduct to be
increased by his behavior.
The tone and content of Professor Franklin's
speeches must have been particularly significant for two
groups: 1) people in the movement; 2) people who are
violence-prone for whatever reason. In respect to the
first, these are people who are responsive to Professor
Franklin by virtue of past association, respect,
dedication, and sharing of common goals. They tend to
understand the nuances of his speech, as was evident at
the hearing itself. As for the second grou, it is well
known that public meetings characterized by intense
anger and hints of violence tend to attract, both at the
meeting and via media coverage, individuals who are
drawn to violence for a variety of reasons, not
necessarily political. Whatever the reason for their
susceptibility to violence, they tend to find such
occasions exciting. They may be induced by angry
rhetoric to commit acts of gravity, particularly in the
context of recent examples of violent behavior.
Professor Franklin testified that he was aware of the
long-term, bitter antagonism between Venceremos and
FCM; and he was aware of the immediate, clearly
expressed hostility toward the small FCM group at the
rally. The presence of these mutually hostile groups at
the rally certainly added to the risk. The use of violent
rhetoric in such circumstances increased the probability
of attack and counter-attack.
We think that "movement" people were capable of
understanding the messages. We refer here to familiar
connotations understood by a group sharing common
intersts and values. For example, reference to "militant
action on campus" in 1971 is understood by many
people to mean "trashing " which in turn is understood
to mean "window-breaking." These are not the only
connotations of the terms, nor are they understood by
everyone who comes on campus. A few years ago, the
terms did not have these connotations. But common
usage in concrete situations has led to a widely shared
understanding.
Those devoted to the "movement" had a rich
refresher course in such terms during the rallies of the
preceding few days which we have already summarized.
Professor Franklin is explicit in his testimony that he
was aiming his remarks specifically at them, wanting
primarily to be un derstood by them. Braunstein
testified that there is special communication within the
"movement" and pointed out that Professor Franklin
referred to "us" at the rally. But the defense, in effect,
asks us to believe that, on the night of February 10,
individuals in the "movement" failed to understand the
coercive and violent connotations of phrases like "war
on this campus", taking action on multiple levels to
resist oppression here, and "we must learn from the
peoples of Southeast Asia that when confronted with an
occupation army, we must respond with the methods of
people's war". The defense puts forwards its bland
interpretation of such phrases even though they were
expressed in a very angry tone and in a context of
profound hostility toward the university by a respected
leader who generally approves coercive and violent
tactics in campus disputes (though he denies he
advocated them on this occasion). We must therefore
examine possible reasons why the audience might not
have detected the menacing connotations of his remarks
on the evening of February 10.
From the testimony in the hearing, we do not believe
members of the "movement" were obtuse; nor is there
anything credible in the record to suggest that they were
in such a conciliatory mood that his angry rhetoric failed
to rcach them. Were the "movement" members of
Professor Franklin's audience so concerned with trying
to win over the Roble group that they rejected all

coercive and violent connotations of his remarks? This
possibility deserves further consideration.
During the rally, "movement" people in control of
the meeting showed little consideration for the feelings
ol the Roble students. Indeed, Professor Franklin seems
to have been concerned about this situation, since he
devoted a good deal of his first speech to persuading the
Roble group to accept the "movement's" view of the
situation. As a Roble speaker made clear in the KZSU
interview, the difference between the Roble contingent
and the "movement" was not only one of demands
(narrow vs. broad) but of tactics (non-violent vs.
violent). In this episode, Professor Franklin
demonstrated his authority as a leader of the
"movement" when he easily stopped the flow of the
meeting, re-opened the question, made a major speech,
and got a re-vote.
In his way, Professor Franklin was trying to persuade
the Roble contingent to link up with the "movement" in
a united front, at least for the moment. His way of
undertaking this persuasion was itself inflamatory. He
made assertions of such hostile content in such an angry
manner regarding the University and the police that,
whatever their effect on the Roble group, they must
surely have intensified the resentment of many persons
favorable to the "movement" and thereby raised the
probability of violent actions later. We have earlier
quoted a portion of his first Old Union speech pertinent
to this point. Finally, his do-your-own-thing formula
permitted some encouragement for Roble students to
take peaceful actions and still leave room for
encouragement of "militant" actions by the
"movement".
This brings us again to one of the central themes in
the entire case. At Old Union as at White Plaza, the
actions urged by Professor Franklin were not exclusively
coercive or violent. He advocated a wide range of protest
actions: some peaceful, some coercive, some violent. If a
person removes valuable merchandise from a store,
paying for half, but not paying for the other half, is he
culpable for the part he stole? We believe that the
presence of peaceful recommendations cannot immunize
a person from sanctions if he has urged imminent
coercion and violence as well.
Once again, as at White Plaza, Professor Franklin was
the final speaker, and once again his speech was
promptly followed by events of a disruptive, coercive or
violent nature. The probability of this occurring by
chance is very small. At the least, it reflects his
leadership position in the "movement" and the riskiness
of those situations in which he spoke. He cannot avoid
the conclusion that his pseeches, the last on each
occasion, increased the probability that illegal acts
would follow the two rallies.
In an earlier section on "Fundamental Issues and
Standards", we have indicated that the University must
have the right to put some constraints on speech in
dangerous circumstances, but only with great caution.
This applies to acts of incitement to imminent lawless
action that arc likely to produce such action. "Lawless"
in the university context includes state or local laws, the
Policy on Campus Disruptions or other university
regulations, or common-law understandings of
professorial responsibility.
In judging the applicability of this standard to the
present charge, we have been guided by these questions:
(1) What is the entire context surrounding the alleged
incitement? (2) What was conmunicated to the
audience? (3) What would the speiker judge to be the
effect of his communication on the audience?
Since we wish to sustain the university's vital
tradition of fostering free expression in its widest
diversity, we are exceedingly cautious in considering
possible constraints on speech. If such constraints are
ever to be invoked, they must be reserved for extreme
situations. We are asking whether the context here was
that of a highly combustible situation, whether the
speaker gave an inflammatory message in that context,
and whether the speaker had good reason to anticipate
lhat his message would increase the risk of imminent
lawless action. If indeed we find that the speaker issued
a call to violence, he is not protected by having issued it
in euphemistic jargon. Such a call may be quite as
effective as one issued in more stark terms. In any event,
the language used here was hardly occult.
Although Professor Franklin's witnesses were inclined
to protect him by minimizing their understanding of
coercive and violent connotations in his speeches, they
did not exclude such connotations—nor did he. The
difference between them and administration witnesses
was mainly one of emphasis. In the spectrum of
activities advocated by Professof Franklin, the defense
emphasized the legal end, whereas the administration
emphasized the illegal end.
In our detailed analysis of the context for his Old
Union speeches, we have determined that persons active
in the "movement" must have been quite familiar with
the coercive and violent connotations of Professor
Franklin's phrases, that they were responsive to such
connotations, and that Professor Franklin must have
been aware of these facts.
Finally, we must consider the line of defense that,
even if Professor Franklin were considered to have
carried out such an incitement, he would nevertheless be
justified by his perception of Stanford as a fascist
institution playing an important role in an imperialist
war.
We recognize that Professor Franklin is pressing for
reform in important areas of social concern. Can this
justify coercive behavior in campus disputes, or the
fostering of a climate of violence on campus? Once any
person is granted this privilege in the name of a good
cause, we must grant it also to others who feel they have
worthy aims. When these rights conflict, as they
inevitably must, are we to condone low-grade guerilla
warfare on campus? If we deny to others what we grant
to Professor Franklin, we have adopted a double
standard: coercion and violence in the university may be
condoned if we approve its aims, but restricted if we
disapprove its aims. Then it becomes a simple question
of whose ox is gored. But every cause is fervently
supported by some, eloquently justified by some,
pursued with passion by some. In a way, every war is a
holy war. If we accept Professor Franklin's holiness, how
arc we to reject the holiness of other true believers? In
our view, this course is not morally defensible. We must
do our best to apply one standard across all political
preferences and that standard must not condone
violence on campus.

K. CONCLUSION
Taking into accoutn content, context, delivery, and
audience, did Professor Franklin's two Old Union
speeches include urging and inciting to disruption of
university activities, or threat to persons or property?
Must he have known that this exhortation would be
widely interpreted as immediate advocacy of disruptive
or violent behavior?
1. The situation was risky. Illegal acts had occurred
earlier that day. There was intense resentment toward
the war, the police, and the university; there had been
serious frustration for the "movement" earlier in the
day; bitter political adversaries were present at the rally
and identified by the chairman; protest actions including
coercive and violent possibilities were under discussion;
the police were present on campus; there was a well
known history of violence in similar circumstances at
Stanford. In general, the higher the risk, the less it takes
to trigger coercive and violent behavior.
2. The targets of Professor Franklin's animosity were
quite explicit-the police and the university. He made an
intensive effort in the two speeches to generate further
hostility toward these targets. He provided justification
for coercive and violent behavior toward them, without
specifying precisely what the nature of such acts might
be, leaving that to the judgment and imagination of each
individual or small group.
3. The urging of immediate retaliatory action towards
the police and the university was clear. A great sense of
urgency was conveyed by both the tone and the content
of his remarks. While no detailed blueprint for action
was provided, the necessity for prompt action wis a
strong message. The overall effect was to increase the
likelihood of imminent lawless action.
Taking into account the full context surround his
speeches at the Old Union rally, hte messages he
communicated to his audience, and what he should be
able to judge about the effect of these messages under
the circumstances, we reach the conclusion that
Professor Franklin intentionally urged and incited his
audience to engage in conduct which would disrupt
activities of the University and of members of the
University Community and threaten injury to individuals
an; property.
The Advisory Board thus finds that the charge in No.
10 is sustained.
DISSENTING OPINIONS
Professors Brown and Kennedy, while agreeing with
substantial portions of the majority's account, dissent as
follows:
The majority sustains the charge of incitement
against Professor Franklin citing (1) an extensive
background of material from speeches at this and
other rallies that supply context for his last speech;
(2) Professor Franklin's first speech at this rally,
which also supplies context and reveals relevant
attitudes of his own; and (3) words in the second
speech that constitute, in the majority's view,
sufficiently explicit invitations to do violence against
persons and property.
We dissent regarding some matters of context, as
well as on the finding with respect to Professor
Franklin's own speeches.
In describing the context of the rally, we would
give more weight than does the majority to the
presence of the Roble students and to their impact
upon events in the Old Union Courtyard. The
interaction between the group of Roble moderates
(concerned about the invasion of Laos but not part of
the "movement") and the "movement" group itself
provides a central theme for the rally. Professor
Franklin's own first speech is directed predominantly
to an attenuation of those tensions and to a
reconciliation that would accommodate the new
recruits to "movement" objectives. It is, in essence, a
long argument that political prisoners must not be
forgotten, and that there is a fundamental identity
between the struggle of Asian peoples against U.S.
imperialism and the struggle of oppressed people and
anti-war students against repressive forces at home.
As the majority states, the speech contains a heavy
tone of anger against the police and other forces that,
to Professor Franklin, sumbolize this oppression. We
nevertheless believe it plausible that the speech was
intended to make a group of Stanford students
identify, perhaps for the first time, with oppressed
people; we do not see evidence that Professor
Franklin's intention was to turn them explicitly to
violent actions. In no sense can this first Old Union
speech be regarded as actionable; indeed, the
University administration does not attempt to
persuade us to find against Professor Franklin on the
basis of its content. To the extent that it contains
intensity and anger, and to the extent that these are
directed against the police and the University, the
speech might be said to have added-along with other
speeches at the rally-to the risk that prohibited
conduct might follow. But all agree that nothing in
the content of this speech approaches incitement.
Indeed, we feel that the speech presented, in however
objectionable a style, some legitimate concerns about
the plight of prisoners, the existence of police
brutality, and other significant issues.
Clearly Professor Franklin and other speakers
believed that a major mission of the "movement"
people at the rally was to undertake the "education"
of the rest of the Stanford community. Professor
Franklin's own first speech concludes with a plea that
those present go out to the people "and teach them
what we have learned in the movement," and that
any who are not persuaded should "get up here [ile.
to the microphone] and we should discuss it." At the
conclusion of his speech he testifies that he went over
to discuss the matter further with the Roble group.
The speaker who followed Professor Franklin to the
podium commented that the important thing was to
"go to the dorms, go to the people we want to talk
t0...." A later speaker extends the suggestion by
hoping that those at the rally will go to the dorms
and "rap all night." Recruitment, broadening the base
of the "movement," educating the community: all
these were significant themes in the development o'
the meeting's context. By its relatively stronger
emphasis on the more violent rhetoric, in particular
Professor Franklin's, the majority has decided against
what seems to us a plausible, even persuasive, second
view of the matter.

The content of the second speech, of course, is not
available to us except through the testimony of
witnesses. According to Beyers, Professor Franklin
called for a "people's war against the occupation
army of the police," and he "suggested that people
should go back tot their dormitories, form meetings,
meet in small groups, decide whatever they wanted to
do, to do it as late at night as possible, and to do
things which would bring more of the occupation
here."' Professor Franklin's version in his affidavit is
only slightly different. He, too, calims to have said
that "when confronted with an occupation army we
must respond with the methods of people's war." Me
adds, "I ended by telling people that people's war
meant that they should go back into their
dormitories, organize people into small groups, talk
with them, play football, or whatever, as late into the
night as possible." These differences are not very
substantial; they can easily be accounted for by
differences in recollection.
The majority analyzes these collections of phrases
in such a way that they are strongly persuaded as to
their meaning and that the meaning sustains an
incitement charge, given such other factors as risk.
The logic consists essentially in the elimination of
various attenuative constructions that are more
benign. In our view this interpretation is not
"strongly persuasive." The phrases upon which
attention has been focused are isolated from a
substantial matrix of interstitial speech, the precise
construction of which we do not know, and about
which we must be careful not to draw too confident
appraisals. Two examples will illustrate the point.
First, Professor Franklin says that in the context in
which he used it, "People's war" was clearly indicated
to mean "thoroughly merging with the masses;" he
states that he used the football game as an example of
that kind of tactic. It is significant that virtually all of
the witnesses link the words "people's war" to the
example of the football game. Professor Franklin
states in his affidavit that this was the only exmaple
he used, and the cumulative testimony seems to bear
him out. Second, the phrase "as late into the night as
possible," interpreted by the majority as a call to
militant action by small groups, could equally have
appeared in a context in which it applied primarily to
late dormitory discussions and to legal (though
perhaps risky) methods of taking up the time of the
police. Such an interpretation gain in plausibility
from Professor Franklin's testimony that although he
does not in principle disapprove of trashing, he would
not have urged it on that occasion, both because of
the heavy presence of police on campus that night
and because it would have alienated those new to the
"movement."
The point is that none of these interpretations has
a great deal of certainty about it. The ones we have
just mentioned may be a little less plausible than
those favored by the majority, but only a little less.
The "hard" data on words are so fragmentary, and
depend so much on the kind of context-construction
that is very sensitive to whatever bias the witnesses
may have had, that we find them inadequate to meet
a "strongly persuasive" criterion that Professor
Franklin is guilty as charged by the University
administration.
We are not strongly persuaded by the impressions
of the speech given by various witnesses-as opposed
to actual reconstructions of wording. Such
impressions are especially subject to the bias of
expectations. The differing treatments of Professor
Franklin's account of the football game provide one
example among many. Some witnesses regarded it as
a euphemism for more violent activity, others
regarded it merely as an opportunity for a bad pun,
while still others interpreted it as we would, as an
invitation to occupy the time of the police.
In effect, the majority report argues that Professor
Franklin was employing words well understood to his
audience but not to others. But there is no convincing
evidence that any substantial number of the audience
would have translated his speech into an invitation to
commit violent acts. Each phrase, like "people's
war," has been subject to a number of conflicting
interpretations in the testimony. Furthermore, the
reconstruction of a code depends on one's ability to
capture a reasonably large portion of the message,
and in this instance we have only scattered elements.
Although we think it is quite possible that Professor
Franklin advocated a range of actions some of which
may have been illegal, we do no find the evidence
strongly persuasive that his speech constituted the
advocacy of imminent lawless action.
The majority emphasizes the extremity of the risk
in the situation; we do not disagree with their
evaluation, but we stress more heavily the doubts we
have about the context and the meaning of the words
actually spoken.
to find against Professor Franklin on this charge
might, we believe, force a faculty member addressing
a political rally in the future to guard against possible
cryptic meanings that his speech might convey to a
segment of his audience whenever a situation of high
risk obtains. The social cost of such a prohibition
must be balanced against the benefits to be derived
from being able to prosecute somewhat ambiguous
speech in dangerous situations. We find the costs too
great.
Accordingly, we do not sustain the charge against
Professor Franklin as stated in Paragraph 10.
A. CHARGES
The University Administration's charge concerning
Professor Franklin's conduct during the Old Union
Courtyard rally on February 10th reads as follows:
10. On the eveing of February 10, 1971, beginning at
approximately 8:00 p.m., a rally was held in the Old
Union Courtyard to, among other things, discuss
methods of protesting developments in the war in
Indochina. Over two hundred students and other
persons attended the rally. During the course of the
rally Professor Franklin intentionally urged and
incited students and other persons present to engage
in conduct calculated to disrupt activities of the
University and of members of the University
community and which threatened injury to
individuals and property. Shortly thereafter students
and other persons were assaulted by persons present
at the rally, and later that evening other acts of
violence occurred.
B. NATURE OF THE CHARGE IN PARAGRAPH 10
The charge centers on intentional incitement that
threatened: (1) disruption of University activities, both
individual and institutional; and (2) injury to persons
and property. It implies that a rish of coercive or violent
behavior existed at the time of the rally and that
Professor Franklin further increased the risk by the
content and manner of his participation. In determining
whether the facts fit the charges, the Board must inquite
(1) What is the entire context surrounding the alleged
incitement? (2) What is being communicated to the
audience? (3) What would the speaker judge to be the
effect of his communication on the audience?
C. FINDINGS OF FACT 1. Prominent Themes in the
1. Prominent Themes in the Old Union Rally,
February 10
On Wednesday, February 10 at 8:00 p.m. about 350
people attended a rally in the Old Union Courtyard.
Speakers debated tactics and demands. Professor
Franklin spoke twice. The themes that emerged
prominently in the course of the rally may he
summarized as follows:
a. There was general agreement on opposition to the
war in Southeast Asia and a wish to protest against
American involvement.
b. There was a major difference of opinion on the
scope of demands and of tactics. A contingent of
students from Roble Hall favored a single demand, an
effort to reach out for the broadest possible support
and strict adherence to non-violent tactics. Another
and larger faction favored a broader set of demands,
even at the risk of losing community support; and
they favored a broader range of tactics, including
coercive and violent ones, depending on
circumstances. This distinction between the two
groups was not only apparent in the speeches, but
was emphasized by a KZSU broadcast interview with
representatives of the Roble contingent near the end
of the rally.

c. Five speakers emphasized Stanford's major war
complicity and severe political repression. This
viewpoint may be illustrated with the following
quotation from one of the speakers.
I work at the phone company and I realize that
everyday one out of every two calls that I place
goes from Stanford University or SRI directly to
the Pentagon, to SRI all over the country and all
over the world, and people realize that Stanford
University is integrally linked with Pacific
Telephone Company, that all the business, you
know, that the whole service which Pacific
Telephone puts out is for the benefit of the
financial interest in this area and people who are
against the war, people that I work with who are
against the war, who are very, very angry and
outraged by the expansion of the war into Laos
realize that, because they have brothers, brothers
and uncles and fathers who are over there fighting,
who have been forced to go over there, they don't
have any choice, they can't afford to go to school,
they are forced to be over there. They have
brothers and sisters who are locked up in the
prisons all over America and they realize that
Stanford University, that the kind of research
Stanford does, the kind of money Stanford has,
which controls the black and brown communities
in the mid-peninsula, is a very dangerous thing and
they:re willing to fight against that for their very
survival and I think that the people here should
respect that, should respect the fact that telephone
workers are getting organized, that we're thinking
now about what kind of support demonstration
we can have when Stanford gets itself together and
the issues become clear to the people that
Stanford University is key in the war, key in the
oppression of political prisoners and it's just got to
go. (applause)
d. Eight speakers were very hostile to the police
especially to their presence on campus. Police had
been called to the campus to terminate the
occupation of the Computation Center and had
remained in view of the likelihood of further illegal
acts. It will be recalled that arson and "trashing" had
occurred on the nights of February 6 and 7. Early in
the Old Union rally of February 10, the presence of
police on campus was announced. No witness
testified that a single uniformed policeman entered
the Old Union courtyard, despite the fact that
Professor Franklin, in his affidavit shortly after the
event, said there were many police there. In the
hearing, he corrected this error. Thus, the police were
not visible to the people at the rally, but their
presence on campus was a focus of deep resentment.
They were often referred to as "pigs" and as an
occupation army or occupying forces. In conjunction
with the previous criticism of Stanford's complicity
in the war. the struggle on campus and the struggle in
Southeast Asia were portrayed as different facets of a
single struggle. Parallels were drawn between the

police on campus and imperialist armies in Asia. The
all-one-war theme was emphasized by urging
resistance to the police as analogous to resistance to
occupying forces in Vietnam.
e. On two occasions, members of the Free Campus
Movement were pointed out in a context of hostility,
and were linked to the police on campus.
112. In response to these various instigations, there was
a desire for action — not merely verbal demands, but
concrete, tangible steps to implement them. There
was a clear preference for strong, vivid action, though
some speakers, including those from the Roble
contingent, put their main emphasis on education.
Little reference was made to "strike" in this rally.
The actions mainly preferred by the speakers may be
illustrated by (he following remarks by the chairman:
Okay, I think it's still pretty clear that we want to
keep the demands as they are. Okay, at this point I
think we should go on to specific proposals for
how we act now. We've had a few proposals; one
guy suggested that after the Comp Center thing
today that in order to escalate rather than
de-escalate we should zero in on SRI, Another
person, other people have proposed that we deal
now with the police state that's on this campus
because if we're going to move against the war,
one of the things we have to do to be able to move
against the war in atmosphere where we're not
intimidated by pigs coming through to surround
our meetings and that kind of thing and that one
of the ways to do that is to begin any kind of
action people want to take to get the pigs off this
campus. I think that people should speak to these
proposals and add more proposals that they have.
g. Five speakers explicitly expressed and several
others implicitly expressed anger, using words and
imagery of fighting. Three speakers suggested actions
to embarrass, humiliate, or confront the police,
particularly late at night, while others made more
general comments advocating resistance to
intimidation.
h. Two speakers favored off-campus protests.
2. Professor Franklin's First Speech at Old Union
(Second speech of February 10)
Professor Franklin's first Old Union speech
(Appendix III) began with an effort to persuade the
Roble contingent of the correctness of the majority
position favoring a broad set of demands, including the
freeing of all "political prisoners" and the end of
Stanford's complicity in the war — not merely
immediate withdrawal of US forces from Southeast Asia.
He spoke with concern about people who must spend
time in jail, emphasized solidarity within the
"movement", and opposed betrayal of political
prisoners. Then, in an intense delivery, he said:
And we get very upset when we find our beautiful
campus crawling with pigs who stop and harass
people and rip off and beat half of the people. Well
this is just a very, very mild taste of what life is like in
the black and brown communities of this country
where the pigs come by every night and if you're
young and you're black and brown they stop you and
ask your I.D. and rip you off for suspicion of
burglary and where there are dogs there and where
there's a helicopter overhead and that's part of the
same struggle, and where they shoot you and the pigs
who are here tonight, that's those San Jose pigs have
just mundered a black brother in San Jose, the same
San Jose pig just murdered a black brother down in
San Jose and that's normal life down there. People
murdered in the streets and that's why we call them
pigs. Although it's a little unfair to the four-footed
variety, because they don't do that kind of thing.
[Applause]
Continuing to speak in the same delivery, he next
alluded to the Black Panther party's leadership and made
the following remarks:
And the Black Panther Party teaches us that the
people of Laos and the people of South Vietnam are
not another separate nation state. That they are our
brothers and sisters because they are just other
oppressed communities of the same empire. The
Black Panther Party teaches us that today while this
meeting was going on brothers and sisters, blood
brothers and sisters of us, were killed in Laos, in
Vietnam and Cambodia, in the black and brown
communities of the United States of America. They
teach us this is all one struggle and the
interconnections are every place. Even if you thing
about what Laos is all about; what is the chief cash
export of Laos, who knows?
[crowd | Opium, heroin?
Opium, all the heroin on this coast comes from Laos.
And it's all brought in by the CIA. It is grown and
harvested by Meo tribesmen and flown out on Air
America, the CIA airline. And it is brought in to this
state as part of the oppression, particularly of black
and brown people here, but also of white youth. . . .
(brief KZSU interruption). . . . and is just as much a
part of the counter-insurgency system as the pigs are
war on this campus.
He urged that others be taught about such evils as
Stanford's complicity in the war and the necessity to
free all political prisoners. He expressed the view that
the student strike a year earlier had been a success. He
closed by restating the necessity to continue the struggle
to win others to his viewpoint.
3. Professor Franklin 's Second Speech at the Old Union
(Third speech of February 10)
This speech lasted about two minutes, but because
KZSU was conducting an interview at the time, it can
only be heard in the background on the tape recording.
The pitch of his voice is high, with only a few of his
words and intermittent responses from the crowd being
clearly discernible on the tape. The crowd responses
increase toward the end. The content of the speech can
only be reconstructed from testimony, but this poses
little difficulty. There is substantial agreement as to
what Professor Franklin said amont his witnesses, the
University Administration's witnesses, and Professor
Franklin's own affidavit and testimony. The differences,
as might be expected, are in the interpretation of his
speech.
a. Professor Franklin's interpretation of his second
Old Union speech.
In his affidavit he describes the speech as follows:
A number of speakers at the meeting rose to describe
specific instances of police harassment and brutality.
Several proposed that we go to the dormitories to
discuss die police state on campus and what to do
about it, as well as what to do about the situation in
Southeast Asia. One speaker said that many squads of
six to eight police were roaming the campus, and that
if we marched to the dorms some of these squads
would follow us, and that it would be a good
education for people in the dorms to see them. Two
speakers said that the police were attempting to keep
people from knowing what was happening, and that
they had temporarily confiscated a walkie-talkie from
a KZSU reporter and threatened to arrest him for
listening to police frequencies. Another speaker said
that if we march in one group it will be too easy for
the police and we should confuse them by dividing
into many groups. Another speaker siad "there are
pigs all over this campus and we have to show people
who the pigs are and who the people are, and we
cannot tolerate a police state here or any place else."
It was generally agreed that we would go back to the
dormitories to build support for the strike and to
raise consciousness about the police occupation of
the campus. I rose to speak again. 1 said that it was
unfortunate that the people from Roble had not felt
that they were really part of the movement and that
it was necessary to go into the dorms and discuss all
their questions further. I said that it was very
important for people to understand that this is a
united front, and that people will respond on
different levels of action and with different degrees of
consciousness to the war. I said that it was important
for people to accept these different levels, and that if
people are sincere it is correct for them to do their
own thing, to do whatever they think best, and that
that is how all of us learn. I pointed out that with the
police saturation on campus, however, it would be
suicide for people to engage in any militant action in
a large group. I said that we must learn from the
peoples of Southeast Asia that when confronted with
an occupation army, we must respond with the
methods of people's war. Then 1 explained that this
means thoroughly merging with the people. I gave
one and only one example of what I meant by this. I
said that I had been told that a few nights before,
during a similar police occupation, several people had
begun a game of touch football. They moved from
place to place on the campus, forcing the police to
follow them. Several police complained to them that
they were supposed to be in fixed positions, and that
this was preventing them from maintaining those
positions. Finally, when the football game
appraoched the area of the computation center, the
police had asked to examine the football. I said that I
wasn't sure whether this was because they thought it
was a bomb or because they just wanted to examine a
real pigskin. I ended by teliing people that people's

war meant that they should go back to the
dormitories, organize people into small groups, and
talk with them, or play football, or whatever, as late
into the night as possible.
b. Hearing witnesses' interpretation of Professor
Franklin's second Old Union Speech
(i) Administration witnesses-There is considerable
agreement among administration and defense
witnesses on the content (though not on the
interpretation) of this speech. This can be
illustrated by comparing Professor Franklin's
version of his speech after the event given above
with testimony of Robert Beyers, of the Stanford
News Service. He testified that he had attended
many rallies at Stanford over a period of years,
and had often heard Professor Franklin speak. He
described Professor Franklin's speech on this
occasion as very critical of the police. He testified
that Professor Franklin called specifically for
people's war against the occupation army-i.e., the
police. Professor Franklin suggested that people go
back to their dormitories, meet in small groups,
decide to do whatever they wanted to do as late at
night as possible so as to bring more police onto
the campus to help out their brethren in other
communities. At this point, in Beyer's view, the
nature of the meeting changed dramatically,
leading him to expect that illegal or disruptive
incidents would follow. Immediately after the
speech, the rally ended and Beyers said three FCM
students were badly beaten by some of the Old
Union crowd. Under cross-examination, he
indicated that Professor Franklin did not specify
the exact nature of the violent acts to be carried
out.
Brimelow felt there was much tension and
restlessness in the meeting, and that the crowd got
very excited as a result of the speech. After the
speech he saw the crowd stream off in all
directions and he heard "war cries" (something of
this sort is audible on the tape recording). Almas
heard the speech from the balcony of the Women's
Clubhouse, thought it was impassioned and was
startled by it. Almas had heard Professor Franklin
speak about a dozen times but had never heard
him encourage this level of action. Almas felt
Professor Franklin had not been as careful as
usual, and the witness had the expectation that
there was going to be violence.
R. Jacobs, also on the balcony, thought
Professor Franklin had made inflammatory
statements. Grav felt Professor Franklin was
playing the role of a leader giving instructions to
the group in a serious vein.
(ii) Professor Franklin's witnesses
Witnesses for Professor Franklin heard phrases
similar to those reported by Administration
witnesses but to some extent interpreted them
differently. This is well illustrated by an affidavit
of Bennion, who also testified at the hearing.
. . .It became clear that there was some opposition
forming, basically between going back into the
dorms for further discussion and staying in the
area the police were patrolling in order to show
them that the occupation of the campus would
not be tolerated. At this point Professor Franklin
spoke and tried to explain that these two
tendencies were not really opposed, but could be
carried out at the same time and could mutually
serve each other. He discussed at length the tenets
of "people's war" which is based on the concept
of a united front. In essence this means that
everyone can contribute what they can to a
movement, with one person's greater contribution
or risk should not be seen as invalidating another's.
This leads to many levels of action which mutually
reinforce other levels, rather than detracting from
each other. He pointed out that in advanced stages
of "people's war" such as in Vietnam, many
different levels of action are still employed, not
merely the military level of the National
Liberation Front. He also stated that in the
present case it would be suicidal to engage in any
large-scale militant action. He gave one example of
what "people's war" would mean that evening.
Some people could go back to the dorms and
persuade others to join the movement, while
others could play touch football in the area being
patrolled by the police to show that they were not
intimidated by the occupation of the campus. At
no time did say or even remotely imply or suggest
that he advocated a militant action that evening,
nor did his in-depth analysis of "people's war"
make such an interpretation possible for any
person who had ears to hear and a mind to think.
These witnesses were much preoccupied with the
presence of police. They expressed fear and anger,
and were inclined to expect trouble with the
police that night. They were determined not to be
intimidated by the police, and to harass them
where possible, by and large, Professor Franklin
was seen as speaking to these issues in a way that
fostered resistance but not violence. His task was
seen as uniting the people against the common
foe: putting together the university's complicity in
the war, the linkage of the struggle here iwth the
struggle in Asia, the necessity to respond
vigorously on many levels of action. For example
Pat Faulkner testified that he understood
Professor Franklin to mean that all levels of
actions are all right, even writing letters, and that
it is necessary to wage war on many levels to win.
He felt that Professor Franklin gave a speech in
which he approved a wide range of actions,
including trashing, but did not emphasize violent
responses.
Professor Franklin's witnesses gave the term
"people's war" a variety of emphases, but the
words were generally udnerstood to have a range
of connotations. These included (1) harassment of
police; (2) taking control of our own lives; (3)
brining the war home; (4) strike; (5) learning from
the peoples of Southeast Asia; (6) attention to our
war here, not only the one in Indochina; (7) doing
whatever conscience dictates, which might include
trashing; (8) determinationnot to be intimidated
by police, not to shrink from threats.
4. Post-Rally Events
In the course of the hearing, on October 28, the
Advisory Board made the following statement on
post-rally events:
With respect to the Old Union courtyard speech, the
Board is now in a position to give its view of the value
of testimony about events following the rally. We
admitted testimony on these matters because the

University Administration, in order to demonstrate
that there was a risk that prohibited conduct would
follow the speech, introduced evidence for the
limited purpose of showing that such conduct did in
fact occur. We now feel that this
evidence concerning the light on White Plaza, the
alleged false alarms, the shootings, and other
incidents-need not be rebutted. We have reached this
decision because, in our view, the existence of risk is
adequately shown by pre-and co-existing conditions,
and does not require demonstration by referring to
subsequent events.
It is a matter ol record that untoward events of the
sort mentioned above did in fact occur that night,
beginning immediately after the rally. We limited
testimony on these matters for two reasons: (1) the
charges did not contain any references to Professor
Franklin's post-rally conduct; (2) we had good reason to
believe that significant risk existed without reference to
post-rally events.
D. DEFENSES AND THEIR ANALYSES
1. Principal Points made in Defense Against Charges in
Paragraph 10.
Professor Franklin, in testimony and argument, made
several points in defending against these charges:
a. The speeches were brief, especially the second one
at the very end of the evening's program. Such brief
speeches could hardly have had the impact ascribed
to them by the University Administration.
b. It was difficult to hear the speeches. Except for
those near the speakers, consisting to a considerable
extent of Professor Franklin's close associates,
audibility was a problem. The testimony of several
witnesses who were not close to the speaker was
challenged by Professor Franklin.
c. What could be heard was innocuous. It was meant
to inform, educate, and persuade to a political
viewpoint. It was not intended to incite, inflame, or
cause violence.
d. Most of the people at the rally had already decided
what they were going to do by the time Professor
Franklin gave his second and closing spcech. In this
speech, he essentially gave them a political rationale
for what they had already decided to do.
e. Even if his speeches were taken as inflamatory by
some members of his audience, they were well
justified by Stanford's condition as a fascist and
imperialist institution, and by the presence on the
campus of an occupation army consisting of police
who frequently kill black and brown people, and
indeed had just killed a black brother.
112. In any event. Professor Franklin should be able to
give such speeches with impunity, since all speech
should be considered to be constitutionally
protected, even where appreciable risks are posed.
g. If speech is to be restricted at all, it must be done
within a very narrow band. Such a band could not
include general prescritpions for hostile actiona or
even for violence. Specific prescriptions for violent
acts would be required, and tchse must be confirmed
by specific evidence that individuals had been moved
to carry out those same specific acts by the speech in
question.
2. Analysis of the Defenses
The length of the speeches is much less important
than other characteristics: content, delivery, context,
audience. In any event, the first speech was not
particularly brief, and the second was in a crucial
position: at the very end of the rally.
In regard to audibility, we conclude that those who
wanted to hear the speeches could do so. This is
admitted by some defense witnesses, and to a certain
extent by Professor Franklin himself who testified that
at the time he felt he could reach those who really
wanted to hear him. The main variable seems to have
been attention; some members of the audience paid
close attention to his speeches, others little. Among
those who did pay attention, there is considerable
agreement as to content, though witnesses differe as to
interpretation.
There is no meaningful way to consider Professor
Franklin's behavior in the Old Union rally without a
firm grasp of the context in which the rally occurred.
The mood that evening was tense and angry. After the
passage of so many months it is difficult to recapture the
sense of anxious expectation that characterized the
campus that evening. The Old Union rally followed
several days of continually escalating events: threats of
coercion, actual coercion, arson, police action, and
hostile confrontations on campus. We have already
summarized recurrent themes of the immediately
preceding rallies at Dinkelspiel on February 9th and
White Plaza on February 10th. As the Board concluded
in its statement of October 28th, cited above, substantial
risk existed on the Stanford campus before and during
the Old Union rally.
There are additional aspects of the context for the
Old Union rally that deserve consideration. Professor
Franklin rose to speak as a well-known and respected
leader of the "movement". Defense witnesses testified
that he was viewed with admiration and his ideas were
taken seriously. Professor Franklin testified that the
time of these events in February was a crucial one for
the "movement", a time when the "movement" might
transcend itself.
Testimony in the hearing, mainly from defense
witnesses, brought out the fact that this occasion stirred
memories of other similar occasions which also provide
meaningful context for the Old Union rally. The events
approximately a year earlier at the time of the military
action in Cambodia came up repeatedly. Indeed, one of
Professor Franklin's main contentions is that he was
attempting to foster a "Cambodia-type strike". A
number of defense witnesses, including especially
Braumstein and Professor Franklin, discussed the events
of the Cambodian period and compared them with the
events during the Laotian invasion. It became clear that
the protest events of the Cambodian period, viewed with
approbation, included a spectrum of activities, some of
which were nonviolent, some of which were patently
coercive, and some of which were overtly violent. The
coercive and violent activities included: forcible blocking
of entries into buildings for sustained periods, large-scale
breaking of windows, bombings, and lire bombings.
The Old Union rally also brought back recollections
of other night rallies held in similar circumstances,
especially when police were on campus, not only during
the Cambodian protest but at other times in the past few

years as well. There lias been a clear tendency for such
occasions to be followed by violent behavior. This fact
was knwon to Professor Franklin, since several of the
defense witnesses commented on his participation in
these protests.
Two of the major themes permeating the three rallies
of February 9th and February 10, advanced by Professor
Franklin and many of his close associates, are especially
pertinent to his closing speech at the Old Union rally:
(1) all-one-war; (2) multiple-levels-of-action.
(1) All-one-war is the theme linking the struggle at
Stanford with the struggle in Southeast Asia. It is the
heart of the problem, emphasized by Professor Franklin
in his speeches, affidavit, testimony and argument.
The speeches attack Stanford's war complicity, draw
parallels between racial oppression in America and Asia,
and emphasize the necessity to learn from the peoples of
Southeast Asia how to resist oppression at home. By the
end of the Old Union rally, the cumulative weight of
these linkages suggests that one way to fight the war
now is to fight the police and administration here.
In his testimony Professor Franklin says:
. . .what I say there basically is that we can't separate
the war in Southeast Asia from the war at home. Now
on all these points, all four of these speeches that
were given in this 24-hour period -that is from the
night belore in Dink through this—all four of those
speeches are essentially saying-are saying the same
thing. They're expressing a set of ideas which 1
consider the most important ideas. . . . And then this
seems to me the most essential thing, both in this
speech and in the second speech, to try to show
people just as clearly as possible that in fact that
occupation army of police that was on the campus
was part of the same war that was being waged in
Southeast Asia and that was being waged in the Black
ghettos and in the barrios of the United States.
This point is further clarified in Braunstein's defense
testimony, under cross-examination:
And the people fighting the United States in South
east Asia are fighting the same battles that people
fighting the police.. .who were on campus in the Old
Union Courtyard one and two of the year before and
are fighting the same battle as the people trying to get
rotten research off this campus and are fighting all
these battles, and they're all the same battles.
Then if it's all one battle, the word 'opposing forces'
relates to all the people on the other side in this big
global battle.
I've later learned that that is what's known as
'People's War'; is part of what is known as 'People's
War'.
Q. I take it in the context in which you were speaking
you at least included the police in that reference?
A. Oh, certainly. Especially that night, yes. I also
included the University administrators.
(2) The war is to be waged with the
multiple-levels-of-action formula. Each person is to do
his own thing, whatever he can, whatever he thinks best,
using his imagination to find ways of resisting the
occupying forces. This theme has a familiar ring from its
recurrence during the preceding few days. We have
earlier quoted Braunstein's remarks on this subject at the
Dinkelspiel rally on February 9th. It is clear from a
variety of references in several rallies that this
formulation is meant to advocate a spectrum of activities
which might include contacting Congressmen,
persuading students in dormitories, being active on
campus at night, refusing to be intimidated by the
police, blocking doorways, occupying buildings,
breaking windows, putting the computer out of service
for a long time, destroying the computer, or doing other
things for which one might not wish to "take credit."
In his testimony Professor Franklin said he felt
impelled at the end of the rally to speak about:
. . .that action that was going to be taken, which
was essentially gpomg back to the dorms to talk
about the war in Southeast Asia and about the
police occupation of the campus and—for people
to be there and exercise their right. That it was
important for somebody to explain to people that
that action itself was, you know, just as legitimate
a part of this war as, say, the armed self defense of
the Vietnamese people or the people of Laos. . ..
And in that speech I mentioned using the methods
of people's war. And at that point I was speaking
very directly to the people there, I think, who
considered themselves revolutionaries. Because I
knew that they would have a basic understanding
of what that meant, and that that phrase summed
up a whole lot of experience.
Braunstein testified for Professor Franklin, 'There are
all sorts of actions on various levels, including people
breaking windows with rocks and people burning down
buildings, as yet unidentified people burning down
buildings, and so on, that sometimes have the same goals
in mind and sometimes don't."
Significant in this context was the term "people's
war." It was interpreted by various witnesses in different
ways. It seems to include a wide range of suggested
actions, some of which are nonviolent, and some of
which are violent. It can clearly include guerilla warfare.
Some witnesses interpreted this as its primary meaning,
others gave this meaning less prominence. Maoist
writings use the term "People's war" for all action, in
particular guerilla warfare, in which the warriors merge
with the masses. Professor Franklin acknowledge in his
testimony that guerilla warfare, including assassination
and bombings, is one important component of people's
war, but denied it was the one he had in mind when he
used the term in his spcech. Defense testimony indicated
that the concept of people's war extends beyond
military action, but did not deny that it prominently
includes military action. Given the repeated explicit
linkages of the struggle against the police occupation
army here and the war in Southeast Asia, in the context
of recent night violence on campus and an afternoon of
police confrontation, it is difficult to believe that most
listeners would be insensitive to the violent connotations
of this term. Why repeatedly use warlike terms and
images—such as Professor Franklin's "war on this
campus" if peaceful actions are intended?
Similar considerations apply to Professor Franklin's
advocacy of action to be taken against the occupation
army in small groups. It is clear that small groups can
conduct dormitory discussions and other peacefully
persuasive activities, and that this did in fact occur,
though we learned very little about the focus of such
discussions e.g., whether they were intended to foster
particular nonviolent or violent tactics of protest. In any
event, such dormitory discussions may well have been
one of the meanings of his alleged recommendation for
reliance upon affinity groups. He advised against mass
militant action, meaning essentially violent
confrontation with the police, on tactical grounds. Such
action was not feasible because the police were too
strong. It is alos clear that the smaller groups could
engage in violent activities as has often happened in
similar circumstances at Stanford during the past few
years-i.e., following night rallies permeated by angry
speech. Two days earlier, February 8, after a night of
"trashing", a sheet was distributed at a "movement"
rally under the title "Do It!" It endorsed the previous
night's activity and called for more of the same,
indicating that tight affinity groups can be helpful in
doing whatever people want to do.
Whatever the activities that Professor Franklin was
urging upon individuals and small groups, it appears that
lateness of the hour was positively desirable-"as late
into the night as possible". In view of the behavior ot
some individuals and affinity groups at Stanford in
similar circumstances during the past few years, it is
reasonable to suppose that lateness might be useful as a
cover for violent activities—though it could of course be
used for peaceful activities as well.
Professor Franklin's two Old Union speeches were
given in a hostile tone. This is apparent in the content of
the first speech, and the effect is heightened when one
listens to the tape and hears his tone of voice. Even
when the speech is briefly interrupted by a KZSU
interview, the angry tone and the emotional crowd
response can be clearly detected. Although thesecond
speech is covered over by a KZSU interview, similar
indications are available from the tape and from
testimony.
In the course of the hearing, both Professor Franklin
and Braunstein indicated that ambiguity about tactics
was desirable to these rally speeches because KZSU was
broadcasting them and the police would presumably
have tape recordings. To advocate violent tactics openly
in this context would have exposed the speaker to later
sanctions. We were informed in the hearing by Professor
Franklin of his "political decision" to keep his position
at Stanford, hence caution about open calls for
"revolutionary violence".
Thus, we are faced with a difficult problem: how to
interpret speech deliberately given in ambiguous terms.
But we have seen already that considerable clarification
emerges from a close examination of the text, from the
full context provided by preceding events, and from the
way in which the speech was delivered. In essence,
Professor Franklin came into a combustible situation,
focused hostility on certain targets, intensified existing
hostility toward those targets, and urged a spectrum of
actions against them: some peaceful, some coercive,
some violent. We must now turn our attention to his
audience in order to inquire whether they were likely to
understand him and whether Professor Franklin must
have expected the risk of prohibited conduct to be
increased by his behavior.
The tone and content of Professor Franklin's
speeches must have been particularly significant for two
groups: 1) people in the movement; 2) people who are
violence-prone for whatever reason. In respect to the
first, these are people who are responsive to Professor
Franklin by virtue of past association, respect,
dedication, and sharing of common goals. They tend to
understand the nuances of his speech, as was evident at
the hearing itself. As for the second grou, it is well
known that public meetings characterized by intense
anger and hints of violence tend to attract, both at the
meeting and via media coverage, individuals who are
drawn to violence for a variety of reasons, not
necessarily political. Whatever the reason for their
susceptibility to violence, they tend to find such
occasions exciting. They may be induced by angry
rhetoric to commit acts of gravity, particularly in the
context of recent examples of violent behavior.
Professor Franklin testified that he was aware of the
long-term, bitter antagonism between Venceremos and
FCM; and he was aware of the immediate, clearly
expressed hostility toward the small FCM group at the
rally. The presence of these mutually hostile groups at
the rally certainly added to the risk. The use of violent
rhetoric in such circumstances increased the probability
of attack and counter-attack.
We think that "movement" people were capable of
understanding the messages. We refer here to familiar
connotations understood by a group sharing common
intersts and values. For example, reference to "militant
action on campus" in 1971 is understood by many
people to mean "trashing " which in turn is understood
to mean "window-breaking." These are not the only
connotations of the terms, nor are they understood by
everyone who comes on campus. A few years ago, the
terms did not have these connotations. But common
usage in concrete situations has led to a widely shared
understanding.
Those devoted to the "movement" had a rich
refresher course in such terms during the rallies of the
preceding few days which we have already summarized.
Professor Franklin is explicit in his testimony that he
was aiming his remarks specifically at them, wanting
primarily to be un derstood by them. Braunstein
testified that there is special communication within the
"movement" and pointed out that Professor Franklin
referred to "us" at the rally. But the defense, in effect,
asks us to believe that, on the night of February 10,
individuals in the "movement" failed to understand the
coercive and violent connotations of phrases like "war
on this campus", taking action on multiple levels to
resist oppression here, and "we must learn from the
peoples of Southeast Asia that when confronted with an
occupation army, we must respond with the methods of
people's war". The defense puts forwards its bland
interpretation of such phrases even though they were
expressed in a very angry tone and in a context of
profound hostility toward the university by a respected
leader who generally approves coercive and violent
tactics in campus disputes (though he denies he
advocated them on this occasion). We must therefore
examine possible reasons why the audience might not
have detected the menacing connotations of his remarks
on the evening of February 10.
From the testimony in the hearing, we do not believe
members of the "movement" were obtuse; nor is there
anything credible in the record to suggest that they were
in such a conciliatory mood that his angry rhetoric failed
to rcach them. Were the "movement" members of
Professor Franklin's audience so concerned with trying
to win over the Roble group that they rejected all

coercive and violent connotations of his remarks? This
possibility deserves further consideration.
During the rally, "movement" people in control of
the meeting showed little consideration for the feelings
ol the Roble students. Indeed, Professor Franklin seems
to have been concerned about this situation, since he
devoted a good deal of his first speech to persuading the
Roble group to accept the "movement's" view of the
situation. As a Roble speaker made clear in the KZSU
interview, the difference between the Roble contingent
and the "movement" was not only one of demands
(narrow vs. broad) but of tactics (non-violent vs.
violent). In this episode, Professor Franklin
demonstrated his authority as a leader of the
"movement" when he easily stopped the flow of the
meeting, re-opened the question, made a major speech,
and got a re-vote.
In his way, Professor Franklin was trying to persuade
the Roble contingent to link up with the "movement" in
a united front, at least for the moment. His way of
undertaking this persuasion was itself inflamatory. He
made assertions of such hostile content in such an angry
manner regarding the University and the police that,
whatever their effect on the Roble group, they must
surely have intensified the resentment of many persons
favorable to the "movement" and thereby raised the
probability of violent actions later. We have earlier
quoted a portion of his first Old Union speech pertinent
to this point. Finally, his do-your-own-thing formula
permitted some encouragement for Roble students to
take peaceful actions and still leave room for
encouragement of "militant" actions by the
"movement".
This brings us again to one of the central themes in
the entire case. At Old Union as at White Plaza, the
actions urged by Professor Franklin were not exclusively
coercive or violent. He advocated a wide range of protest
actions: some peaceful, some coercive, some violent. If a
person removes valuable merchandise from a store,
paying for half, but not paying for the other half, is he
culpable for the part he stole? We believe that the
presence of peaceful recommendations cannot immunize
a person from sanctions if he has urged imminent
coercion and violence as well.
Once again, as at White Plaza, Professor Franklin was
the final speaker, and once again his speech was
promptly followed by events of a disruptive, coercive or
violent nature. The probability of this occurring by
chance is very small. At the least, it reflects his
leadership position in the "movement" and the riskiness
of those situations in which he spoke. He cannot avoid
the conclusion that his pseeches, the last on each
occasion, increased the probability that illegal acts
would follow the two rallies.
In an earlier section on "Fundamental Issues and
Standards", we have indicated that the University must
have the right to put some constraints on speech in
dangerous circumstances, but only with great caution.
This applies to acts of incitement to imminent lawless
action that arc likely to produce such action. "Lawless"
in the university context includes state or local laws, the
Policy on Campus Disruptions or other university
regulations, or common-law understandings of
professorial responsibility.
In judging the applicability of this standard to the
present charge, we have been guided by these questions:
(1) What is the entire context surrounding the alleged
incitement? (2) What was conmunicated to the
audience? (3) What would the speiker judge to be the
effect of his communication on the audience?
Since we wish to sustain the university's vital
tradition of fostering free expression in its widest
diversity, we are exceedingly cautious in considering
possible constraints on speech. If such constraints are
ever to be invoked, they must be reserved for extreme
situations. We are asking whether the context here was
that of a highly combustible situation, whether the
speaker gave an inflammatory message in that context,
and whether the speaker had good reason to anticipate
lhat his message would increase the risk of imminent
lawless action. If indeed we find that the speaker issued
a call to violence, he is not protected by having issued it
in euphemistic jargon. Such a call may be quite as
effective as one issued in more stark terms. In any event,
the language used here was hardly occult.
Although Professor Franklin's witnesses were inclined
to protect him by minimizing their understanding of
coercive and violent connotations in his speeches, they
did not exclude such connotations—nor did he. The
difference between them and administration witnesses
was mainly one of emphasis. In the spectrum of
activities advocated by Professof Franklin, the defense
emphasized the legal end, whereas the administration
emphasized the illegal end.
In our detailed analysis of the context for his Old
Union speeches, we have determined that persons active
in the "movement" must have been quite familiar with
the coercive and violent connotations of Professor
Franklin's phrases, that they were responsive to such
connotations, and that Professor Franklin must have
been aware of these facts.
Finally, we must consider the line of defense that,
even if Professor Franklin were considered to have
carried out such an incitement, he would nevertheless be
justified by his perception of Stanford as a fascist
institution playing an important role in an imperialist
war.
We recognize that Professor Franklin is pressing for
reform in important areas of social concern. Can this
justify coercive behavior in campus disputes, or the
fostering of a climate of violence on campus? Once any
person is granted this privilege in the name of a good
cause, we must grant it also to others who feel they have
worthy aims. When these rights conflict, as they
inevitably must, are we to condone low-grade guerilla
warfare on campus? If we deny to others what we grant
to Professor Franklin, we have adopted a double
standard: coercion and violence in the university may be
condoned if we approve its aims, but restricted if we
disapprove its aims. Then it becomes a simple question
of whose ox is gored. But every cause is fervently
supported by some, eloquently justified by some,
pursued with passion by some. In a way, every war is a
holy war. If we accept Professor Franklin's holiness, how
arc we to reject the holiness of other true believers? In
our view, this course is not morally defensible. We must
do our best to apply one standard across all political
preferences and that standard must not condone
violence on campus.

K. CONCLUSION
Taking into accoutn content, context, delivery, and
audience, did Professor Franklin's two Old Union
speeches include urging and inciting to disruption of
university activities, or threat to persons or property?
Must he have known that this exhortation would be
widely interpreted as immediate advocacy of disruptive
or violent behavior?
1. The situation was risky. Illegal acts had occurred
earlier that day. There was intense resentment toward
the war, the police, and the university; there had been
serious frustration for the "movement" earlier in the
day; bitter political adversaries were present at the rally
and identified by the chairman; protest actions including
coercive and violent possibilities were under discussion;
the police were present on campus; there was a well
known history of violence in similar circumstances at
Stanford. In general, the higher the risk, the less it takes
to trigger coercive and violent behavior.
2. The targets of Professor Franklin's animosity were
quite explicit-the police and the university. He made an
intensive effort in the two speeches to generate further
hostility toward these targets. He provided justification
for coercive and violent behavior toward them, without
specifying precisely what the nature of such acts might
be, leaving that to the judgment and imagination of each
individual or small group.
3. The urging of immediate retaliatory action towards
the police and the university was clear. A great sense of
urgency was conveyed by both the tone and the content
of his remarks. While no detailed blueprint for action
was provided, the necessity for prompt action wis a
strong message. The overall effect was to increase the
likelihood of imminent lawless action.
Taking into account the full context surround his
speeches at the Old Union rally, hte messages he
communicated to his audience, and what he should be
able to judge about the effect of these messages under
the circumstances, we reach the conclusion that
Professor Franklin intentionally urged and incited his
audience to engage in conduct which would disrupt
activities of the University and of members of the
University Community and threaten injury to individuals
an; property.
The Advisory Board thus finds that the charge in No.
10 is sustained.
DISSENTING OPINIONS
Professors Brown and Kennedy, while agreeing with
substantial portions of the majority's account, dissent as
follows:
The majority sustains the charge of incitement
against Professor Franklin citing (1) an extensive
background of material from speeches at this and
other rallies that supply context for his last speech;
(2) Professor Franklin's first speech at this rally,
which also supplies context and reveals relevant
attitudes of his own; and (3) words in the second
speech that constitute, in the majority's view,
sufficiently explicit invitations to do violence against
persons and property.
We dissent regarding some matters of context, as
well as on the finding with respect to Professor
Franklin's own speeches.
In describing the context of the rally, we would
give more weight than does the majority to the
presence of the Roble students and to their impact
upon events in the Old Union Courtyard. The
interaction between the group of Roble moderates
(concerned about the invasion of Laos but not part of
the "movement") and the "movement" group itself
provides a central theme for the rally. Professor
Franklin's own first speech is directed predominantly
to an attenuation of those tensions and to a
reconciliation that would accommodate the new
recruits to "movement" objectives. It is, in essence, a
long argument that political prisoners must not be
forgotten, and that there is a fundamental identity
between the struggle of Asian peoples against U.S.
imperialism and the struggle of oppressed people and
anti-war students against repressive forces at home.
As the majority states, the speech contains a heavy
tone of anger against the police and other forces that,
to Professor Franklin, sumbolize this oppression. We
nevertheless believe it plausible that the speech was
intended to make a group of Stanford students
identify, perhaps for the first time, with oppressed
people; we do not see evidence that Professor
Franklin's intention was to turn them explicitly to
violent actions. In no sense can this first Old Union
speech be regarded as actionable; indeed, the
University administration does not attempt to
persuade us to find against Professor Franklin on the
basis of its content. To the extent that it contains
intensity and anger, and to the extent that these are
directed against the police and the University, the
speech might be said to have added-along with other
speeches at the rally-to the risk that prohibited
conduct might follow. But all agree that nothing in
the content of this speech approaches incitement.
Indeed, we feel that the speech presented, in however
objectionable a style, some legitimate concerns about
the plight of prisoners, the existence of police
brutality, and other significant issues.
Clearly Professor Franklin and other speakers
believed that a major mission of the "movement"
people at the rally was to undertake the "education"
of the rest of the Stanford community. Professor
Franklin's own first speech concludes with a plea that
those present go out to the people "and teach them
what we have learned in the movement," and that
any who are not persuaded should "get up here [ile.
to the microphone] and we should discuss it." At the
conclusion of his speech he testifies that he went over
to discuss the matter further with the Roble group.
The speaker who followed Professor Franklin to the
podium commented that the important thing was to
"go to the dorms, go to the people we want to talk
t0...." A later speaker extends the suggestion by
hoping that those at the rally will go to the dorms
and "rap all night." Recruitment, broadening the base
of the "movement," educating the community: all
these were significant themes in the development o'
the meeting's context. By its relatively stronger
emphasis on the more violent rhetoric, in particular
Professor Franklin's, the majority has decided against
what seems to us a plausible, even persuasive, second
view of the matter.

The content of the second speech, of course, is not
available to us except through the testimony of
witnesses. According to Beyers, Professor Franklin
called for a "people's war against the occupation
army of the police," and he "suggested that people
should go back tot their dormitories, form meetings,
meet in small groups, decide whatever they wanted to
do, to do it as late at night as possible, and to do
things which would bring more of the occupation
here."' Professor Franklin's version in his affidavit is
only slightly different. He, too, calims to have said
that "when confronted with an occupation army we
must respond with the methods of people's war." Me
adds, "I ended by telling people that people's war
meant that they should go back into their
dormitories, organize people into small groups, talk
with them, play football, or whatever, as late into the
night as possible." These differences are not very
substantial; they can easily be accounted for by
differences in recollection.
The majority analyzes these collections of phrases
in such a way that they are strongly persuaded as to
their meaning and that the meaning sustains an
incitement charge, given such other factors as risk.
The logic consists essentially in the elimination of
various attenuative constructions that are more
benign. In our view this interpretation is not
"strongly persuasive." The phrases upon which
attention has been focused are isolated from a
substantial matrix of interstitial speech, the precise
construction of which we do not know, and about
which we must be careful not to draw too confident
appraisals. Two examples will illustrate the point.
First, Professor Franklin says that in the context in
which he used it, "People's war" was clearly indicated
to mean "thoroughly merging with the masses;" he
states that he used the football game as an example of
that kind of tactic. It is significant that virtually all of
the witnesses link the words "people's war" to the
example of the football game. Professor Franklin
states in his affidavit that this was the only exmaple
he used, and the cumulative testimony seems to bear
him out. Second, the phrase "as late into the night as
possible," interpreted by the majority as a call to
militant action by small groups, could equally have
appeared in a context in which it applied primarily to
late dormitory discussions and to legal (though
perhaps risky) methods of taking up the time of the
police. Such an interpretation gain in plausibility
from Professor Franklin's testimony that although he
does not in principle disapprove of trashing, he would
not have urged it on that occasion, both because of
the heavy presence of police on campus that night
and because it would have alienated those new to the
"movement."
The point is that none of these interpretations has
a great deal of certainty about it. The ones we have
just mentioned may be a little less plausible than
those favored by the majority, but only a little less.
The "hard" data on words are so fragmentary, and
depend so much on the kind of context-construction
that is very sensitive to whatever bias the witnesses
may have had, that we find them inadequate to meet
a "strongly persuasive" criterion that Professor
Franklin is guilty as charged by the University
administration.
We are not strongly persuaded by the impressions
of the speech given by various witnesses-as opposed
to actual reconstructions of wording. Such
impressions are especially subject to the bias of
expectations. The differing treatments of Professor
Franklin's account of the football game provide one
example among many. Some witnesses regarded it as
a euphemism for more violent activity, others
regarded it merely as an opportunity for a bad pun,
while still others interpreted it as we would, as an
invitation to occupy the time of the police.
In effect, the majority report argues that Professor
Franklin was employing words well understood to his
audience but not to others. But there is no convincing
evidence that any substantial number of the audience
would have translated his speech into an invitation to
commit violent acts. Each phrase, like "people's
war," has been subject to a number of conflicting
interpretations in the testimony. Furthermore, the
reconstruction of a code depends on one's ability to
capture a reasonably large portion of the message,
and in this instance we have only scattered elements.
Although we think it is quite possible that Professor
Franklin advocated a range of actions some of which
may have been illegal, we do no find the evidence
strongly persuasive that his speech constituted the
advocacy of imminent lawless action.
The majority emphasizes the extremity of the risk
in the situation; we do not disagree with their
evaluation, but we stress more heavily the doubts we
have about the context and the meaning of the words
actually spoken.
to find against Professor Franklin on this charge
might, we believe, force a faculty member addressing
a political rally in the future to guard against possible
cryptic meanings that his speech might convey to a
segment of his audience whenever a situation of high
risk obtains. The social cost of such a prohibition
must be balanced against the benefits to be derived
from being able to prosecute somewhat ambiguous
speech in dangerous situations. We find the costs too
great.
Accordingly, we do not sustain the charge against
Professor Franklin as stated in Paragraph 10.
A. CHARGES
The University Administration's charge concerning
Professor Franklin's conduct during the Old Union
Courtyard rally on February 10th reads as follows:
10. On the eveing of February 10, 1971, beginning at
approximately 8:00 p.m., a rally was held in the Old
Union Courtyard to, among other things, discuss
methods of protesting developments in the war in
Indochina. Over two hundred students and other
persons attended the rally. During the course of the
rally Professor Franklin intentionally urged and
incited students and other persons present to engage
in conduct calculated to disrupt activities of the
University and of members of the University
community and which threatened injury to
individuals and property. Shortly thereafter students
and other persons were assaulted by persons present
at the rally, and later that evening other acts of
violence occurred.
B. NATURE OF THE CHARGE IN PARAGRAPH 10
The charge centers on intentional incitement that
threatened: (1) disruption of University activities, both
individual and institutional; and (2) injury to persons
and property. It implies that a rish of coercive or violent
behavior existed at the time of the rally and that
Professor Franklin further increased the risk by the
content and manner of his participation. In determining
whether the facts fit the charges, the Board must inquite
(1) What is the entire context surrounding the alleged
incitement? (2) What is being communicated to the
audience? (3) What would the speaker judge to be the
effect of his communication on the audience?
C. FINDINGS OF FACT 1. Prominent Themes in the
1. Prominent Themes in the Old Union Rally,
February 10
On Wednesday, February 10 at 8:00 p.m. about 350
people attended a rally in the Old Union Courtyard.
Speakers debated tactics and demands. Professor
Franklin spoke twice. The themes that emerged
prominently in the course of the rally may he
summarized as follows:
a. There was general agreement on opposition to the
war in Southeast Asia and a wish to protest against
American involvement.
b. There was a major difference of opinion on the
scope of demands and of tactics. A contingent of
students from Roble Hall favored a single demand, an
effort to reach out for the broadest possible support
and strict adherence to non-violent tactics. Another
and larger faction favored a broader set of demands,
even at the risk of losing community support; and
they favored a broader range of tactics, including
coercive and violent ones, depending on
circumstances. This distinction between the two
groups was not only apparent in the speeches, but
was emphasized by a KZSU broadcast interview with
representatives of the Roble contingent near the end
of the rally.

c. Five speakers emphasized Stanford's major war
complicity and severe political repression. This
viewpoint may be illustrated with the following
quotation from one of the speakers.
I work at the phone company and I realize that
everyday one out of every two calls that I place
goes from Stanford University or SRI directly to
the Pentagon, to SRI all over the country and all
over the world, and people realize that Stanford
University is integrally linked with Pacific
Telephone Company, that all the business, you
know, that the whole service which Pacific
Telephone puts out is for the benefit of the
financial interest in this area and people who are
against the war, people that I work with who are
against the war, who are very, very angry and
outraged by the expansion of the war into Laos
realize that, because they have brothers, brothers
and uncles and fathers who are over there fighting,
who have been forced to go over there, they don't
have any choice, they can't afford to go to school,
they are forced to be over there. They have
brothers and sisters who are locked up in the
prisons all over America and they realize that
Stanford University, that the kind of research
Stanford does, the kind of money Stanford has,
which controls the black and brown communities
in the mid-peninsula, is a very dangerous thing and
they:re willing to fight against that for their very
survival and I think that the people here should
respect that, should respect the fact that telephone
workers are getting organized, that we're thinking
now about what kind of support demonstration
we can have when Stanford gets itself together and
the issues become clear to the people that
Stanford University is key in the war, key in the
oppression of political prisoners and it's just got to
go. (applause)
d. Eight speakers were very hostile to the police
especially to their presence on campus. Police had
been called to the campus to terminate the
occupation of the Computation Center and had
remained in view of the likelihood of further illegal
acts. It will be recalled that arson and "trashing" had
occurred on the nights of February 6 and 7. Early in
the Old Union rally of February 10, the presence of
police on campus was announced. No witness
testified that a single uniformed policeman entered
the Old Union courtyard, despite the fact that
Professor Franklin, in his affidavit shortly after the
event, said there were many police there. In the
hearing, he corrected this error. Thus, the police were
not visible to the people at the rally, but their
presence on campus was a focus of deep resentment.
They were often referred to as "pigs" and as an
occupation army or occupying forces. In conjunction
with the previous criticism of Stanford's complicity
in the war. the struggle on campus and the struggle in
Southeast Asia were portrayed as different facets of a
single struggle. Parallels were drawn between the

police on campus and imperialist armies in Asia. The
all-one-war theme was emphasized by urging
resistance to the police as analogous to resistance to
occupying forces in Vietnam.
e. On two occasions, members of the Free Campus
Movement were pointed out in a context of hostility,
and were linked to the police on campus.
112. In response to these various instigations, there was
a desire for action — not merely verbal demands, but
concrete, tangible steps to implement them. There
was a clear preference for strong, vivid action, though
some speakers, including those from the Roble
contingent, put their main emphasis on education.
Little reference was made to "strike" in this rally.
The actions mainly preferred by the speakers may be
illustrated by (he following remarks by the chairman:
Okay, I think it's still pretty clear that we want to
keep the demands as they are. Okay, at this point I
think we should go on to specific proposals for
how we act now. We've had a few proposals; one
guy suggested that after the Comp Center thing
today that in order to escalate rather than
de-escalate we should zero in on SRI, Another
person, other people have proposed that we deal
now with the police state that's on this campus
because if we're going to move against the war,
one of the things we have to do to be able to move
against the war in atmosphere where we're not
intimidated by pigs coming through to surround
our meetings and that kind of thing and that one
of the ways to do that is to begin any kind of
action people want to take to get the pigs off this
campus. I think that people should speak to these
proposals and add more proposals that they have.
g. Five speakers explicitly expressed and several
others implicitly expressed anger, using words and
imagery of fighting. Three speakers suggested actions
to embarrass, humiliate, or confront the police,
particularly late at night, while others made more
general comments advocating resistance to
intimidation.
h. Two speakers favored off-campus protests.
2. Professor Franklin's First Speech at Old Union
(Second speech of February 10)
Professor Franklin's first Old Union speech
(Appendix III) began with an effort to persuade the
Roble contingent of the correctness of the majority
position favoring a broad set of demands, including the
freeing of all "political prisoners" and the end of
Stanford's complicity in the war — not merely
immediate withdrawal of US forces from Southeast Asia.
He spoke with concern about people who must spend
time in jail, emphasized solidarity within the
"movement", and opposed betrayal of political
prisoners. Then, in an intense delivery, he said:
And we get very upset when we find our beautiful
campus crawling with pigs who stop and harass
people and rip off and beat half of the people. Well
this is just a very, very mild taste of what life is like in
the black and brown communities of this country
where the pigs come by every night and if you're
young and you're black and brown they stop you and
ask your I.D. and rip you off for suspicion of
burglary and where there are dogs there and where
there's a helicopter overhead and that's part of the
same struggle, and where they shoot you and the pigs
who are here tonight, that's those San Jose pigs have
just mundered a black brother in San Jose, the same
San Jose pig just murdered a black brother down in
San Jose and that's normal life down there. People
murdered in the streets and that's why we call them
pigs. Although it's a little unfair to the four-footed
variety, because they don't do that kind of thing.
[Applause]
Continuing to speak in the same delivery, he next
alluded to the Black Panther party's leadership and made
the following remarks:
And the Black Panther Party teaches us that the
people of Laos and the people of South Vietnam are
not another separate nation state. That they are our
brothers and sisters because they are just other
oppressed communities of the same empire. The
Black Panther Party teaches us that today while this
meeting was going on brothers and sisters, blood
brothers and sisters of us, were killed in Laos, in
Vietnam and Cambodia, in the black and brown
communities of the United States of America. They
teach us this is all one struggle and the
interconnections are every place. Even if you thing
about what Laos is all about; what is the chief cash
export of Laos, who knows?
[crowd | Opium, heroin?
Opium, all the heroin on this coast comes from Laos.
And it's all brought in by the CIA. It is grown and
harvested by Meo tribesmen and flown out on Air
America, the CIA airline. And it is brought in to this
state as part of the oppression, particularly of black
and brown people here, but also of white youth. . . .
(brief KZSU interruption). . . . and is just as much a
part of the counter-insurgency system as the pigs are
war on this campus.
He urged that others be taught about such evils as
Stanford's complicity in the war and the necessity to
free all political prisoners. He expressed the view that
the student strike a year earlier had been a success. He
closed by restating the necessity to continue the struggle
to win others to his viewpoint.
3. Professor Franklin 's Second Speech at the Old Union
(Third speech of February 10)
This speech lasted about two minutes, but because
KZSU was conducting an interview at the time, it can
only be heard in the background on the tape recording.
The pitch of his voice is high, with only a few of his
words and intermittent responses from the crowd being
clearly discernible on the tape. The crowd responses
increase toward the end. The content of the speech can
only be reconstructed from testimony, but this poses
little difficulty. There is substantial agreement as to
what Professor Franklin said amont his witnesses, the
University Administration's witnesses, and Professor
Franklin's own affidavit and testimony. The differences,
as might be expected, are in the interpretation of his
speech.
a. Professor Franklin's interpretation of his second
Old Union speech.
In his affidavit he describes the speech as follows:
A number of speakers at the meeting rose to describe
specific instances of police harassment and brutality.
Several proposed that we go to the dormitories to
discuss die police state on campus and what to do
about it, as well as what to do about the situation in
Southeast Asia. One speaker said that many squads of
six to eight police were roaming the campus, and that
if we marched to the dorms some of these squads
would follow us, and that it would be a good
education for people in the dorms to see them. Two
speakers said that the police were attempting to keep
people from knowing what was happening, and that
they had temporarily confiscated a walkie-talkie from
a KZSU reporter and threatened to arrest him for
listening to police frequencies. Another speaker said
that if we march in one group it will be too easy for
the police and we should confuse them by dividing
into many groups. Another speaker siad "there are
pigs all over this campus and we have to show people
who the pigs are and who the people are, and we
cannot tolerate a police state here or any place else."
It was generally agreed that we would go back to the
dormitories to build support for the strike and to
raise consciousness about the police occupation of
the campus. I rose to speak again. 1 said that it was
unfortunate that the people from Roble had not felt
that they were really part of the movement and that
it was necessary to go into the dorms and discuss all
their questions further. I said that it was very
important for people to understand that this is a
united front, and that people will respond on
different levels of action and with different degrees of
consciousness to the war. I said that it was important
for people to accept these different levels, and that if
people are sincere it is correct for them to do their
own thing, to do whatever they think best, and that
that is how all of us learn. I pointed out that with the
police saturation on campus, however, it would be
suicide for people to engage in any militant action in
a large group. I said that we must learn from the
peoples of Southeast Asia that when confronted with
an occupation army, we must respond with the
methods of people's war. Then 1 explained that this
means thoroughly merging with the people. I gave
one and only one example of what I meant by this. I
said that I had been told that a few nights before,
during a similar police occupation, several people had
begun a game of touch football. They moved from
place to place on the campus, forcing the police to
follow them. Several police complained to them that
they were supposed to be in fixed positions, and that
this was preventing them from maintaining those
positions. Finally, when the football game
appraoched the area of the computation center, the
police had asked to examine the football. I said that I
wasn't sure whether this was because they thought it
was a bomb or because they just wanted to examine a
real pigskin. I ended by teliing people that people's

war meant that they should go back to the
dormitories, organize people into small groups, and
talk with them, or play football, or whatever, as late
into the night as possible.
b. Hearing witnesses' interpretation of Professor
Franklin's second Old Union Speech
(i) Administration witnesses-There is considerable
agreement among administration and defense
witnesses on the content (though not on the
interpretation) of this speech. This can be
illustrated by comparing Professor Franklin's
version of his speech after the event given above
with testimony of Robert Beyers, of the Stanford
News Service. He testified that he had attended
many rallies at Stanford over a period of years,
and had often heard Professor Franklin speak. He
described Professor Franklin's speech on this
occasion as very critical of the police. He testified
that Professor Franklin called specifically for
people's war against the occupation army-i.e., the
police. Professor Franklin suggested that people go
back to their dormitories, meet in small groups,
decide to do whatever they wanted to do as late at
night as possible so as to bring more police onto
the campus to help out their brethren in other
communities. At this point, in Beyer's view, the
nature of the meeting changed dramatically,
leading him to expect that illegal or disruptive
incidents would follow. Immediately after the
speech, the rally ended and Beyers said three FCM
students were badly beaten by some of the Old
Union crowd. Under cross-examination, he
indicated that Professor Franklin did not specify
the exact nature of the violent acts to be carried
out.
Brimelow felt there was much tension and
restlessness in the meeting, and that the crowd got
very excited as a result of the speech. After the
speech he saw the crowd stream off in all
directions and he heard "war cries" (something of
this sort is audible on the tape recording). Almas
heard the speech from the balcony of the Women's
Clubhouse, thought it was impassioned and was
startled by it. Almas had heard Professor Franklin
speak about a dozen times but had never heard
him encourage this level of action. Almas felt
Professor Franklin had not been as careful as
usual, and the witness had the expectation that
there was going to be violence.
R. Jacobs, also on the balcony, thought
Professor Franklin had made inflammatory
statements. Grav felt Professor Franklin was
playing the role of a leader giving instructions to
the group in a serious vein.
(ii) Professor Franklin's witnesses
Witnesses for Professor Franklin heard phrases
similar to those reported by Administration
witnesses but to some extent interpreted them
differently. This is well illustrated by an affidavit
of Bennion, who also testified at the hearing.
. . .It became clear that there was some opposition
forming, basically between going back into the
dorms for further discussion and staying in the
area the police were patrolling in order to show
them that the occupation of the campus would
not be tolerated. At this point Professor Franklin
spoke and tried to explain that these two
tendencies were not really opposed, but could be
carried out at the same time and could mutually
serve each other. He discussed at length the tenets
of "people's war" which is based on the concept
of a united front. In essence this means that
everyone can contribute what they can to a
movement, with one person's greater contribution
or risk should not be seen as invalidating another's.
This leads to many levels of action which mutually
reinforce other levels, rather than detracting from
each other. He pointed out that in advanced stages
of "people's war" such as in Vietnam, many
different levels of action are still employed, not
merely the military level of the National
Liberation Front. He also stated that in the
present case it would be suicidal to engage in any
large-scale militant action. He gave one example of
what "people's war" would mean that evening.
Some people could go back to the dorms and
persuade others to join the movement, while
others could play touch football in the area being
patrolled by the police to show that they were not
intimidated by the occupation of the campus. At
no time did say or even remotely imply or suggest
that he advocated a militant action that evening,
nor did his in-depth analysis of "people's war"
make such an interpretation possible for any
person who had ears to hear and a mind to think.
These witnesses were much preoccupied with the
presence of police. They expressed fear and anger,
and were inclined to expect trouble with the
police that night. They were determined not to be
intimidated by the police, and to harass them
where possible, by and large, Professor Franklin
was seen as speaking to these issues in a way that
fostered resistance but not violence. His task was
seen as uniting the people against the common
foe: putting together the university's complicity in
the war, the linkage of the struggle here iwth the
struggle in Asia, the necessity to respond
vigorously on many levels of action. For example
Pat Faulkner testified that he understood
Professor Franklin to mean that all levels of
actions are all right, even writing letters, and that
it is necessary to wage war on many levels to win.
He felt that Professor Franklin gave a speech in
which he approved a wide range of actions,
including trashing, but did not emphasize violent
responses.
Professor Franklin's witnesses gave the term
"people's war" a variety of emphases, but the
words were generally udnerstood to have a range
of connotations. These included (1) harassment of
police; (2) taking control of our own lives; (3)
brining the war home; (4) strike; (5) learning from
the peoples of Southeast Asia; (6) attention to our
war here, not only the one in Indochina; (7) doing
whatever conscience dictates, which might include
trashing; (8) determinationnot to be intimidated
by police, not to shrink from threats.
4. Post-Rally Events
In the course of the hearing, on October 28, the
Advisory Board made the following statement on
post-rally events:
With respect to the Old Union courtyard speech, the
Board is now in a position to give its view of the value
of testimony about events following the rally. We
admitted testimony on these matters because the

University Administration, in order to demonstrate
that there was a risk that prohibited conduct would
follow the speech, introduced evidence for the
limited purpose of showing that such conduct did in
fact occur. We now feel that this
evidence concerning the light on White Plaza, the
alleged false alarms, the shootings, and other
incidents-need not be rebutted. We have reached this
decision because, in our view, the existence of risk is
adequately shown by pre-and co-existing conditions,
and does not require demonstration by referring to
subsequent events.
It is a matter ol record that untoward events of the
sort mentioned above did in fact occur that night,
beginning immediately after the rally. We limited
testimony on these matters for two reasons: (1) the
charges did not contain any references to Professor
Franklin's post-rally conduct; (2) we had good reason to
believe that significant risk existed without reference to
post-rally events.
D. DEFENSES AND THEIR ANALYSES
1. Principal Points made in Defense Against Charges in
Paragraph 10.
Professor Franklin, in testimony and argument, made
several points in defending against these charges:
a. The speeches were brief, especially the second one
at the very end of the evening's program. Such brief
speeches could hardly have had the impact ascribed
to them by the University Administration.
b. It was difficult to hear the speeches. Except for
those near the speakers, consisting to a considerable
extent of Professor Franklin's close associates,
audibility was a problem. The testimony of several
witnesses who were not close to the speaker was
challenged by Professor Franklin.
c. What could be heard was innocuous. It was meant
to inform, educate, and persuade to a political
viewpoint. It was not intended to incite, inflame, or
cause violence.
d. Most of the people at the rally had already decided
what they were going to do by the time Professor
Franklin gave his second and closing spcech. In this
speech, he essentially gave them a political rationale
for what they had already decided to do.
e. Even if his speeches were taken as inflamatory by
some members of his audience, they were well
justified by Stanford's condition as a fascist and
imperialist institution, and by the presence on the
campus of an occupation army consisting of police
who frequently kill black and brown people, and
indeed had just killed a black brother.
112. In any event. Professor Franklin should be able to
give such speeches with impunity, since all speech
should be considered to be constitutionally
protected, even where appreciable risks are posed.
g. If speech is to be restricted at all, it must be done
within a very narrow band. Such a band could not
include general prescritpions for hostile actiona or
even for violence. Specific prescriptions for violent
acts would be required, and tchse must be confirmed
by specific evidence that individuals had been moved
to carry out those same specific acts by the speech in
question.
2. Analysis of the Defenses
The length of the speeches is much less important
than other characteristics: content, delivery, context,
audience. In any event, the first speech was not
particularly brief, and the second was in a crucial
position: at the very end of the rally.
In regard to audibility, we conclude that those who
wanted to hear the speeches could do so. This is
admitted by some defense witnesses, and to a certain
extent by Professor Franklin himself who testified that
at the time he felt he could reach those who really
wanted to hear him. The main variable seems to have
been attention; some members of the audience paid
close attention to his speeches, others little. Among
those who did pay attention, there is considerable
agreement as to content, though witnesses differe as to
interpretation.
There is no meaningful way to consider Professor
Franklin's behavior in the Old Union rally without a
firm grasp of the context in which the rally occurred.
The mood that evening was tense and angry. After the
passage of so many months it is difficult to recapture the
sense of anxious expectation that characterized the
campus that evening. The Old Union rally followed
several days of continually escalating events: threats of
coercion, actual coercion, arson, police action, and
hostile confrontations on campus. We have already
summarized recurrent themes of the immediately
preceding rallies at Dinkelspiel on February 9th and
White Plaza on February 10th. As the Board concluded
in its statement of October 28th, cited above, substantial
risk existed on the Stanford campus before and during
the Old Union rally.
There are additional aspects of the context for the
Old Union rally that deserve consideration. Professor
Franklin rose to speak as a well-known and respected
leader of the "movement". Defense witnesses testified
that he was viewed with admiration and his ideas were
taken seriously. Professor Franklin testified that the
time of these events in February was a crucial one for
the "movement", a time when the "movement" might
transcend itself.
Testimony in the hearing, mainly from defense
witnesses, brought out the fact that this occasion stirred
memories of other similar occasions which also provide
meaningful context for the Old Union rally. The events
approximately a year earlier at the time of the military
action in Cambodia came up repeatedly. Indeed, one of
Professor Franklin's main contentions is that he was
attempting to foster a "Cambodia-type strike". A
number of defense witnesses, including especially
Braumstein and Professor Franklin, discussed the events
of the Cambodian period and compared them with the
events during the Laotian invasion. It became clear that
the protest events of the Cambodian period, viewed with
approbation, included a spectrum of activities, some of
which were nonviolent, some of which were patently
coercive, and some of which were overtly violent. The
coercive and violent activities included: forcible blocking
of entries into buildings for sustained periods, large-scale
breaking of windows, bombings, and lire bombings.
The Old Union rally also brought back recollections
of other night rallies held in similar circumstances,
especially when police were on campus, not only during
the Cambodian protest but at other times in the past few

years as well. There lias been a clear tendency for such
occasions to be followed by violent behavior. This fact
was knwon to Professor Franklin, since several of the
defense witnesses commented on his participation in
these protests.
Two of the major themes permeating the three rallies
of February 9th and February 10, advanced by Professor
Franklin and many of his close associates, are especially
pertinent to his closing speech at the Old Union rally:
(1) all-one-war; (2) multiple-levels-of-action.
(1) All-one-war is the theme linking the struggle at
Stanford with the struggle in Southeast Asia. It is the
heart of the problem, emphasized by Professor Franklin
in his speeches, affidavit, testimony and argument.
The speeches attack Stanford's war complicity, draw
parallels between racial oppression in America and Asia,
and emphasize the necessity to learn from the peoples of
Southeast Asia how to resist oppression at home. By the
end of the Old Union rally, the cumulative weight of
these linkages suggests that one way to fight the war
now is to fight the police and administration here.
In his testimony Professor Franklin says:
. . .what I say there basically is that we can't separate
the war in Southeast Asia from the war at home. Now
on all these points, all four of these speeches that
were given in this 24-hour period -that is from the
night belore in Dink through this—all four of those
speeches are essentially saying-are saying the same
thing. They're expressing a set of ideas which 1
consider the most important ideas. . . . And then this
seems to me the most essential thing, both in this
speech and in the second speech, to try to show
people just as clearly as possible that in fact that
occupation army of police that was on the campus
was part of the same war that was being waged in
Southeast Asia and that was being waged in the Black
ghettos and in the barrios of the United States.
This point is further clarified in Braunstein's defense
testimony, under cross-examination:
And the people fighting the United States in South
east Asia are fighting the same battles that people
fighting the police.. .who were on campus in the Old
Union Courtyard one and two of the year before and
are fighting the same battle as the people trying to get
rotten research off this campus and are fighting all
these battles, and they're all the same battles.
Then if it's all one battle, the word 'opposing forces'
relates to all the people on the other side in this big
global battle.
I've later learned that that is what's known as
'People's War'; is part of what is known as 'People's
War'.
Q. I take it in the context in which you were speaking
you at least included the police in that reference?
A. Oh, certainly. Especially that night, yes. I also
included the University administrators.
(2) The war is to be waged with the
multiple-levels-of-action formula. Each person is to do
his own thing, whatever he can, whatever he thinks best,
using his imagination to find ways of resisting the
occupying forces. This theme has a familiar ring from its
recurrence during the preceding few days. We have
earlier quoted Braunstein's remarks on this subject at the
Dinkelspiel rally on February 9th. It is clear from a
variety of references in several rallies that this
formulation is meant to advocate a spectrum of activities
which might include contacting Congressmen,
persuading students in dormitories, being active on
campus at night, refusing to be intimidated by the
police, blocking doorways, occupying buildings,
breaking windows, putting the computer out of service
for a long time, destroying the computer, or doing other
things for which one might not wish to "take credit."
In his testimony Professor Franklin said he felt
impelled at the end of the rally to speak about:
. . .that action that was going to be taken, which
was essentially gpomg back to the dorms to talk
about the war in Southeast Asia and about the
police occupation of the campus and—for people
to be there and exercise their right. That it was
important for somebody to explain to people that
that action itself was, you know, just as legitimate
a part of this war as, say, the armed self defense of
the Vietnamese people or the people of Laos. . ..
And in that speech I mentioned using the methods
of people's war. And at that point I was speaking
very directly to the people there, I think, who
considered themselves revolutionaries. Because I
knew that they would have a basic understanding
of what that meant, and that that phrase summed
up a whole lot of experience.
Braunstein testified for Professor Franklin, 'There are
all sorts of actions on various levels, including people
breaking windows with rocks and people burning down
buildings, as yet unidentified people burning down
buildings, and so on, that sometimes have the same goals
in mind and sometimes don't."
Significant in this context was the term "people's
war." It was interpreted by various witnesses in different
ways. It seems to include a wide range of suggested
actions, some of which are nonviolent, and some of
which are violent. It can clearly include guerilla warfare.
Some witnesses interpreted this as its primary meaning,
others gave this meaning less prominence. Maoist
writings use the term "People's war" for all action, in
particular guerilla warfare, in which the warriors merge
with the masses. Professor Franklin acknowledge in his
testimony that guerilla warfare, including assassination
and bombings, is one important component of people's
war, but denied it was the one he had in mind when he
used the term in his spcech. Defense testimony indicated
that the concept of people's war extends beyond
military action, but did not deny that it prominently
includes military action. Given the repeated explicit
linkages of the struggle against the police occupation
army here and the war in Southeast Asia, in the context
of recent night violence on campus and an afternoon of
police confrontation, it is difficult to believe that most
listeners would be insensitive to the violent connotations
of this term. Why repeatedly use warlike terms and
images—such as Professor Franklin's "war on this
campus" if peaceful actions are intended?
Similar considerations apply to Professor Franklin's
advocacy of action to be taken against the occupation
army in small groups. It is clear that small groups can
conduct dormitory discussions and other peacefully
persuasive activities, and that this did in fact occur,
though we learned very little about the focus of such
discussions e.g., whether they were intended to foster
particular nonviolent or violent tactics of protest. In any
event, such dormitory discussions may well have been
one of the meanings of his alleged recommendation for
reliance upon affinity groups. He advised against mass
militant action, meaning essentially violent
confrontation with the police, on tactical grounds. Such
action was not feasible because the police were too
strong. It is alos clear that the smaller groups could
engage in violent activities as has often happened in
similar circumstances at Stanford during the past few
years-i.e., following night rallies permeated by angry
speech. Two days earlier, February 8, after a night of
"trashing", a sheet was distributed at a "movement"
rally under the title "Do It!" It endorsed the previous
night's activity and called for more of the same,
indicating that tight affinity groups can be helpful in
doing whatever people want to do.
Whatever the activities that Professor Franklin was
urging upon individuals and small groups, it appears that
lateness of the hour was positively desirable-"as late
into the night as possible". In view of the behavior ot
some individuals and affinity groups at Stanford in
similar circumstances during the past few years, it is
reasonable to suppose that lateness might be useful as a
cover for violent activities—though it could of course be
used for peaceful activities as well.
Professor Franklin's two Old Union speeches were
given in a hostile tone. This is apparent in the content of
the first speech, and the effect is heightened when one
listens to the tape and hears his tone of voice. Even
when the speech is briefly interrupted by a KZSU
interview, the angry tone and the emotional crowd
response can be clearly detected. Although thesecond
speech is covered over by a KZSU interview, similar
indications are available from the tape and from
testimony.
In the course of the hearing, both Professor Franklin
and Braunstein indicated that ambiguity about tactics
was desirable to these rally speeches because KZSU was
broadcasting them and the police would presumably
have tape recordings. To advocate violent tactics openly
in this context would have exposed the speaker to later
sanctions. We were informed in the hearing by Professor
Franklin of his "political decision" to keep his position
at Stanford, hence caution about open calls for
"revolutionary violence".
Thus, we are faced with a difficult problem: how to
interpret speech deliberately given in ambiguous terms.
But we have seen already that considerable clarification
emerges from a close examination of the text, from the
full context provided by preceding events, and from the
way in which the speech was delivered. In essence,
Professor Franklin came into a combustible situation,
focused hostility on certain targets, intensified existing
hostility toward those targets, and urged a spectrum of
actions against them: some peaceful, some coercive,
some violent. We must now turn our attention to his
audience in order to inquire whether they were likely to
understand him and whether Professor Franklin must
have expected the risk of prohibited conduct to be
increased by his behavior.
The tone and content of Professor Franklin's
speeches must have been particularly significant for two
groups: 1) people in the movement; 2) people who are
violence-prone for whatever reason. In respect to the
first, these are people who are responsive to Professor
Franklin by virtue of past association, respect,
dedication, and sharing of common goals. They tend to
understand the nuances of his speech, as was evident at
the hearing itself. As for the second grou, it is well
known that public meetings characterized by intense
anger and hints of violence tend to attract, both at the
meeting and via media coverage, individuals who are
drawn to violence for a variety of reasons, not
necessarily political. Whatever the reason for their
susceptibility to violence, they tend to find such
occasions exciting. They may be induced by angry
rhetoric to commit acts of gravity, particularly in the
context of recent examples of violent behavior.
Professor Franklin testified that he was aware of the
long-term, bitter antagonism between Venceremos and
FCM; and he was aware of the immediate, clearly
expressed hostility toward the small FCM group at the
rally. The presence of these mutually hostile groups at
the rally certainly added to the risk. The use of violent
rhetoric in such circumstances increased the probability
of attack and counter-attack.
We think that "movement" people were capable of
understanding the messages. We refer here to familiar
connotations understood by a group sharing common
intersts and values. For example, reference to "militant
action on campus" in 1971 is understood by many
people to mean "trashing " which in turn is understood
to mean "window-breaking." These are not the only
connotations of the terms, nor are they understood by
everyone who comes on campus. A few years ago, the
terms did not have these connotations. But common
usage in concrete situations has led to a widely shared
understanding.
Those devoted to the "movement" had a rich
refresher course in such terms during the rallies of the
preceding few days which we have already summarized.
Professor Franklin is explicit in his testimony that he
was aiming his remarks specifically at them, wanting
primarily to be un derstood by them. Braunstein
testified that there is special communication within the
"movement" and pointed out that Professor Franklin
referred to "us" at the rally. But the defense, in effect,
asks us to believe that, on the night of February 10,
individuals in the "movement" failed to understand the
coercive and violent connotations of phrases like "war
on this campus", taking action on multiple levels to
resist oppression here, and "we must learn from the
peoples of Southeast Asia that when confronted with an
occupation army, we must respond with the methods of
people's war". The defense puts forwards its bland
interpretation of such phrases even though they were
expressed in a very angry tone and in a context of
profound hostility toward the university by a respected
leader who generally approves coercive and violent
tactics in campus disputes (though he denies he
advocated them on this occasion). We must therefore
examine possible reasons why the audience might not
have detected the menacing connotations of his remarks
on the evening of February 10.
From the testimony in the hearing, we do not believe
members of the "movement" were obtuse; nor is there
anything credible in the record to suggest that they were
in such a conciliatory mood that his angry rhetoric failed
to rcach them. Were the "movement" members of
Professor Franklin's audience so concerned with trying
to win over the Roble group that they rejected all

coercive and violent connotations of his remarks? This
possibility deserves further consideration.
During the rally, "movement" people in control of
the meeting showed little consideration for the feelings
ol the Roble students. Indeed, Professor Franklin seems
to have been concerned about this situation, since he
devoted a good deal of his first speech to persuading the
Roble group to accept the "movement's" view of the
situation. As a Roble speaker made clear in the KZSU
interview, the difference between the Roble contingent
and the "movement" was not only one of demands
(narrow vs. broad) but of tactics (non-violent vs.
violent). In this episode, Professor Franklin
demonstrated his authority as a leader of the
"movement" when he easily stopped the flow of the
meeting, re-opened the question, made a major speech,
and got a re-vote.
In his way, Professor Franklin was trying to persuade
the Roble contingent to link up with the "movement" in
a united front, at least for the moment. His way of
undertaking this persuasion was itself inflamatory. He
made assertions of such hostile content in such an angry
manner regarding the University and the police that,
whatever their effect on the Roble group, they must
surely have intensified the resentment of many persons
favorable to the "movement" and thereby raised the
probability of violent actions later. We have earlier
quoted a portion of his first Old Union speech pertinent
to this point. Finally, his do-your-own-thing formula
permitted some encouragement for Roble students to
take peaceful actions and still leave room for
encouragement of "militant" actions by the
"movement".
This brings us again to one of the central themes in
the entire case. At Old Union as at White Plaza, the
actions urged by Professor Franklin were not exclusively
coercive or violent. He advocated a wide range of protest
actions: some peaceful, some coercive, some violent. If a
person removes valuable merchandise from a store,
paying for half, but not paying for the other half, is he
culpable for the part he stole? We believe that the
presence of peaceful recommendations cannot immunize
a person from sanctions if he has urged imminent
coercion and violence as well.
Once again, as at White Plaza, Professor Franklin was
the final speaker, and once again his speech was
promptly followed by events of a disruptive, coercive or
violent nature. The probability of this occurring by
chance is very small. At the least, it reflects his
leadership position in the "movement" and the riskiness
of those situations in which he spoke. He cannot avoid
the conclusion that his pseeches, the last on each
occasion, increased the probability that illegal acts
would follow the two rallies.
In an earlier section on "Fundamental Issues and
Standards", we have indicated that the University must
have the right to put some constraints on speech in
dangerous circumstances, but only with great caution.
This applies to acts of incitement to imminent lawless
action that arc likely to produce such action. "Lawless"
in the university context includes state or local laws, the
Policy on Campus Disruptions or other university
regulations, or common-law understandings of
professorial responsibility.
In judging the applicability of this standard to the
present charge, we have been guided by these questions:
(1) What is the entire context surrounding the alleged
incitement? (2) What was conmunicated to the
audience? (3) What would the speiker judge to be the
effect of his communication on the audience?
Since we wish to sustain the university's vital
tradition of fostering free expression in its widest
diversity, we are exceedingly cautious in considering
possible constraints on speech. If such constraints are
ever to be invoked, they must be reserved for extreme
situations. We are asking whether the context here was
that of a highly combustible situation, whether the
speaker gave an inflammatory message in that context,
and whether the speaker had good reason to anticipate
lhat his message would increase the risk of imminent
lawless action. If indeed we find that the speaker issued
a call to violence, he is not protected by having issued it
in euphemistic jargon. Such a call may be quite as
effective as one issued in more stark terms. In any event,
the language used here was hardly occult.
Although Professor Franklin's witnesses were inclined
to protect him by minimizing their understanding of
coercive and violent connotations in his speeches, they
did not exclude such connotations—nor did he. The
difference between them and administration witnesses
was mainly one of emphasis. In the spectrum of
activities advocated by Professof Franklin, the defense
emphasized the legal end, whereas the administration
emphasized the illegal end.
In our detailed analysis of the context for his Old
Union speeches, we have determined that persons active
in the "movement" must have been quite familiar with
the coercive and violent connotations of Professor
Franklin's phrases, that they were responsive to such
connotations, and that Professor Franklin must have
been aware of these facts.
Finally, we must consider the line of defense that,
even if Professor Franklin were considered to have
carried out such an incitement, he would nevertheless be
justified by his perception of Stanford as a fascist
institution playing an important role in an imperialist
war.
We recognize that Professor Franklin is pressing for
reform in important areas of social concern. Can this
justify coercive behavior in campus disputes, or the
fostering of a climate of violence on campus? Once any
person is granted this privilege in the name of a good
cause, we must grant it also to others who feel they have
worthy aims. When these rights conflict, as they
inevitably must, are we to condone low-grade guerilla
warfare on campus? If we deny to others what we grant
to Professor Franklin, we have adopted a double
standard: coercion and violence in the university may be
condoned if we approve its aims, but restricted if we
disapprove its aims. Then it becomes a simple question
of whose ox is gored. But every cause is fervently
supported by some, eloquently justified by some,
pursued with passion by some. In a way, every war is a
holy war. If we accept Professor Franklin's holiness, how
arc we to reject the holiness of other true believers? In
our view, this course is not morally defensible. We must
do our best to apply one standard across all political
preferences and that standard must not condone
violence on campus.

K. CONCLUSION
Taking into accoutn content, context, delivery, and
audience, did Professor Franklin's two Old Union
speeches include urging and inciting to disruption of
university activities, or threat to persons or property?
Must he have known that this exhortation would be
widely interpreted as immediate advocacy of disruptive
or violent behavior?
1. The situation was risky. Illegal acts had occurred
earlier that day. There was intense resentment toward
the war, the police, and the university; there had been
serious frustration for the "movement" earlier in the
day; bitter political adversaries were present at the rally
and identified by the chairman; protest actions including
coercive and violent possibilities were under discussion;
the police were present on campus; there was a well
known history of violence in similar circumstances at
Stanford. In general, the higher the risk, the less it takes
to trigger coercive and violent behavior.
2. The targets of Professor Franklin's animosity were
quite explicit-the police and the university. He made an
intensive effort in the two speeches to generate further
hostility toward these targets. He provided justification
for coercive and violent behavior toward them, without
specifying precisely what the nature of such acts might
be, leaving that to the judgment and imagination of each
individual or small group.
3. The urging of immediate retaliatory action towards
the police and the university was clear. A great sense of
urgency was conveyed by both the tone and the content
of his remarks. While no detailed blueprint for action
was provided, the necessity for prompt action wis a
strong message. The overall effect was to increase the
likelihood of imminent lawless action.
Taking into account the full context surround his
speeches at the Old Union rally, hte messages he
communicated to his audience, and what he should be
able to judge about the effect of these messages under
the circumstances, we reach the conclusion that
Professor Franklin intentionally urged and incited his
audience to engage in conduct which would disrupt
activities of the University and of members of the
University Community and threaten injury to individuals
an; property.
The Advisory Board thus finds that the charge in No.
10 is sustained.
DISSENTING OPINIONS
Professors Brown and Kennedy, while agreeing with
substantial portions of the majority's account, dissent as
follows:
The majority sustains the charge of incitement
against Professor Franklin citing (1) an extensive
background of material from speeches at this and
other rallies that supply context for his last speech;
(2) Professor Franklin's first speech at this rally,
which also supplies context and reveals relevant
attitudes of his own; and (3) words in the second
speech that constitute, in the majority's view,
sufficiently explicit invitations to do violence against
persons and property.
We dissent regarding some matters of context, as
well as on the finding with respect to Professor
Franklin's own speeches.
In describing the context of the rally, we would
give more weight than does the majority to the
presence of the Roble students and to their impact
upon events in the Old Union Courtyard. The
interaction between the group of Roble moderates
(concerned about the invasion of Laos but not part of
the "movement") and the "movement" group itself
provides a central theme for the rally. Professor
Franklin's own first speech is directed predominantly
to an attenuation of those tensions and to a
reconciliation that would accommodate the new
recruits to "movement" objectives. It is, in essence, a
long argument that political prisoners must not be
forgotten, and that there is a fundamental identity
between the struggle of Asian peoples against U.S.
imperialism and the struggle of oppressed people and
anti-war students against repressive forces at home.
As the majority states, the speech contains a heavy
tone of anger against the police and other forces that,
to Professor Franklin, sumbolize this oppression. We
nevertheless believe it plausible that the speech was
intended to make a group of Stanford students
identify, perhaps for the first time, with oppressed
people; we do not see evidence that Professor
Franklin's intention was to turn them explicitly to
violent actions. In no sense can this first Old Union
speech be regarded as actionable; indeed, the
University administration does not attempt to
persuade us to find against Professor Franklin on the
basis of its content. To the extent that it contains
intensity and anger, and to the extent that these are
directed against the police and the University, the
speech might be said to have added-along with other
speeches at the rally-to the risk that prohibited
conduct might follow. But all agree that nothing in
the content of this speech approaches incitement.
Indeed, we feel that the speech presented, in however
objectionable a style, some legitimate concerns about
the plight of prisoners, the existence of police
brutality, and other significant issues.
Clearly Professor Franklin and other speakers
believed that a major mission of the "movement"
people at the rally was to undertake the "education"
of the rest of the Stanford community. Professor
Franklin's own first speech concludes with a plea that
those present go out to the people "and teach them
what we have learned in the movement," and that
any who are not persuaded should "get up here [ile.
to the microphone] and we should discuss it." At the
conclusion of his speech he testifies that he went over
to discuss the matter further with the Roble group.
The speaker who followed Professor Franklin to the
podium commented that the important thing was to
"go to the dorms, go to the people we want to talk
t0...." A later speaker extends the suggestion by
hoping that those at the rally will go to the dorms
and "rap all night." Recruitment, broadening the base
of the "movement," educating the community: all
these were significant themes in the development o'
the meeting's context. By its relatively stronger
emphasis on the more violent rhetoric, in particular
Professor Franklin's, the majority has decided against
what seems to us a plausible, even persuasive, second
view of the matter.

The content of the second speech, of course, is not
available to us except through the testimony of
witnesses. According to Beyers, Professor Franklin
called for a "people's war against the occupation
army of the police," and he "suggested that people
should go back tot their dormitories, form meetings,
meet in small groups, decide whatever they wanted to
do, to do it as late at night as possible, and to do
things which would bring more of the occupation
here."' Professor Franklin's version in his affidavit is
only slightly different. He, too, calims to have said
that "when confronted with an occupation army we
must respond with the methods of people's war." Me
adds, "I ended by telling people that people's war
meant that they should go back into their
dormitories, organize people into small groups, talk
with them, play football, or whatever, as late into the
night as possible." These differences are not very
substantial; they can easily be accounted for by
differences in recollection.
The majority analyzes these collections of phrases
in such a way that they are strongly persuaded as to
their meaning and that the meaning sustains an
incitement charge, given such other factors as risk.
The logic consists essentially in the elimination of
various attenuative constructions that are more
benign. In our view this interpretation is not
"strongly persuasive." The phrases upon which
attention has been focused are isolated from a
substantial matrix of interstitial speech, the precise
construction of which we do not know, and about
which we must be careful not to draw too confident
appraisals. Two examples will illustrate the point.
First, Professor Franklin says that in the context in
which he used it, "People's war" was clearly indicated
to mean "thoroughly merging with the masses;" he
states that he used the football game as an example of
that kind of tactic. It is significant that virtually all of
the witnesses link the words "people's war" to the
example of the football game. Professor Franklin
states in his affidavit that this was the only exmaple
he used, and the cumulative testimony seems to bear
him out. Second, the phrase "as late into the night as
possible," interpreted by the majority as a call to
militant action by small groups, could equally have
appeared in a context in which it applied primarily to
late dormitory discussions and to legal (though
perhaps risky) methods of taking up the time of the
police. Such an interpretation gain in plausibility
from Professor Franklin's testimony that although he
does not in principle disapprove of trashing, he would
not have urged it on that occasion, both because of
the heavy presence of police on campus that night
and because it would have alienated those new to the
"movement."
The point is that none of these interpretations has
a great deal of certainty about it. The ones we have
just mentioned may be a little less plausible than
those favored by the majority, but only a little less.
The "hard" data on words are so fragmentary, and
depend so much on the kind of context-construction
that is very sensitive to whatever bias the witnesses
may have had, that we find them inadequate to meet
a "strongly persuasive" criterion that Professor
Franklin is guilty as charged by the University
administration.
We are not strongly persuaded by the impressions
of the speech given by various witnesses-as opposed
to actual reconstructions of wording. Such
impressions are especially subject to the bias of
expectations. The differing treatments of Professor
Franklin's account of the football game provide one
example among many. Some witnesses regarded it as
a euphemism for more violent activity, others
regarded it merely as an opportunity for a bad pun,
while still others interpreted it as we would, as an
invitation to occupy the time of the police.
In effect, the majority report argues that Professor
Franklin was employing words well understood to his
audience but not to others. But there is no convincing
evidence that any substantial number of the audience
would have translated his speech into an invitation to
commit violent acts. Each phrase, like "people's
war," has been subject to a number of conflicting
interpretations in the testimony. Furthermore, the
reconstruction of a code depends on one's ability to
capture a reasonably large portion of the message,
and in this instance we have only scattered elements.
Although we think it is quite possible that Professor
Franklin advocated a range of actions some of which
may have been illegal, we do no find the evidence
strongly persuasive that his speech constituted the
advocacy of imminent lawless action.
The majority emphasizes the extremity of the risk
in the situation; we do not disagree with their
evaluation, but we stress more heavily the doubts we
have about the context and the meaning of the words
actually spoken.
to find against Professor Franklin on this charge
might, we believe, force a faculty member addressing
a political rally in the future to guard against possible
cryptic meanings that his speech might convey to a
segment of his audience whenever a situation of high
risk obtains. The social cost of such a prohibition
must be balanced against the benefits to be derived
from being able to prosecute somewhat ambiguous
speech in dangerous situations. We find the costs too
great.
Accordingly, we do not sustain the charge against
Professor Franklin as stated in Paragraph 10.
A. CHARGES
The University Administration's charge concerning
Professor Franklin's conduct during the Old Union
Courtyard rally on February 10th reads as follows:
10. On the eveing of February 10, 1971, beginning at
approximately 8:00 p.m., a rally was held in the Old
Union Courtyard to, among other things, discuss
methods of protesting developments in the war in
Indochina. Over two hundred students and other
persons attended the rally. During the course of the
rally Professor Franklin intentionally urged and
incited students and other persons present to engage
in conduct calculated to disrupt activities of the
University and of members of the University
community and which threatened injury to
individuals and property. Shortly thereafter students
and other persons were assaulted by persons present
at the rally, and later that evening other acts of
violence occurred.
B. NATURE OF THE CHARGE IN PARAGRAPH 10
The charge centers on intentional incitement that
threatened: (1) disruption of University activities, both
individual and institutional; and (2) injury to persons
and property. It implies that a rish of coercive or violent
behavior existed at the time of the rally and that
Professor Franklin further increased the risk by the
content and manner of his participation. In determining
whether the facts fit the charges, the Board must inquite
(1) What is the entire context surrounding the alleged
incitement? (2) What is being communicated to the
audience? (3) What would the speaker judge to be the
effect of his communication on the audience?
C. FINDINGS OF FACT 1. Prominent Themes in the
1. Prominent Themes in the Old Union Rally,
February 10
On Wednesday, February 10 at 8:00 p.m. about 350
people attended a rally in the Old Union Courtyard.
Speakers debated tactics and demands. Professor
Franklin spoke twice. The themes that emerged
prominently in the course of the rally may he
summarized as follows:
a. There was general agreement on opposition to the
war in Southeast Asia and a wish to protest against
American involvement.
b. There was a major difference of opinion on the
scope of demands and of tactics. A contingent of
students from Roble Hall favored a single demand, an
effort to reach out for the broadest possible support
and strict adherence to non-violent tactics. Another
and larger faction favored a broader set of demands,
even at the risk of losing community support; and
they favored a broader range of tactics, including
coercive and violent ones, depending on
circumstances. This distinction between the two
groups was not only apparent in the speeches, but
was emphasized by a KZSU broadcast interview with
representatives of the Roble contingent near the end
of the rally.

c. Five speakers emphasized Stanford's major war
complicity and severe political repression. This
viewpoint may be illustrated with the following
quotation from one of the speakers.
I work at the phone company and I realize that
everyday one out of every two calls that I place
goes from Stanford University or SRI directly to
the Pentagon, to SRI all over the country and all
over the world, and people realize that Stanford
University is integrally linked with Pacific
Telephone Company, that all the business, you
know, that the whole service which Pacific
Telephone puts out is for the benefit of the
financial interest in this area and people who are
against the war, people that I work with who are
against the war, who are very, very angry and
outraged by the expansion of the war into Laos
realize that, because they have brothers, brothers
and uncles and fathers who are over there fighting,
who have been forced to go over there, they don't
have any choice, they can't afford to go to school,
they are forced to be over there. They have
brothers and sisters who are locked up in the
prisons all over America and they realize that
Stanford University, that the kind of research
Stanford does, the kind of money Stanford has,
which controls the black and brown communities
in the mid-peninsula, is a very dangerous thing and
they:re willing to fight against that for their very
survival and I think that the people here should
respect that, should respect the fact that telephone
workers are getting organized, that we're thinking
now about what kind of support demonstration
we can have when Stanford gets itself together and
the issues become clear to the people that
Stanford University is key in the war, key in the
oppression of political prisoners and it's just got to
go. (applause)
d. Eight speakers were very hostile to the police
especially to their presence on campus. Police had
been called to the campus to terminate the
occupation of the Computation Center and had
remained in view of the likelihood of further illegal
acts. It will be recalled that arson and "trashing" had
occurred on the nights of February 6 and 7. Early in
the Old Union rally of February 10, the presence of
police on campus was announced. No witness
testified that a single uniformed policeman entered
the Old Union courtyard, despite the fact that
Professor Franklin, in his affidavit shortly after the
event, said there were many police there. In the
hearing, he corrected this error. Thus, the police were
not visible to the people at the rally, but their
presence on campus was a focus of deep resentment.
They were often referred to as "pigs" and as an
occupation army or occupying forces. In conjunction
with the previous criticism of Stanford's complicity
in the war. the struggle on campus and the struggle in
Southeast Asia were portrayed as different facets of a
single struggle. Parallels were drawn between the

police on campus and imperialist armies in Asia. The
all-one-war theme was emphasized by urging
resistance to the police as analogous to resistance to
occupying forces in Vietnam.
e. On two occasions, members of the Free Campus
Movement were pointed out in a context of hostility,
and were linked to the police on campus.
112. In response to these various instigations, there was
a desire for action — not merely verbal demands, but
concrete, tangible steps to implement them. There
was a clear preference for strong, vivid action, though
some speakers, including those from the Roble
contingent, put their main emphasis on education.
Little reference was made to "strike" in this rally.
The actions mainly preferred by the speakers may be
illustrated by (he following remarks by the chairman:
Okay, I think it's still pretty clear that we want to
keep the demands as they are. Okay, at this point I
think we should go on to specific proposals for
how we act now. We've had a few proposals; one
guy suggested that after the Comp Center thing
today that in order to escalate rather than
de-escalate we should zero in on SRI, Another
person, other people have proposed that we deal
now with the police state that's on this campus
because if we're going to move against the war,
one of the things we have to do to be able to move
against the war in atmosphere where we're not
intimidated by pigs coming through to surround
our meetings and that kind of thing and that one
of the ways to do that is to begin any kind of
action people want to take to get the pigs off this
campus. I think that people should speak to these
proposals and add more proposals that they have.
g. Five speakers explicitly expressed and several
others implicitly expressed anger, using words and
imagery of fighting. Three speakers suggested actions
to embarrass, humiliate, or confront the police,
particularly late at night, while others made more
general comments advocating resistance to
intimidation.
h. Two speakers favored off-campus protests.
2. Professor Franklin's First Speech at Old Union
(Second speech of February 10)
Professor Franklin's first Old Union speech
(Appendix III) began with an effort to persuade the
Roble contingent of the correctness of the majority
position favoring a broad set of demands, including the
freeing of all "political prisoners" and the end of
Stanford's complicity in the war — not merely
immediate withdrawal of US forces from Southeast Asia.
He spoke with concern about people who must spend
time in jail, emphasized solidarity within the
"movement", and opposed betrayal of political
prisoners. Then, in an intense delivery, he said:
And we get very upset when we find our beautiful
campus crawling with pigs who stop and harass
people and rip off and beat half of the people. Well
this is just a very, very mild taste of what life is like in
the black and brown communities of this country
where the pigs come by every night and if you're
young and you're black and brown they stop you and
ask your I.D. and rip you off for suspicion of
burglary and where there are dogs there and where
there's a helicopter overhead and that's part of the
same struggle, and where they shoot you and the pigs
who are here tonight, that's those San Jose pigs have
just mundered a black brother in San Jose, the same
San Jose pig just murdered a black brother down in
San Jose and that's normal life down there. People
murdered in the streets and that's why we call them
pigs. Although it's a little unfair to the four-footed
variety, because they don't do that kind of thing.
[Applause]
Continuing to speak in the same delivery, he next
alluded to the Black Panther party's leadership and made
the following remarks:
And the Black Panther Party teaches us that the
people of Laos and the people of South Vietnam are
not another separate nation state. That they are our
brothers and sisters because they are just other
oppressed communities of the same empire. The
Black Panther Party teaches us that today while this
meeting was going on brothers and sisters, blood
brothers and sisters of us, were killed in Laos, in
Vietnam and Cambodia, in the black and brown
communities of the United States of America. They
teach us this is all one struggle and the
interconnections are every place. Even if you thing
about what Laos is all about; what is the chief cash
export of Laos, who knows?
[crowd | Opium, heroin?
Opium, all the heroin on this coast comes from Laos.
And it's all brought in by the CIA. It is grown and
harvested by Meo tribesmen and flown out on Air
America, the CIA airline. And it is brought in to this
state as part of the oppression, particularly of black
and brown people here, but also of white youth. . . .
(brief KZSU interruption). . . . and is just as much a
part of the counter-insurgency system as the pigs are
war on this campus.
He urged that others be taught about such evils as
Stanford's complicity in the war and the necessity to
free all political prisoners. He expressed the view that
the student strike a year earlier had been a success. He
closed by restating the necessity to continue the struggle
to win others to his viewpoint.
3. Professor Franklin 's Second Speech at the Old Union
(Third speech of February 10)
This speech lasted about two minutes, but because
KZSU was conducting an interview at the time, it can
only be heard in the background on the tape recording.
The pitch of his voice is high, with only a few of his
words and intermittent responses from the crowd being
clearly discernible on the tape. The crowd responses
increase toward the end. The content of the speech can
only be reconstructed from testimony, but this poses
little difficulty. There is substantial agreement as to
what Professor Franklin said amont his witnesses, the
University Administration's witnesses, and Professor
Franklin's own affidavit and testimony. The differences,
as might be expected, are in the interpretation of his
speech.
a. Professor Franklin's interpretation of his second
Old Union speech.
In his affidavit he describes the speech as follows:
A number of speakers at the meeting rose to describe
specific instances of police harassment and brutality.
Several proposed that we go to the dormitories to
discuss die police state on campus and what to do
about it, as well as what to do about the situation in
Southeast Asia. One speaker said that many squads of
six to eight police were roaming the campus, and that
if we marched to the dorms some of these squads
would follow us, and that it would be a good
education for people in the dorms to see them. Two
speakers said that the police were attempting to keep
people from knowing what was happening, and that
they had temporarily confiscated a walkie-talkie from
a KZSU reporter and threatened to arrest him for
listening to police frequencies. Another speaker said
that if we march in one group it will be too easy for
the police and we should confuse them by dividing
into many groups. Another speaker siad "there are
pigs all over this campus and we have to show people
who the pigs are and who the people are, and we
cannot tolerate a police state here or any place else."
It was generally agreed that we would go back to the
dormitories to build support for the strike and to
raise consciousness about the police occupation of
the campus. I rose to speak again. 1 said that it was
unfortunate that the people from Roble had not felt
that they were really part of the movement and that
it was necessary to go into the dorms and discuss all
their questions further. I said that it was very
important for people to understand that this is a
united front, and that people will respond on
different levels of action and with different degrees of
consciousness to the war. I said that it was important
for people to accept these different levels, and that if
people are sincere it is correct for them to do their
own thing, to do whatever they think best, and that
that is how all of us learn. I pointed out that with the
police saturation on campus, however, it would be
suicide for people to engage in any militant action in
a large group. I said that we must learn from the
peoples of Southeast Asia that when confronted with
an occupation army, we must respond with the
methods of people's war. Then 1 explained that this
means thoroughly merging with the people. I gave
one and only one example of what I meant by this. I
said that I had been told that a few nights before,
during a similar police occupation, several people had
begun a game of touch football. They moved from
place to place on the campus, forcing the police to
follow them. Several police complained to them that
they were supposed to be in fixed positions, and that
this was preventing them from maintaining those
positions. Finally, when the football game
appraoched the area of the computation center, the
police had asked to examine the football. I said that I
wasn't sure whether this was because they thought it
was a bomb or because they just wanted to examine a
real pigskin. I ended by teliing people that people's

war meant that they should go back to the
dormitories, organize people into small groups, and
talk with them, or play football, or whatever, as late
into the night as possible.
b. Hearing witnesses' interpretation of Professor
Franklin's second Old Union Speech
(i) Administration witnesses-There is considerable
agreement among administration and defense
witnesses on the content (though not on the
interpretation) of this speech. This can be
illustrated by comparing Professor Franklin's
version of his speech after the event given above
with testimony of Robert Beyers, of the Stanford
News Service. He testified that he had attended
many rallies at Stanford over a period of years,
and had often heard Professor Franklin speak. He
described Professor Franklin's speech on this
occasion as very critical of the police. He testified
that Professor Franklin called specifically for
people's war against the occupation army-i.e., the
police. Professor Franklin suggested that people go
back to their dormitories, meet in small groups,
decide to do whatever they wanted to do as late at
night as possible so as to bring more police onto
the campus to help out their brethren in other
communities. At this point, in Beyer's view, the
nature of the meeting changed dramatically,
leading him to expect that illegal or disruptive
incidents would follow. Immediately after the
speech, the rally ended and Beyers said three FCM
students were badly beaten by some of the Old
Union crowd. Under cross-examination, he
indicated that Professor Franklin did not specify
the exact nature of the violent acts to be carried
out.
Brimelow felt there was much tension and
restlessness in the meeting, and that the crowd got
very excited as a result of the speech. After the
speech he saw the crowd stream off in all
directions and he heard "war cries" (something of
this sort is audible on the tape recording). Almas
heard the speech from the balcony of the Women's
Clubhouse, thought it was impassioned and was
startled by it. Almas had heard Professor Franklin
speak about a dozen times but had never heard
him encourage this level of action. Almas felt
Professor Franklin had not been as careful as
usual, and the witness had the expectation that
there was going to be violence.
R. Jacobs, also on the balcony, thought
Professor Franklin had made inflammatory
statements. Grav felt Professor Franklin was
playing the role of a leader giving instructions to
the group in a serious vein.
(ii) Professor Franklin's witnesses
Witnesses for Professor Franklin heard phrases
similar to those reported by Administration
witnesses but to some extent interpreted them
differently. This is well illustrated by an affidavit
of Bennion, who also testified at the hearing.
. . .It became clear that there was some opposition
forming, basically between going back into the
dorms for further discussion and staying in the
area the police were patrolling in order to show
them that the occupation of the campus would
not be tolerated. At this point Professor Franklin
spoke and tried to explain that these two
tendencies were not really opposed, but could be
carried out at the same time and could mutually
serve each other. He discussed at length the tenets
of "people's war" which is based on the concept
of a united front. In essence this means that
everyone can contribute what they can to a
movement, with one person's greater contribution
or risk should not be seen as invalidating another's.
This leads to many levels of action which mutually
reinforce other levels, rather than detracting from
each other. He pointed out that in advanced stages
of "people's war" such as in Vietnam, many
different levels of action are still employed, not
merely the military level of the National
Liberation Front. He also stated that in the
present case it would be suicidal to engage in any
large-scale militant action. He gave one example of
what "people's war" would mean that evening.
Some people could go back to the dorms and
persuade others to join the movement, while
others could play touch football in the area being
patrolled by the police to show that they were not
intimidated by the occupation of the campus. At
no time did say or even remotely imply or suggest
that he advocated a militant action that evening,
nor did his in-depth analysis of "people's war"
make such an interpretation possible for any
person who had ears to hear and a mind to think.
These witnesses were much preoccupied with the
presence of police. They expressed fear and anger,
and were inclined to expect trouble with the
police that night. They were determined not to be
intimidated by the police, and to harass them
where possible, by and large, Professor Franklin
was seen as speaking to these issues in a way that
fostered resistance but not violence. His task was
seen as uniting the people against the common
foe: putting together the university's complicity in
the war, the linkage of the struggle here iwth the
struggle in Asia, the necessity to respond
vigorously on many levels of action. For example
Pat Faulkner testified that he understood
Professor Franklin to mean that all levels of
actions are all right, even writing letters, and that
it is necessary to wage war on many levels to win.
He felt that Professor Franklin gave a speech in
which he approved a wide range of actions,
including trashing, but did not emphasize violent
responses.
Professor Franklin's witnesses gave the term
"people's war" a variety of emphases, but the
words were generally udnerstood to have a range
of connotations. These included (1) harassment of
police; (2) taking control of our own lives; (3)
brining the war home; (4) strike; (5) learning from
the peoples of Southeast Asia; (6) attention to our
war here, not only the one in Indochina; (7) doing
whatever conscience dictates, which might include
trashing; (8) determinationnot to be intimidated
by police, not to shrink from threats.
4. Post-Rally Events
In the course of the hearing, on October 28, the
Advisory Board made the following statement on
post-rally events:
With respect to the Old Union courtyard speech, the
Board is now in a position to give its view of the value
of testimony about events following the rally. We
admitted testimony on these matters because the

University Administration, in order to demonstrate
that there was a risk that prohibited conduct would
follow the speech, introduced evidence for the
limited purpose of showing that such conduct did in
fact occur. We now feel that this
evidence concerning the light on White Plaza, the
alleged false alarms, the shootings, and other
incidents-need not be rebutted. We have reached this
decision because, in our view, the existence of risk is
adequately shown by pre-and co-existing conditions,
and does not require demonstration by referring to
subsequent events.
It is a matter ol record that untoward events of the
sort mentioned above did in fact occur that night,
beginning immediately after the rally. We limited
testimony on these matters for two reasons: (1) the
charges did not contain any references to Professor
Franklin's post-rally conduct; (2) we had good reason to
believe that significant risk existed without reference to
post-rally events.
D. DEFENSES AND THEIR ANALYSES
1. Principal Points made in Defense Against Charges in
Paragraph 10.
Professor Franklin, in testimony and argument, made
several points in defending against these charges:
a. The speeches were brief, especially the second one
at the very end of the evening's program. Such brief
speeches could hardly have had the impact ascribed
to them by the University Administration.
b. It was difficult to hear the speeches. Except for
those near the speakers, consisting to a considerable
extent of Professor Franklin's close associates,
audibility was a problem. The testimony of several
witnesses who were not close to the speaker was
challenged by Professor Franklin.
c. What could be heard was innocuous. It was meant
to inform, educate, and persuade to a political
viewpoint. It was not intended to incite, inflame, or
cause violence.
d. Most of the people at the rally had already decided
what they were going to do by the time Professor
Franklin gave his second and closing spcech. In this
speech, he essentially gave them a political rationale
for what they had already decided to do.
e. Even if his speeches were taken as inflamatory by
some members of his audience, they were well
justified by Stanford's condition as a fascist and
imperialist institution, and by the presence on the
campus of an occupation army consisting of police
who frequently kill black and brown people, and
indeed had just killed a black brother.
112. In any event. Professor Franklin should be able to
give such speeches with impunity, since all speech
should be considered to be constitutionally
protected, even where appreciable risks are posed.
g. If speech is to be restricted at all, it must be done
within a very narrow band. Such a band could not
include general prescritpions for hostile actiona or
even for violence. Specific prescriptions for violent
acts would be required, and tchse must be confirmed
by specific evidence that individuals had been moved
to carry out those same specific acts by the speech in
question.
2. Analysis of the Defenses
The length of the speeches is much less important
than other characteristics: content, delivery, context,
audience. In any event, the first speech was not
particularly brief, and the second was in a crucial
position: at the very end of the rally.
In regard to audibility, we conclude that those who
wanted to hear the speeches could do so. This is
admitted by some defense witnesses, and to a certain
extent by Professor Franklin himself who testified that
at the time he felt he could reach those who really
wanted to hear him. The main variable seems to have
been attention; some members of the audience paid
close attention to his speeches, others little. Among
those who did pay attention, there is considerable
agreement as to content, though witnesses differe as to
interpretation.
There is no meaningful way to consider Professor
Franklin's behavior in the Old Union rally without a
firm grasp of the context in which the rally occurred.
The mood that evening was tense and angry. After the
passage of so many months it is difficult to recapture the
sense of anxious expectation that characterized the
campus that evening. The Old Union rally followed
several days of continually escalating events: threats of
coercion, actual coercion, arson, police action, and
hostile confrontations on campus. We have already
summarized recurrent themes of the immediately
preceding rallies at Dinkelspiel on February 9th and
White Plaza on February 10th. As the Board concluded
in its statement of October 28th, cited above, substantial
risk existed on the Stanford campus before and during
the Old Union rally.
There are additional aspects of the context for the
Old Union rally that deserve consideration. Professor
Franklin rose to speak as a well-known and respected
leader of the "movement". Defense witnesses testified
that he was viewed with admiration and his ideas were
taken seriously. Professor Franklin testified that the
time of these events in February was a crucial one for
the "movement", a time when the "movement" might
transcend itself.
Testimony in the hearing, mainly from defense
witnesses, brought out the fact that this occasion stirred
memories of other similar occasions which also provide
meaningful context for the Old Union rally. The events
approximately a year earlier at the time of the military
action in Cambodia came up repeatedly. Indeed, one of
Professor Franklin's main contentions is that he was
attempting to foster a "Cambodia-type strike". A
number of defense witnesses, including especially
Braumstein and Professor Franklin, discussed the events
of the Cambodian period and compared them with the
events during the Laotian invasion. It became clear that
the protest events of the Cambodian period, viewed with
approbation, included a spectrum of activities, some of
which were nonviolent, some of which were patently
coercive, and some of which were overtly violent. The
coercive and violent activities included: forcible blocking
of entries into buildings for sustained periods, large-scale
breaking of windows, bombings, and lire bombings.
The Old Union rally also brought back recollections
of other night rallies held in similar circumstances,
especially when police were on campus, not only during
the Cambodian protest but at other times in the past few

years as well. There lias been a clear tendency for such
occasions to be followed by violent behavior. This fact
was knwon to Professor Franklin, since several of the
defense witnesses commented on his participation in
these protests.
Two of the major themes permeating the three rallies
of February 9th and February 10, advanced by Professor
Franklin and many of his close associates, are especially
pertinent to his closing speech at the Old Union rally:
(1) all-one-war; (2) multiple-levels-of-action.
(1) All-one-war is the theme linking the struggle at
Stanford with the struggle in Southeast Asia. It is the
heart of the problem, emphasized by Professor Franklin
in his speeches, affidavit, testimony and argument.
The speeches attack Stanford's war complicity, draw
parallels between racial oppression in America and Asia,
and emphasize the necessity to learn from the peoples of
Southeast Asia how to resist oppression at home. By the
end of the Old Union rally, the cumulative weight of
these linkages suggests that one way to fight the war
now is to fight the police and administration here.
In his testimony Professor Franklin says:
. . .what I say there basically is that we can't separate
the war in Southeast Asia from the war at home. Now
on all these points, all four of these speeches that
were given in this 24-hour period -that is from the
night belore in Dink through this—all four of those
speeches are essentially saying-are saying the same
thing. They're expressing a set of ideas which 1
consider the most important ideas. . . . And then this
seems to me the most essential thing, both in this
speech and in the second speech, to try to show
people just as clearly as possible that in fact that
occupation army of police that was on the campus
was part of the same war that was being waged in
Southeast Asia and that was being waged in the Black
ghettos and in the barrios of the United States.
This point is further clarified in Braunstein's defense
testimony, under cross-examination:
And the people fighting the United States in South
east Asia are fighting the same battles that people
fighting the police.. .who were on campus in the Old
Union Courtyard one and two of the year before and
are fighting the same battle as the people trying to get
rotten research off this campus and are fighting all
these battles, and they're all the same battles.
Then if it's all one battle, the word 'opposing forces'
relates to all the people on the other side in this big
global battle.
I've later learned that that is what's known as
'People's War'; is part of what is known as 'People's
War'.
Q. I take it in the context in which you were speaking
you at least included the police in that reference?
A. Oh, certainly. Especially that night, yes. I also
included the University administrators.
(2) The war is to be waged with the
multiple-levels-of-action formula. Each person is to do
his own thing, whatever he can, whatever he thinks best,
using his imagination to find ways of resisting the
occupying forces. This theme has a familiar ring from its
recurrence during the preceding few days. We have
earlier quoted Braunstein's remarks on this subject at the
Dinkelspiel rally on February 9th. It is clear from a
variety of references in several rallies that this
formulation is meant to advocate a spectrum of activities
which might include contacting Congressmen,
persuading students in dormitories, being active on
campus at night, refusing to be intimidated by the
police, blocking doorways, occupying buildings,
breaking windows, putting the computer out of service
for a long time, destroying the computer, or doing other
things for which one might not wish to "take credit."
In his testimony Professor Franklin said he felt
impelled at the end of the rally to speak about:
. . .that action that was going to be taken, which
was essentially gpomg back to the dorms to talk
about the war in Southeast Asia and about the
police occupation of the campus and—for people
to be there and exercise their right. That it was
important for somebody to explain to people that
that action itself was, you know, just as legitimate
a part of this war as, say, the armed self defense of
the Vietnamese people or the people of Laos. . ..
And in that speech I mentioned using the methods
of people's war. And at that point I was speaking
very directly to the people there, I think, who
considered themselves revolutionaries. Because I
knew that they would have a basic understanding
of what that meant, and that that phrase summed
up a whole lot of experience.
Braunstein testified for Professor Franklin, 'There are
all sorts of actions on various levels, including people
breaking windows with rocks and people burning down
buildings, as yet unidentified people burning down
buildings, and so on, that sometimes have the same goals
in mind and sometimes don't."
Significant in this context was the term "people's
war." It was interpreted by various witnesses in different
ways. It seems to include a wide range of suggested
actions, some of which are nonviolent, and some of
which are violent. It can clearly include guerilla warfare.
Some witnesses interpreted this as its primary meaning,
others gave this meaning less prominence. Maoist
writings use the term "People's war" for all action, in
particular guerilla warfare, in which the warriors merge
with the masses. Professor Franklin acknowledge in his
testimony that guerilla warfare, including assassination
and bombings, is one important component of people's
war, but denied it was the one he had in mind when he
used the term in his spcech. Defense testimony indicated
that the concept of people's war extends beyond
military action, but did not deny that it prominently
includes military action. Given the repeated explicit
linkages of the struggle against the police occupation
army here and the war in Southeast Asia, in the context
of recent night violence on campus and an afternoon of
police confrontation, it is difficult to believe that most
listeners would be insensitive to the violent connotations
of this term. Why repeatedly use warlike terms and
images—such as Professor Franklin's "war on this
campus" if peaceful actions are intended?
Similar considerations apply to Professor Franklin's
advocacy of action to be taken against the occupation
army in small groups. It is clear that small groups can
conduct dormitory discussions and other peacefully
persuasive activities, and that this did in fact occur,
though we learned very little about the focus of such
discussions e.g., whether they were intended to foster
particular nonviolent or violent tactics of protest. In any
event, such dormitory discussions may well have been
one of the meanings of his alleged recommendation for
reliance upon affinity groups. He advised against mass
militant action, meaning essentially violent
confrontation with the police, on tactical grounds. Such
action was not feasible because the police were too
strong. It is alos clear that the smaller groups could
engage in violent activities as has often happened in
similar circumstances at Stanford during the past few
years-i.e., following night rallies permeated by angry
speech. Two days earlier, February 8, after a night of
"trashing", a sheet was distributed at a "movement"
rally under the title "Do It!" It endorsed the previous
night's activity and called for more of the same,
indicating that tight affinity groups can be helpful in
doing whatever people want to do.
Whatever the activities that Professor Franklin was
urging upon individuals and small groups, it appears that
lateness of the hour was positively desirable-"as late
into the night as possible". In view of the behavior ot
some individuals and affinity groups at Stanford in
similar circumstances during the past few years, it is
reasonable to suppose that lateness might be useful as a
cover for violent activities—though it could of course be
used for peaceful activities as well.
Professor Franklin's two Old Union speeches were
given in a hostile tone. This is apparent in the content of
the first speech, and the effect is heightened when one
listens to the tape and hears his tone of voice. Even
when the speech is briefly interrupted by a KZSU
interview, the angry tone and the emotional crowd
response can be clearly detected. Although thesecond
speech is covered over by a KZSU interview, similar
indications are available from the tape and from
testimony.
In the course of the hearing, both Professor Franklin
and Braunstein indicated that ambiguity about tactics
was desirable to these rally speeches because KZSU was
broadcasting them and the police would presumably
have tape recordings. To advocate violent tactics openly
in this context would have exposed the speaker to later
sanctions. We were informed in the hearing by Professor
Franklin of his "political decision" to keep his position
at Stanford, hence caution about open calls for
"revolutionary violence".
Thus, we are faced with a difficult problem: how to
interpret speech deliberately given in ambiguous terms.
But we have seen already that considerable clarification
emerges from a close examination of the text, from the
full context provided by preceding events, and from the
way in which the speech was delivered. In essence,
Professor Franklin came into a combustible situation,
focused hostility on certain targets, intensified existing
hostility toward those targets, and urged a spectrum of
actions against them: some peaceful, some coercive,
some violent. We must now turn our attention to his
audience in order to inquire whether they were likely to
understand him and whether Professor Franklin must
have expected the risk of prohibited conduct to be
increased by his behavior.
The tone and content of Professor Franklin's
speeches must have been particularly significant for two
groups: 1) people in the movement; 2) people who are
violence-prone for whatever reason. In respect to the
first, these are people who are responsive to Professor
Franklin by virtue of past association, respect,
dedication, and sharing of common goals. They tend to
understand the nuances of his speech, as was evident at
the hearing itself. As for the second grou, it is well
known that public meetings characterized by intense
anger and hints of violence tend to attract, both at the
meeting and via media coverage, individuals who are
drawn to violence for a variety of reasons, not
necessarily political. Whatever the reason for their
susceptibility to violence, they tend to find such
occasions exciting. They may be induced by angry
rhetoric to commit acts of gravity, particularly in the
context of recent examples of violent behavior.
Professor Franklin testified that he was aware of the
long-term, bitter antagonism between Venceremos and
FCM; and he was aware of the immediate, clearly
expressed hostility toward the small FCM group at the
rally. The presence of these mutually hostile groups at
the rally certainly added to the risk. The use of violent
rhetoric in such circumstances increased the probability
of attack and counter-attack.
We think that "movement" people were capable of
understanding the messages. We refer here to familiar
connotations understood by a group sharing common
intersts and values. For example, reference to "militant
action on campus" in 1971 is understood by many
people to mean "trashing " which in turn is understood
to mean "window-breaking." These are not the only
connotations of the terms, nor are they understood by
everyone who comes on campus. A few years ago, the
terms did not have these connotations. But common
usage in concrete situations has led to a widely shared
understanding.
Those devoted to the "movement" had a rich
refresher course in such terms during the rallies of the
preceding few days which we have already summarized.
Professor Franklin is explicit in his testimony that he
was aiming his remarks specifically at them, wanting
primarily to be un derstood by them. Braunstein
testified that there is special communication within the
"movement" and pointed out that Professor Franklin
referred to "us" at the rally. But the defense, in effect,
asks us to believe that, on the night of February 10,
individuals in the "movement" failed to understand the
coercive and violent connotations of phrases like "war
on this campus", taking action on multiple levels to
resist oppression here, and "we must learn from the
peoples of Southeast Asia that when confronted with an
occupation army, we must respond with the methods of
people's war". The defense puts forwards its bland
interpretation of such phrases even though they were
expressed in a very angry tone and in a context of
profound hostility toward the university by a respected
leader who generally approves coercive and violent
tactics in campus disputes (though he denies he
advocated them on this occasion). We must therefore
examine possible reasons why the audience might not
have detected the menacing connotations of his remarks
on the evening of February 10.
From the testimony in the hearing, we do not believe
members of the "movement" were obtuse; nor is there
anything credible in the record to suggest that they were
in such a conciliatory mood that his angry rhetoric failed
to rcach them. Were the "movement" members of
Professor Franklin's audience so concerned with trying
to win over the Roble group that they rejected all

coercive and violent connotations of his remarks? This
possibility deserves further consideration.
During the rally, "movement" people in control of
the meeting showed little consideration for the feelings
ol the Roble students. Indeed, Professor Franklin seems
to have been concerned about this situation, since he
devoted a good deal of his first speech to persuading the
Roble group to accept the "movement's" view of the
situation. As a Roble speaker made clear in the KZSU
interview, the difference between the Roble contingent
and the "movement" was not only one of demands
(narrow vs. broad) but of tactics (non-violent vs.
violent). In this episode, Professor Franklin
demonstrated his authority as a leader of the
"movement" when he easily stopped the flow of the
meeting, re-opened the question, made a major speech,
and got a re-vote.
In his way, Professor Franklin was trying to persuade
the Roble contingent to link up with the "movement" in
a united front, at least for the moment. His way of
undertaking this persuasion was itself inflamatory. He
made assertions of such hostile content in such an angry
manner regarding the University and the police that,
whatever their effect on the Roble group, they must
surely have intensified the resentment of many persons
favorable to the "movement" and thereby raised the
probability of violent actions later. We have earlier
quoted a portion of his first Old Union speech pertinent
to this point. Finally, his do-your-own-thing formula
permitted some encouragement for Roble students to
take peaceful actions and still leave room for
encouragement of "militant" actions by the
"movement".
This brings us again to one of the central themes in
the entire case. At Old Union as at White Plaza, the
actions urged by Professor Franklin were not exclusively
coercive or violent. He advocated a wide range of protest
actions: some peaceful, some coercive, some violent. If a
person removes valuable merchandise from a store,
paying for half, but not paying for the other half, is he
culpable for the part he stole? We believe that the
presence of peaceful recommendations cannot immunize
a person from sanctions if he has urged imminent
coercion and violence as well.
Once again, as at White Plaza, Professor Franklin was
the final speaker, and once again his speech was
promptly followed by events of a disruptive, coercive or
violent nature. The probability of this occurring by
chance is very small. At the least, it reflects his
leadership position in the "movement" and the riskiness
of those situations in which he spoke. He cannot avoid
the conclusion that his pseeches, the last on each
occasion, increased the probability that illegal acts
would follow the two rallies.
In an earlier section on "Fundamental Issues and
Standards", we have indicated that the University must
have the right to put some constraints on speech in
dangerous circumstances, but only with great caution.
This applies to acts of incitement to imminent lawless
action that arc likely to produce such action. "Lawless"
in the university context includes state or local laws, the
Policy on Campus Disruptions or other university
regulations, or common-law understandings of
professorial responsibility.
In judging the applicability of this standard to the
present charge, we have been guided by these questions:
(1) What is the entire context surrounding the alleged
incitement? (2) What was conmunicated to the
audience? (3) What would the speiker judge to be the
effect of his communication on the audience?
Since we wish to sustain the university's vital
tradition of fostering free expression in its widest
diversity, we are exceedingly cautious in considering
possible constraints on speech. If such constraints are
ever to be invoked, they must be reserved for extreme
situations. We are asking whether the context here was
that of a highly combustible situation, whether the
speaker gave an inflammatory message in that context,
and whether the speaker had good reason to anticipate
lhat his message would increase the risk of imminent
lawless action. If indeed we find that the speaker issued
a call to violence, he is not protected by having issued it
in euphemistic jargon. Such a call may be quite as
effective as one issued in more stark terms. In any event,
the language used here was hardly occult.
Although Professor Franklin's witnesses were inclined
to protect him by minimizing their understanding of
coercive and violent connotations in his speeches, they
did not exclude such connotations—nor did he. The
difference between them and administration witnesses
was mainly one of emphasis. In the spectrum of
activities advocated by Professof Franklin, the defense
emphasized the legal end, whereas the administration
emphasized the illegal end.
In our detailed analysis of the context for his Old
Union speeches, we have determined that persons active
in the "movement" must have been quite familiar with
the coercive and violent connotations of Professor
Franklin's phrases, that they were responsive to such
connotations, and that Professor Franklin must have
been aware of these facts.
Finally, we must consider the line of defense that,
even if Professor Franklin were considered to have
carried out such an incitement, he would nevertheless be
justified by his perception of Stanford as a fascist
institution playing an important role in an imperialist
war.
We recognize that Professor Franklin is pressing for
reform in important areas of social concern. Can this
justify coercive behavior in campus disputes, or the
fostering of a climate of violence on campus? Once any
person is granted this privilege in the name of a good
cause, we must grant it also to others who feel they have
worthy aims. When these rights conflict, as they
inevitably must, are we to condone low-grade guerilla
warfare on campus? If we deny to others what we grant
to Professor Franklin, we have adopted a double
standard: coercion and violence in the university may be
condoned if we approve its aims, but restricted if we
disapprove its aims. Then it becomes a simple question
of whose ox is gored. But every cause is fervently
supported by some, eloquently justified by some,
pursued with passion by some. In a way, every war is a
holy war. If we accept Professor Franklin's holiness, how
arc we to reject the holiness of other true believers? In
our view, this course is not morally defensible. We must
do our best to apply one standard across all political
preferences and that standard must not condone
violence on campus.

K. CONCLUSION
Taking into accoutn content, context, delivery, and
audience, did Professor Franklin's two Old Union
speeches include urging and inciting to disruption of
university activities, or threat to persons or property?
Must he have known that this exhortation would be
widely interpreted as immediate advocacy of disruptive
or violent behavior?
1. The situation was risky. Illegal acts had occurred
earlier that day. There was intense resentment toward
the war, the police, and the university; there had been
serious frustration for the "movement" earlier in the
day; bitter political adversaries were present at the rally
and identified by the chairman; protest actions including
coercive and violent possibilities were under discussion;
the police were present on campus; there was a well
known history of violence in similar circumstances at
Stanford. In general, the higher the risk, the less it takes
to trigger coercive and violent behavior.
2. The targets of Professor Franklin's animosity were
quite explicit-the police and the university. He made an
intensive effort in the two speeches to generate further
hostility toward these targets. He provided justification
for coercive and violent behavior toward them, without
specifying precisely what the nature of such acts might
be, leaving that to the judgment and imagination of each
individual or small group.
3. The urging of immediate retaliatory action towards
the police and the university was clear. A great sense of
urgency was conveyed by both the tone and the content
of his remarks. While no detailed blueprint for action
was provided, the necessity for prompt action wis a
strong message. The overall effect was to increase the
likelihood of imminent lawless action.
Taking into account the full context surround his
speeches at the Old Union rally, hte messages he
communicated to his audience, and what he should be
able to judge about the effect of these messages under
the circumstances, we reach the conclusion that
Professor Franklin intentionally urged and incited his
audience to engage in conduct which would disrupt
activities of the University and of members of the
University Community and threaten injury to individuals
an; property.
The Advisory Board thus finds that the charge in No.
10 is sustained.
DISSENTING OPINIONS
Professors Brown and Kennedy, while agreeing with
substantial portions of the majority's account, dissent as
follows:
The majority sustains the charge of incitement
against Professor Franklin citing (1) an extensive
background of material from speeches at this and
other rallies that supply context for his last speech;
(2) Professor Franklin's first speech at this rally,
which also supplies context and reveals relevant
attitudes of his own; and (3) words in the second
speech that constitute, in the majority's view,
sufficiently explicit invitations to do violence against
persons and property.
We dissent regarding some matters of context, as
well as on the finding with respect to Professor
Franklin's own speeches.
In describing the context of the rally, we would
give more weight than does the majority to the
presence of the Roble students and to their impact
upon events in the Old Union Courtyard. The
interaction between the group of Roble moderates
(concerned about the invasion of Laos but not part of
the "movement") and the "movement" group itself
provides a central theme for the rally. Professor
Franklin's own first speech is directed predominantly
to an attenuation of those tensions and to a
reconciliation that would accommodate the new
recruits to "movement" objectives. It is, in essence, a
long argument that political prisoners must not be
forgotten, and that there is a fundamental identity
between the struggle of Asian peoples against U.S.
imperialism and the struggle of oppressed people and
anti-war students against repressive forces at home.
As the majority states, the speech contains a heavy
tone of anger against the police and other forces that,
to Professor Franklin, sumbolize this oppression. We
nevertheless believe it plausible that the speech was
intended to make a group of Stanford students
identify, perhaps for the first time, with oppressed
people; we do not see evidence that Professor
Franklin's intention was to turn them explicitly to
violent actions. In no sense can this first Old Union
speech be regarded as actionable; indeed, the
University administration does not attempt to
persuade us to find against Professor Franklin on the
basis of its content. To the extent that it contains
intensity and anger, and to the extent that these are
directed against the police and the University, the
speech might be said to have added-along with other
speeches at the rally-to the risk that prohibited
conduct might follow. But all agree that nothing in
the content of this speech approaches incitement.
Indeed, we feel that the speech presented, in however
objectionable a style, some legitimate concerns about
the plight of prisoners, the existence of police
brutality, and other significant issues.
Clearly Professor Franklin and other speakers
believed that a major mission of the "movement"
people at the rally was to undertake the "education"
of the rest of the Stanford community. Professor
Franklin's own first speech concludes with a plea that
those present go out to the people "and teach them
what we have learned in the movement," and that
any who are not persuaded should "get up here [ile.
to the microphone] and we should discuss it." At the
conclusion of his speech he testifies that he went over
to discuss the matter further with the Roble group.
The speaker who followed Professor Franklin to the
podium commented that the important thing was to
"go to the dorms, go to the people we want to talk
t0...." A later speaker extends the suggestion by
hoping that those at the rally will go to the dorms
and "rap all night." Recruitment, broadening the base
of the "movement," educating the community: all
these were significant themes in the development o'
the meeting's context. By its relatively stronger
emphasis on the more violent rhetoric, in particular
Professor Franklin's, the majority has decided against
what seems to us a plausible, even persuasive, second
view of the matter.

The content of the second speech, of course, is not
available to us except through the testimony of
witnesses. According to Beyers, Professor Franklin
called for a "people's war against the occupation
army of the police," and he "suggested that people
should go back tot their dormitories, form meetings,
meet in small groups, decide whatever they wanted to
do, to do it as late at night as possible, and to do
things which would bring more of the occupation
here."' Professor Franklin's version in his affidavit is
only slightly different. He, too, calims to have said
that "when confronted with an occupation army we
must respond with the methods of people's war." Me
adds, "I ended by telling people that people's war
meant that they should go back into their
dormitories, organize people into small groups, talk
with them, play football, or whatever, as late into the
night as possible." These differences are not very
substantial; they can easily be accounted for by
differences in recollection.
The majority analyzes these collections of phrases
in such a way that they are strongly persuaded as to
their meaning and that the meaning sustains an
incitement charge, given such other factors as risk.
The logic consists essentially in the elimination of
various attenuative constructions that are more
benign. In our view this interpretation is not
"strongly persuasive." The phrases upon which
attention has been focused are isolated from a
substantial matrix of interstitial speech, the precise
construction of which we do not know, and about
which we must be careful not to draw too confident
appraisals. Two examples will illustrate the point.
First, Professor Franklin says that in the context in
which he used it, "People's war" was clearly indicated
to mean "thoroughly merging with the masses;" he
states that he used the football game as an example of
that kind of tactic. It is significant that virtually all of
the witnesses link the words "people's war" to the
example of the football game. Professor Franklin
states in his affidavit that this was the only exmaple
he used, and the cumulative testimony seems to bear
him out. Second, the phrase "as late into the night as
possible," interpreted by the majority as a call to
militant action by small groups, could equally have
appeared in a context in which it applied primarily to
late dormitory discussions and to legal (though
perhaps risky) methods of taking up the time of the
police. Such an interpretation gain in plausibility
from Professor Franklin's testimony that although he
does not in principle disapprove of trashing, he would
not have urged it on that occasion, both because of
the heavy presence of police on campus that night
and because it would have alienated those new to the
"movement."
The point is that none of these interpretations has
a great deal of certainty about it. The ones we have
just mentioned may be a little less plausible than
those favored by the majority, but only a little less.
The "hard" data on words are so fragmentary, and
depend so much on the kind of context-construction
that is very sensitive to whatever bias the witnesses
may have had, that we find them inadequate to meet
a "strongly persuasive" criterion that Professor
Franklin is guilty as charged by the University
administration.
We are not strongly persuaded by the impressions
of the speech given by various witnesses-as opposed
to actual reconstructions of wording. Such
impressions are especially subject to the bias of
expectations. The differing treatments of Professor
Franklin's account of the football game provide one
example among many. Some witnesses regarded it as
a euphemism for more violent activity, others
regarded it merely as an opportunity for a bad pun,
while still others interpreted it as we would, as an
invitation to occupy the time of the police.
In effect, the majority report argues that Professor
Franklin was employing words well understood to his
audience but not to others. But there is no convincing
evidence that any substantial number of the audience
would have translated his speech into an invitation to
commit violent acts. Each phrase, like "people's
war," has been subject to a number of conflicting
interpretations in the testimony. Furthermore, the
reconstruction of a code depends on one's ability to
capture a reasonably large portion of the message,
and in this instance we have only scattered elements.
Although we think it is quite possible that Professor
Franklin advocated a range of actions some of which
may have been illegal, we do no find the evidence
strongly persuasive that his speech constituted the
advocacy of imminent lawless action.
The majority emphasizes the extremity of the risk
in the situation; we do not disagree with their
evaluation, but we stress more heavily the doubts we
have about the context and the meaning of the words
actually spoken.
to find against Professor Franklin on this charge
might, we believe, force a faculty member addressing
a political rally in the future to guard against possible
cryptic meanings that his speech might convey to a
segment of his audience whenever a situation of high
risk obtains. The social cost of such a prohibition
must be balanced against the benefits to be derived
from being able to prosecute somewhat ambiguous
speech in dangerous situations. We find the costs too
great.
Accordingly, we do not sustain the charge against
Professor Franklin as stated in Paragraph 10.
A. CHARGES
The University Administration's charge concerning
Professor Franklin's conduct during the Old Union
Courtyard rally on February 10th reads as follows:
10. On the eveing of February 10, 1971, beginning at
approximately 8:00 p.m., a rally was held in the Old
Union Courtyard to, among other things, discuss
methods of protesting developments in the war in
Indochina. Over two hundred students and other
persons attended the rally. During the course of the
rally Professor Franklin intentionally urged and
incited students and other persons present to engage
in conduct calculated to disrupt activities of the
University and of members of the University
community and which threatened injury to
individuals and property. Shortly thereafter students
and other persons were assaulted by persons present
at the rally, and later that evening other acts of
violence occurred.
B. NATURE OF THE CHARGE IN PARAGRAPH 10
The charge centers on intentional incitement that
threatened: (1) disruption of University activities, both
individual and institutional; and (2) injury to persons
and property. It implies that a rish of coercive or violent
behavior existed at the time of the rally and that
Professor Franklin further increased the risk by the
content and manner of his participation. In determining
whether the facts fit the charges, the Board must inquite
(1) What is the entire context surrounding the alleged
incitement? (2) What is being communicated to the
audience? (3) What would the speaker judge to be the
effect of his communication on the audience?
C. FINDINGS OF FACT 1. Prominent Themes in the
1. Prominent Themes in the Old Union Rally,
February 10
On Wednesday, February 10 at 8:00 p.m. about 350
people attended a rally in the Old Union Courtyard.
Speakers debated tactics and demands. Professor
Franklin spoke twice. The themes that emerged
prominently in the course of the rally may he
summarized as follows:
a. There was general agreement on opposition to the
war in Southeast Asia and a wish to protest against
American involvement.
b. There was a major difference of opinion on the
scope of demands and of tactics. A contingent of
students from Roble Hall favored a single demand, an
effort to reach out for the broadest possible support
and strict adherence to non-violent tactics. Another
and larger faction favored a broader set of demands,
even at the risk of losing community support; and
they favored a broader range of tactics, including
coercive and violent ones, depending on
circumstances. This distinction between the two
groups was not only apparent in the speeches, but
was emphasized by a KZSU broadcast interview with
representatives of the Roble contingent near the end
of the rally.

c. Five speakers emphasized Stanford's major war
complicity and severe political repression. This
viewpoint may be illustrated with the following
quotation from one of the speakers.
I work at the phone company and I realize that
everyday one out of every two calls that I place
goes from Stanford University or SRI directly to
the Pentagon, to SRI all over the country and all
over the world, and people realize that Stanford
University is integrally linked with Pacific
Telephone Company, that all the business, you
know, that the whole service which Pacific
Telephone puts out is for the benefit of the
financial interest in this area and people who are
against the war, people that I work with who are
against the war, who are very, very angry and
outraged by the expansion of the war into Laos
realize that, because they have brothers, brothers
and uncles and fathers who are over there fighting,
who have been forced to go over there, they don't
have any choice, they can't afford to go to school,
they are forced to be over there. They have
brothers and sisters who are locked up in the
prisons all over America and they realize that
Stanford University, that the kind of research
Stanford does, the kind of money Stanford has,
which controls the black and brown communities
in the mid-peninsula, is a very dangerous thing and
they:re willing to fight against that for their very
survival and I think that the people here should
respect that, should respect the fact that telephone
workers are getting organized, that we're thinking
now about what kind of support demonstration
we can have when Stanford gets itself together and
the issues become clear to the people that
Stanford University is key in the war, key in the
oppression of political prisoners and it's just got to
go. (applause)
d. Eight speakers were very hostile to the police
especially to their presence on campus. Police had
been called to the campus to terminate the
occupation of the Computation Center and had
remained in view of the likelihood of further illegal
acts. It will be recalled that arson and "trashing" had
occurred on the nights of February 6 and 7. Early in
the Old Union rally of February 10, the presence of
police on campus was announced. No witness
testified that a single uniformed policeman entered
the Old Union courtyard, despite the fact that
Professor Franklin, in his affidavit shortly after the
event, said there were many police there. In the
hearing, he corrected this error. Thus, the police were
not visible to the people at the rally, but their
presence on campus was a focus of deep resentment.
They were often referred to as "pigs" and as an
occupation army or occupying forces. In conjunction
with the previous criticism of Stanford's complicity
in the war. the struggle on campus and the struggle in
Southeast Asia were portrayed as different facets of a
single struggle. Parallels were drawn between the

police on campus and imperialist armies in Asia. The
all-one-war theme was emphasized by urging
resistance to the police as analogous to resistance to
occupying forces in Vietnam.
e. On two occasions, members of the Free Campus
Movement were pointed out in a context of hostility,
and were linked to the police on campus.
112. In response to these various instigations, there was
a desire for action — not merely verbal demands, but
concrete, tangible steps to implement them. There
was a clear preference for strong, vivid action, though
some speakers, including those from the Roble
contingent, put their main emphasis on education.
Little reference was made to "strike" in this rally.
The actions mainly preferred by the speakers may be
illustrated by (he following remarks by the chairman:
Okay, I think it's still pretty clear that we want to
keep the demands as they are. Okay, at this point I
think we should go on to specific proposals for
how we act now. We've had a few proposals; one
guy suggested that after the Comp Center thing
today that in order to escalate rather than
de-escalate we should zero in on SRI, Another
person, other people have proposed that we deal
now with the police state that's on this campus
because if we're going to move against the war,
one of the things we have to do to be able to move
against the war in atmosphere where we're not
intimidated by pigs coming through to surround
our meetings and that kind of thing and that one
of the ways to do that is to begin any kind of
action people want to take to get the pigs off this
campus. I think that people should speak to these
proposals and add more proposals that they have.
g. Five speakers explicitly expressed and several
others implicitly expressed anger, using words and
imagery of fighting. Three speakers suggested actions
to embarrass, humiliate, or confront the police,
particularly late at night, while others made more
general comments advocating resistance to
intimidation.
h. Two speakers favored off-campus protests.
2. Professor Franklin's First Speech at Old Union
(Second speech of February 10)
Professor Franklin's first Old Union speech
(Appendix III) began with an effort to persuade the
Roble contingent of the correctness of the majority
position favoring a broad set of demands, including the
freeing of all "political prisoners" and the end of
Stanford's complicity in the war — not merely
immediate withdrawal of US forces from Southeast Asia.
He spoke with concern about people who must spend
time in jail, emphasized solidarity within the
"movement", and opposed betrayal of political
prisoners. Then, in an intense delivery, he said:
And we get very upset when we find our beautiful
campus crawling with pigs who stop and harass
people and rip off and beat half of the people. Well
this is just a very, very mild taste of what life is like in
the black and brown communities of this country
where the pigs come by every night and if you're
young and you're black and brown they stop you and
ask your I.D. and rip you off for suspicion of
burglary and where there are dogs there and where
there's a helicopter overhead and that's part of the
same struggle, and where they shoot you and the pigs
who are here tonight, that's those San Jose pigs have
just mundered a black brother in San Jose, the same
San Jose pig just murdered a black brother down in
San Jose and that's normal life down there. People
murdered in the streets and that's why we call them
pigs. Although it's a little unfair to the four-footed
variety, because they don't do that kind of thing.
[Applause]
Continuing to speak in the same delivery, he next
alluded to the Black Panther party's leadership and made
the following remarks:
And the Black Panther Party teaches us that the
people of Laos and the people of South Vietnam are
not another separate nation state. That they are our
brothers and sisters because they are just other
oppressed communities of the same empire. The
Black Panther Party teaches us that today while this
meeting was going on brothers and sisters, blood
brothers and sisters of us, were killed in Laos, in
Vietnam and Cambodia, in the black and brown
communities of the United States of America. They
teach us this is all one struggle and the
interconnections are every place. Even if you thing
about what Laos is all about; what is the chief cash
export of Laos, who knows?
[crowd | Opium, heroin?
Opium, all the heroin on this coast comes from Laos.
And it's all brought in by the CIA. It is grown and
harvested by Meo tribesmen and flown out on Air
America, the CIA airline. And it is brought in to this
state as part of the oppression, particularly of black
and brown people here, but also of white youth. . . .
(brief KZSU interruption). . . . and is just as much a
part of the counter-insurgency system as the pigs are
war on this campus.
He urged that others be taught about such evils as
Stanford's complicity in the war and the necessity to
free all political prisoners. He expressed the view that
the student strike a year earlier had been a success. He
closed by restating the necessity to continue the struggle
to win others to his viewpoint.
3. Professor Franklin 's Second Speech at the Old Union
(Third speech of February 10)
This speech lasted about two minutes, but because
KZSU was conducting an interview at the time, it can
only be heard in the background on the tape recording.
The pitch of his voice is high, with only a few of his
words and intermittent responses from the crowd being
clearly discernible on the tape. The crowd responses
increase toward the end. The content of the speech can
only be reconstructed from testimony, but this poses
little difficulty. There is substantial agreement as to
what Professor Franklin said amont his witnesses, the
University Administration's witnesses, and Professor
Franklin's own affidavit and testimony. The differences,
as might be expected, are in the interpretation of his
speech.
a. Professor Franklin's interpretation of his second
Old Union speech.
In his affidavit he describes the speech as follows:
A number of speakers at the meeting rose to describe
specific instances of police harassment and brutality.
Several proposed that we go to the dormitories to
discuss die police state on campus and what to do
about it, as well as what to do about the situation in
Southeast Asia. One speaker said that many squads of
six to eight police were roaming the campus, and that
if we marched to the dorms some of these squads
would follow us, and that it would be a good
education for people in the dorms to see them. Two
speakers said that the police were attempting to keep
people from knowing what was happening, and that
they had temporarily confiscated a walkie-talkie from
a KZSU reporter and threatened to arrest him for
listening to police frequencies. Another speaker said
that if we march in one group it will be too easy for
the police and we should confuse them by dividing
into many groups. Another speaker siad "there are
pigs all over this campus and we have to show people
who the pigs are and who the people are, and we
cannot tolerate a police state here or any place else."
It was generally agreed that we would go back to the
dormitories to build support for the strike and to
raise consciousness about the police occupation of
the campus. I rose to speak again. 1 said that it was
unfortunate that the people from Roble had not felt
that they were really part of the movement and that
it was necessary to go into the dorms and discuss all
their questions further. I said that it was very
important for people to understand that this is a
united front, and that people will respond on
different levels of action and with different degrees of
consciousness to the war. I said that it was important
for people to accept these different levels, and that if
people are sincere it is correct for them to do their
own thing, to do whatever they think best, and that
that is how all of us learn. I pointed out that with the
police saturation on campus, however, it would be
suicide for people to engage in any militant action in
a large group. I said that we must learn from the
peoples of Southeast Asia that when confronted with
an occupation army, we must respond with the
methods of people's war. Then 1 explained that this
means thoroughly merging with the people. I gave
one and only one example of what I meant by this. I
said that I had been told that a few nights before,
during a similar police occupation, several people had
begun a game of touch football. They moved from
place to place on the campus, forcing the police to
follow them. Several police complained to them that
they were supposed to be in fixed positions, and that
this was preventing them from maintaining those
positions. Finally, when the football game
appraoched the area of the computation center, the
police had asked to examine the football. I said that I
wasn't sure whether this was because they thought it
was a bomb or because they just wanted to examine a
real pigskin. I ended by teliing people that people's

war meant that they should go back to the
dormitories, organize people into small groups, and
talk with them, or play football, or whatever, as late
into the night as possible.
b. Hearing witnesses' interpretation of Professor
Franklin's second Old Union Speech
(i) Administration witnesses-There is considerable
agreement among administration and defense
witnesses on the content (though not on the
interpretation) of this speech. This can be
illustrated by comparing Professor Franklin's
version of his speech after the event given above
with testimony of Robert Beyers, of the Stanford
News Service. He testified that he had attended
many rallies at Stanford over a period of years,
and had often heard Professor Franklin speak. He
described Professor Franklin's speech on this
occasion as very critical of the police. He testified
that Professor Franklin called specifically for
people's war against the occupation army-i.e., the
police. Professor Franklin suggested that people go
back to their dormitories, meet in small groups,
decide to do whatever they wanted to do as late at
night as possible so as to bring more police onto
the campus to help out their brethren in other
communities. At this point, in Beyer's view, the
nature of the meeting changed dramatically,
leading him to expect that illegal or disruptive
incidents would follow. Immediately after the
speech, the rally ended and Beyers said three FCM
students were badly beaten by some of the Old
Union crowd. Under cross-examination, he
indicated that Professor Franklin did not specify
the exact nature of the violent acts to be carried
out.
Brimelow felt there was much tension and
restlessness in the meeting, and that the crowd got
very excited as a result of the speech. After the
speech he saw the crowd stream off in all
directions and he heard "war cries" (something of
this sort is audible on the tape recording). Almas
heard the speech from the balcony of the Women's
Clubhouse, thought it was impassioned and was
startled by it. Almas had heard Professor Franklin
speak about a dozen times but had never heard
him encourage this level of action. Almas felt
Professor Franklin had not been as careful as
usual, and the witness had the expectation that
there was going to be violence.
R. Jacobs, also on the balcony, thought
Professor Franklin had made inflammatory
statements. Grav felt Professor Franklin was
playing the role of a leader giving instructions to
the group in a serious vein.
(ii) Professor Franklin's witnesses
Witnesses for Professor Franklin heard phrases
similar to those reported by Administration
witnesses but to some extent interpreted them
differently. This is well illustrated by an affidavit
of Bennion, who also testified at the hearing.
. . .It became clear that there was some opposition
forming, basically between going back into the
dorms for further discussion and staying in the
area the police were patrolling in order to show
them that the occupation of the campus would
not be tolerated. At this point Professor Franklin
spoke and tried to explain that these two
tendencies were not really opposed, but could be
carried out at the same time and could mutually
serve each other. He discussed at length the tenets
of "people's war" which is based on the concept
of a united front. In essence this means that
everyone can contribute what they can to a
movement, with one person's greater contribution
or risk should not be seen as invalidating another's.
This leads to many levels of action which mutually
reinforce other levels, rather than detracting from
each other. He pointed out that in advanced stages
of "people's war" such as in Vietnam, many
different levels of action are still employed, not
merely the military level of the National
Liberation Front. He also stated that in the
present case it would be suicidal to engage in any
large-scale militant action. He gave one example of
what "people's war" would mean that evening.
Some people could go back to the dorms and
persuade others to join the movement, while
others could play touch football in the area being
patrolled by the police to show that they were not
intimidated by the occupation of the campus. At
no time did say or even remotely imply or suggest
that he advocated a militant action that evening,
nor did his in-depth analysis of "people's war"
make such an interpretation possible for any
person who had ears to hear and a mind to think.
These witnesses were much preoccupied with the
presence of police. They expressed fear and anger,
and were inclined to expect trouble with the
police that night. They were determined not to be
intimidated by the police, and to harass them
where possible, by and large, Professor Franklin
was seen as speaking to these issues in a way that
fostered resistance but not violence. His task was
seen as uniting the people against the common
foe: putting together the university's complicity in
the war, the linkage of the struggle here iwth the
struggle in Asia, the necessity to respond
vigorously on many levels of action. For example
Pat Faulkner testified that he understood
Professor Franklin to mean that all levels of
actions are all right, even writing letters, and that
it is necessary to wage war on many levels to win.
He felt that Professor Franklin gave a speech in
which he approved a wide range of actions,
including trashing, but did not emphasize violent
responses.
Professor Franklin's witnesses gave the term
"people's war" a variety of emphases, but the
words were generally udnerstood to have a range
of connotations. These included (1) harassment of
police; (2) taking control of our own lives; (3)
brining the war home; (4) strike; (5) learning from
the peoples of Southeast Asia; (6) attention to our
war here, not only the one in Indochina; (7) doing
whatever conscience dictates, which might include
trashing; (8) determinationnot to be intimidated
by police, not to shrink from threats.
4. Post-Rally Events
In the course of the hearing, on October 28, the
Advisory Board made the following statement on
post-rally events:
With respect to the Old Union courtyard speech, the
Board is now in a position to give its view of the value
of testimony about events following the rally. We
admitted testimony on these matters because the

University Administration, in order to demonstrate
that there was a risk that prohibited conduct would
follow the speech, introduced evidence for the
limited purpose of showing that such conduct did in
fact occur. We now feel that this
evidence concerning the light on White Plaza, the
alleged false alarms, the shootings, and other
incidents-need not be rebutted. We have reached this
decision because, in our view, the existence of risk is
adequately shown by pre-and co-existing conditions,
and does not require demonstration by referring to
subsequent events.
It is a matter ol record that untoward events of the
sort mentioned above did in fact occur that night,
beginning immediately after the rally. We limited
testimony on these matters for two reasons: (1) the
charges did not contain any references to Professor
Franklin's post-rally conduct; (2) we had good reason to
believe that significant risk existed without reference to
post-rally events.
D. DEFENSES AND THEIR ANALYSES
1. Principal Points made in Defense Against Charges in
Paragraph 10.
Professor Franklin, in testimony and argument, made
several points in defending against these charges:
a. The speeches were brief, especially the second one
at the very end of the evening's program. Such brief
speeches could hardly have had the impact ascribed
to them by the University Administration.
b. It was difficult to hear the speeches. Except for
those near the speakers, consisting to a considerable
extent of Professor Franklin's close associates,
audibility was a problem. The testimony of several
witnesses who were not close to the speaker was
challenged by Professor Franklin.
c. What could be heard was innocuous. It was meant
to inform, educate, and persuade to a political
viewpoint. It was not intended to incite, inflame, or
cause violence.
d. Most of the people at the rally had already decided
what they were going to do by the time Professor
Franklin gave his second and closing spcech. In this
speech, he essentially gave them a political rationale
for what they had already decided to do.
e. Even if his speeches were taken as inflamatory by
some members of his audience, they were well
justified by Stanford's condition as a fascist and
imperialist institution, and by the presence on the
campus of an occupation army consisting of police
who frequently kill black and brown people, and
indeed had just killed a black brother.
112. In any event. Professor Franklin should be able to
give such speeches with impunity, since all speech
should be considered to be constitutionally
protected, even where appreciable risks are posed.
g. If speech is to be restricted at all, it must be done
within a very narrow band. Such a band could not
include general prescritpions for hostile actiona or
even for violence. Specific prescriptions for violent
acts would be required, and tchse must be confirmed
by specific evidence that individuals had been moved
to carry out those same specific acts by the speech in
question.
2. Analysis of the Defenses
The length of the speeches is much less important
than other characteristics: content, delivery, context,
audience. In any event, the first speech was not
particularly brief, and the second was in a crucial
position: at the very end of the rally.
In regard to audibility, we conclude that those who
wanted to hear the speeches could do so. This is
admitted by some defense witnesses, and to a certain
extent by Professor Franklin himself who testified that
at the time he felt he could reach those who really
wanted to hear him. The main variable seems to have
been attention; some members of the audience paid
close attention to his speeches, others little. Among
those who did pay attention, there is considerable
agreement as to content, though witnesses differe as to
interpretation.
There is no meaningful way to consider Professor
Franklin's behavior in the Old Union rally without a
firm grasp of the context in which the rally occurred.
The mood that evening was tense and angry. After the
passage of so many months it is difficult to recapture the
sense of anxious expectation that characterized the
campus that evening. The Old Union rally followed
several days of continually escalating events: threats of
coercion, actual coercion, arson, police action, and
hostile confrontations on campus. We have already
summarized recurrent themes of the immediately
preceding rallies at Dinkelspiel on February 9th and
White Plaza on February 10th. As the Board concluded
in its statement of October 28th, cited above, substantial
risk existed on the Stanford campus before and during
the Old Union rally.
There are additional aspects of the context for the
Old Union rally that deserve consideration. Professor
Franklin rose to speak as a well-known and respected
leader of the "movement". Defense witnesses testified
that he was viewed with admiration and his ideas were
taken seriously. Professor Franklin testified that the
time of these events in February was a crucial one for
the "movement", a time when the "movement" might
transcend itself.
Testimony in the hearing, mainly from defense
witnesses, brought out the fact that this occasion stirred
memories of other similar occasions which also provide
meaningful context for the Old Union rally. The events
approximately a year earlier at the time of the military
action in Cambodia came up repeatedly. Indeed, one of
Professor Franklin's main contentions is that he was
attempting to foster a "Cambodia-type strike". A
number of defense witnesses, including especially
Braumstein and Professor Franklin, discussed the events
of the Cambodian period and compared them with the
events during the Laotian invasion. It became clear that
the protest events of the Cambodian period, viewed with
approbation, included a spectrum of activities, some of
which were nonviolent, some of which were patently
coercive, and some of which were overtly violent. The
coercive and violent activities included: forcible blocking
of entries into buildings for sustained periods, large-scale
breaking of windows, bombings, and lire bombings.
The Old Union rally also brought back recollections
of other night rallies held in similar circumstances,
especially when police were on campus, not only during
the Cambodian protest but at other times in the past few

years as well. There lias been a clear tendency for such
occasions to be followed by violent behavior. This fact
was knwon to Professor Franklin, since several of the
defense witnesses commented on his participation in
these protests.
Two of the major themes permeating the three rallies
of February 9th and February 10, advanced by Professor
Franklin and many of his close associates, are especially
pertinent to his closing speech at the Old Union rally:
(1) all-one-war; (2) multiple-levels-of-action.
(1) All-one-war is the theme linking the struggle at
Stanford with the struggle in Southeast Asia. It is the
heart of the problem, emphasized by Professor Franklin
in his speeches, affidavit, testimony and argument.
The speeches attack Stanford's war complicity, draw
parallels between racial oppression in America and Asia,
and emphasize the necessity to learn from the peoples of
Southeast Asia how to resist oppression at home. By the
end of the Old Union rally, the cumulative weight of
these linkages suggests that one way to fight the war
now is to fight the police and administration here.
In his testimony Professor Franklin says:
. . .what I say there basically is that we can't separate
the war in Southeast Asia from the war at home. Now
on all these points, all four of these speeches that
were given in this 24-hour period -that is from the
night belore in Dink through this—all four of those
speeches are essentially saying-are saying the same
thing. They're expressing a set of ideas which 1
consider the most important ideas. . . . And then this
seems to me the most essential thing, both in this
speech and in the second speech, to try to show
people just as clearly as possible that in fact that
occupation army of police that was on the campus
was part of the same war that was being waged in
Southeast Asia and that was being waged in the Black
ghettos and in the barrios of the United States.
This point is further clarified in Braunstein's defense
testimony, under cross-examination:
And the people fighting the United States in South
east Asia are fighting the same battles that people
fighting the police.. .who were on campus in the Old
Union Courtyard one and two of the year before and
are fighting the same battle as the people trying to get
rotten research off this campus and are fighting all
these battles, and they're all the same battles.
Then if it's all one battle, the word 'opposing forces'
relates to all the people on the other side in this big
global battle.
I've later learned that that is what's known as
'People's War'; is part of what is known as 'People's
War'.
Q. I take it in the context in which you were speaking
you at least included the police in that reference?
A. Oh, certainly. Especially that night, yes. I also
included the University administrators.
(2) The war is to be waged with the
multiple-levels-of-action formula. Each person is to do
his own thing, whatever he can, whatever he thinks best,
using his imagination to find ways of resisting the
occupying forces. This theme has a familiar ring from its
recurrence during the preceding few days. We have
earlier quoted Braunstein's remarks on this subject at the
Dinkelspiel rally on February 9th. It is clear from a
variety of references in several rallies that this
formulation is meant to advocate a spectrum of activities
which might include contacting Congressmen,
persuading students in dormitories, being active on
campus at night, refusing to be intimidated by the
police, blocking doorways, occupying buildings,
breaking windows, putting the computer out of service
for a long time, destroying the computer, or doing other
things for which one might not wish to "take credit."
In his testimony Professor Franklin said he felt
impelled at the end of the rally to speak about:
. . .that action that was going to be taken, which
was essentially gpomg back to the dorms to talk
about the war in Southeast Asia and about the
police occupation of the campus and—for people
to be there and exercise their right. That it was
important for somebody to explain to people that
that action itself was, you know, just as legitimate
a part of this war as, say, the armed self defense of
the Vietnamese people or the people of Laos. . ..
And in that speech I mentioned using the methods
of people's war. And at that point I was speaking
very directly to the people there, I think, who
considered themselves revolutionaries. Because I
knew that they would have a basic understanding
of what that meant, and that that phrase summed
up a whole lot of experience.
Braunstein testified for Professor Franklin, 'There are
all sorts of actions on various levels, including people
breaking windows with rocks and people burning down
buildings, as yet unidentified people burning down
buildings, and so on, that sometimes have the same goals
in mind and sometimes don't."
Significant in this context was the term "people's
war." It was interpreted by various witnesses in different
ways. It seems to include a wide range of suggested
actions, some of which are nonviolent, and some of
which are violent. It can clearly include guerilla warfare.
Some witnesses interpreted this as its primary meaning,
others gave this meaning less prominence. Maoist
writings use the term "People's war" for all action, in
particular guerilla warfare, in which the warriors merge
with the masses. Professor Franklin acknowledge in his
testimony that guerilla warfare, including assassination
and bombings, is one important component of people's
war, but denied it was the one he had in mind when he
used the term in his spcech. Defense testimony indicated
that the concept of people's war extends beyond
military action, but did not deny that it prominently
includes military action. Given the repeated explicit
linkages of the struggle against the police occupation
army here and the war in Southeast Asia, in the context
of recent night violence on campus and an afternoon of
police confrontation, it is difficult to believe that most
listeners would be insensitive to the violent connotations
of this term. Why repeatedly use warlike terms and
images—such as Professor Franklin's "war on this
campus" if peaceful actions are intended?
Similar considerations apply to Professor Franklin's
advocacy of action to be taken against the occupation
army in small groups. It is clear that small groups can
conduct dormitory discussions and other peacefully
persuasive activities, and that this did in fact occur,
though we learned very little about the focus of such
discussions e.g., whether they were intended to foster
particular nonviolent or violent tactics of protest. In any
event, such dormitory discussions may well have been
one of the meanings of his alleged recommendation for
reliance upon affinity groups. He advised against mass
militant action, meaning essentially violent
confrontation with the police, on tactical grounds. Such
action was not feasible because the police were too
strong. It is alos clear that the smaller groups could
engage in violent activities as has often happened in
similar circumstances at Stanford during the past few
years-i.e., following night rallies permeated by angry
speech. Two days earlier, February 8, after a night of
"trashing", a sheet was distributed at a "movement"
rally under the title "Do It!" It endorsed the previous
night's activity and called for more of the same,
indicating that tight affinity groups can be helpful in
doing whatever people want to do.
Whatever the activities that Professor Franklin was
urging upon individuals and small groups, it appears that
lateness of the hour was positively desirable-"as late
into the night as possible". In view of the behavior ot
some individuals and affinity groups at Stanford in
similar circumstances during the past few years, it is
reasonable to suppose that lateness might be useful as a
cover for violent activities—though it could of course be
used for peaceful activities as well.
Professor Franklin's two Old Union speeches were
given in a hostile tone. This is apparent in the content of
the first speech, and the effect is heightened when one
listens to the tape and hears his tone of voice. Even
when the speech is briefly interrupted by a KZSU
interview, the angry tone and the emotional crowd
response can be clearly detected. Although thesecond
speech is covered over by a KZSU interview, similar
indications are available from the tape and from
testimony.
In the course of the hearing, both Professor Franklin
and Braunstein indicated that ambiguity about tactics
was desirable to these rally speeches because KZSU was
broadcasting them and the police would presumably
have tape recordings. To advocate violent tactics openly
in this context would have exposed the speaker to later
sanctions. We were informed in the hearing by Professor
Franklin of his "political decision" to keep his position
at Stanford, hence caution about open calls for
"revolutionary violence".
Thus, we are faced with a difficult problem: how to
interpret speech deliberately given in ambiguous terms.
But we have seen already that considerable clarification
emerges from a close examination of the text, from the
full context provided by preceding events, and from the
way in which the speech was delivered. In essence,
Professor Franklin came into a combustible situation,
focused hostility on certain targets, intensified existing
hostility toward those targets, and urged a spectrum of
actions against them: some peaceful, some coercive,
some violent. We must now turn our attention to his
audience in order to inquire whether they were likely to
understand him and whether Professor Franklin must
have expected the risk of prohibited conduct to be
increased by his behavior.
The tone and content of Professor Franklin's
speeches must have been particularly significant for two
groups: 1) people in the movement; 2) people who are
violence-prone for whatever reason. In respect to the
first, these are people who are responsive to Professor
Franklin by virtue of past association, respect,
dedication, and sharing of common goals. They tend to
understand the nuances of his speech, as was evident at
the hearing itself. As for the second grou, it is well
known that public meetings characterized by intense
anger and hints of violence tend to attract, both at the
meeting and via media coverage, individuals who are
drawn to violence for a variety of reasons, not
necessarily political. Whatever the reason for their
susceptibility to violence, they tend to find such
occasions exciting. They may be induced by angry
rhetoric to commit acts of gravity, particularly in the
context of recent examples of violent behavior.
Professor Franklin testified that he was aware of the
long-term, bitter antagonism between Venceremos and
FCM; and he was aware of the immediate, clearly
expressed hostility toward the small FCM group at the
rally. The presence of these mutually hostile groups at
the rally certainly added to the risk. The use of violent
rhetoric in such circumstances increased the probability
of attack and counter-attack.
We think that "movement" people were capable of
understanding the messages. We refer here to familiar
connotations understood by a group sharing common
intersts and values. For example, reference to "militant
action on campus" in 1971 is understood by many
people to mean "trashing " which in turn is understood
to mean "window-breaking." These are not the only
connotations of the terms, nor are they understood by
everyone who comes on campus. A few years ago, the
terms did not have these connotations. But common
usage in concrete situations has led to a widely shared
understanding.
Those devoted to the "movement" had a rich
refresher course in such terms during the rallies of the
preceding few days which we have already summarized.
Professor Franklin is explicit in his testimony that he
was aiming his remarks specifically at them, wanting
primarily to be un derstood by them. Braunstein
testified that there is special communication within the
"movement" and pointed out that Professor Franklin
referred to "us" at the rally. But the defense, in effect,
asks us to believe that, on the night of February 10,
individuals in the "movement" failed to understand the
coercive and violent connotations of phrases like "war
on this campus", taking action on multiple levels to
resist oppression here, and "we must learn from the
peoples of Southeast Asia that when confronted with an
occupation army, we must respond with the methods of
people's war". The defense puts forwards its bland
interpretation of such phrases even though they were
expressed in a very angry tone and in a context of
profound hostility toward the university by a respected
leader who generally approves coercive and violent
tactics in campus disputes (though he denies he
advocated them on this occasion). We must therefore
examine possible reasons why the audience might not
have detected the menacing connotations of his remarks
on the evening of February 10.
From the testimony in the hearing, we do not believe
members of the "movement" were obtuse; nor is there
anything credible in the record to suggest that they were
in such a conciliatory mood that his angry rhetoric failed
to rcach them. Were the "movement" members of
Professor Franklin's audience so concerned with trying
to win over the Roble group that they rejected all

coercive and violent connotations of his remarks? This
possibility deserves further consideration.
During the rally, "movement" people in control of
the meeting showed little consideration for the feelings
ol the Roble students. Indeed, Professor Franklin seems
to have been concerned about this situation, since he
devoted a good deal of his first speech to persuading the
Roble group to accept the "movement's" view of the
situation. As a Roble speaker made clear in the KZSU
interview, the difference between the Roble contingent
and the "movement" was not only one of demands
(narrow vs. broad) but of tactics (non-violent vs.
violent). In this episode, Professor Franklin
demonstrated his authority as a leader of the
"movement" when he easily stopped the flow of the
meeting, re-opened the question, made a major speech,
and got a re-vote.
In his way, Professor Franklin was trying to persuade
the Roble contingent to link up with the "movement" in
a united front, at least for the moment. His way of
undertaking this persuasion was itself inflamatory. He
made assertions of such hostile content in such an angry
manner regarding the University and the police that,
whatever their effect on the Roble group, they must
surely have intensified the resentment of many persons
favorable to the "movement" and thereby raised the
probability of violent actions later. We have earlier
quoted a portion of his first Old Union speech pertinent
to this point. Finally, his do-your-own-thing formula
permitted some encouragement for Roble students to
take peaceful actions and still leave room for
encouragement of "militant" actions by the
"movement".
This brings us again to one of the central themes in
the entire case. At Old Union as at White Plaza, the
actions urged by Professor Franklin were not exclusively
coercive or violent. He advocated a wide range of protest
actions: some peaceful, some coercive, some violent. If a
person removes valuable merchandise from a store,
paying for half, but not paying for the other half, is he
culpable for the part he stole? We believe that the
presence of peaceful recommendations cannot immunize
a person from sanctions if he has urged imminent
coercion and violence as well.
Once again, as at White Plaza, Professor Franklin was
the final speaker, and once again his speech was
promptly followed by events of a disruptive, coercive or
violent nature. The probability of this occurring by
chance is very small. At the least, it reflects his
leadership position in the "movement" and the riskiness
of those situations in which he spoke. He cannot avoid
the conclusion that his pseeches, the last on each
occasion, increased the probability that illegal acts
would follow the two rallies.
In an earlier section on "Fundamental Issues and
Standards", we have indicated that the University must
have the right to put some constraints on speech in
dangerous circumstances, but only with great caution.
This applies to acts of incitement to imminent lawless
action that arc likely to produce such action. "Lawless"
in the university context includes state or local laws, the
Policy on Campus Disruptions or other university
regulations, or common-law understandings of
professorial responsibility.
In judging the applicability of this standard to the
present charge, we have been guided by these questions:
(1) What is the entire context surrounding the alleged
incitement? (2) What was conmunicated to the
audience? (3) What would the speiker judge to be the
effect of his communication on the audience?
Since we wish to sustain the university's vital
tradition of fostering free expression in its widest
diversity, we are exceedingly cautious in considering
possible constraints on speech. If such constraints are
ever to be invoked, they must be reserved for extreme
situations. We are asking whether the context here was
that of a highly combustible situation, whether the
speaker gave an inflammatory message in that context,
and whether the speaker had good reason to anticipate
lhat his message would increase the risk of imminent
lawless action. If indeed we find that the speaker issued
a call to violence, he is not protected by having issued it
in euphemistic jargon. Such a call may be quite as
effective as one issued in more stark terms. In any event,
the language used here was hardly occult.
Although Professor Franklin's witnesses were inclined
to protect him by minimizing their understanding of
coercive and violent connotations in his speeches, they
did not exclude such connotations—nor did he. The
difference between them and administration witnesses
was mainly one of emphasis. In the spectrum of
activities advocated by Professof Franklin, the defense
emphasized the legal end, whereas the administration
emphasized the illegal end.
In our detailed analysis of the context for his Old
Union speeches, we have determined that persons active
in the "movement" must have been quite familiar with
the coercive and violent connotations of Professor
Franklin's phrases, that they were responsive to such
connotations, and that Professor Franklin must have
been aware of these facts.
Finally, we must consider the line of defense that,
even if Professor Franklin were considered to have
carried out such an incitement, he would nevertheless be
justified by his perception of Stanford as a fascist
institution playing an important role in an imperialist
war.
We recognize that Professor Franklin is pressing for
reform in important areas of social concern. Can this
justify coercive behavior in campus disputes, or the
fostering of a climate of violence on campus? Once any
person is granted this privilege in the name of a good
cause, we must grant it also to others who feel they have
worthy aims. When these rights conflict, as they
inevitably must, are we to condone low-grade guerilla
warfare on campus? If we deny to others what we grant
to Professor Franklin, we have adopted a double
standard: coercion and violence in the university may be
condoned if we approve its aims, but restricted if we
disapprove its aims. Then it becomes a simple question
of whose ox is gored. But every cause is fervently
supported by some, eloquently justified by some,
pursued with passion by some. In a way, every war is a
holy war. If we accept Professor Franklin's holiness, how
arc we to reject the holiness of other true believers? In
our view, this course is not morally defensible. We must
do our best to apply one standard across all political
preferences and that standard must not condone
violence on campus.

K. CONCLUSION
Taking into accoutn content, context, delivery, and
audience, did Professor Franklin's two Old Union
speeches include urging and inciting to disruption of
university activities, or threat to persons or property?
Must he have known that this exhortation would be
widely interpreted as immediate advocacy of disruptive
or violent behavior?
1. The situation was risky. Illegal acts had occurred
earlier that day. There was intense resentment toward
the war, the police, and the university; there had been
serious frustration for the "movement" earlier in the
day; bitter political adversaries were present at the rally
and identified by the chairman; protest actions including
coercive and violent possibilities were under discussion;
the police were present on campus; there was a well
known history of violence in similar circumstances at
Stanford. In general, the higher the risk, the less it takes
to trigger coercive and violent behavior.
2. The targets of Professor Franklin's animosity were
quite explicit-the police and the university. He made an
intensive effort in the two speeches to generate further
hostility toward these targets. He provided justification
for coercive and violent behavior toward them, without
specifying precisely what the nature of such acts might
be, leaving that to the judgment and imagination of each
individual or small group.
3. The urging of immediate retaliatory action towards
the police and the university was clear. A great sense of
urgency was conveyed by both the tone and the content
of his remarks. While no detailed blueprint for action
was provided, the necessity for prompt action wis a
strong message. The overall effect was to increase the
likelihood of imminent lawless action.
Taking into account the full context surround his
speeches at the Old Union rally, hte messages he
communicated to his audience, and what he should be
able to judge about the effect of these messages under
the circumstances, we reach the conclusion that
Professor Franklin intentionally urged and incited his
audience to engage in conduct which would disrupt
activities of the University and of members of the
University Community and threaten injury to individuals
an; property.
The Advisory Board thus finds that the charge in No.
10 is sustained.
DISSENTING OPINIONS
Professors Brown and Kennedy, while agreeing with
substantial portions of the majority's account, dissent as
follows:
The majority sustains the charge of incitement
against Professor Franklin citing (1) an extensive
background of material from speeches at this and
other rallies that supply context for his last speech;
(2) Professor Franklin's first speech at this rally,
which also supplies context and reveals relevant
attitudes of his own; and (3) words in the second
speech that constitute, in the majority's view,
sufficiently explicit invitations to do violence against
persons and property.
We dissent regarding some matters of context, as
well as on the finding with respect to Professor
Franklin's own speeches.
In describing the context of the rally, we would
give more weight than does the majority to the
presence of the Roble students and to their impact
upon events in the Old Union Courtyard. The
interaction between the group of Roble moderates
(concerned about the invasion of Laos but not part of
the "movement") and the "movement" group itself
provides a central theme for the rally. Professor
Franklin's own first speech is directed predominantly
to an attenuation of those tensions and to a
reconciliation that would accommodate the new
recruits to "movement" objectives. It is, in essence, a
long argument that political prisoners must not be
forgotten, and that there is a fundamental identity
between the struggle of Asian peoples against U.S.
imperialism and the struggle of oppressed people and
anti-war students against repressive forces at home.
As the majority states, the speech contains a heavy
tone of anger against the police and other forces that,
to Professor Franklin, sumbolize this oppression. We
nevertheless believe it plausible that the speech was
intended to make a group of Stanford students
identify, perhaps for the first time, with oppressed
people; we do not see evidence that Professor
Franklin's intention was to turn them explicitly to
violent actions. In no sense can this first Old Union
speech be regarded as actionable; indeed, the
University administration does not attempt to
persuade us to find against Professor Franklin on the
basis of its content. To the extent that it contains
intensity and anger, and to the extent that these are
directed against the police and the University, the
speech might be said to have added-along with other
speeches at the rally-to the risk that prohibited
conduct might follow. But all agree that nothing in
the content of this speech approaches incitement.
Indeed, we feel that the speech presented, in however
objectionable a style, some legitimate concerns about
the plight of prisoners, the existence of police
brutality, and other significant issues.
Clearly Professor Franklin and other speakers
believed that a major mission of the "movement"
people at the rally was to undertake the "education"
of the rest of the Stanford community. Professor
Franklin's own first speech concludes with a plea that
those present go out to the people "and teach them
what we have learned in the movement," and that
any who are not persuaded should "get up here [ile.
to the microphone] and we should discuss it." At the
conclusion of his speech he testifies that he went over
to discuss the matter further with the Roble group.
The speaker who followed Professor Franklin to the
podium commented that the important thing was to
"go to the dorms, go to the people we want to talk
t0...." A later speaker extends the suggestion by
hoping that those at the rally will go to the dorms
and "rap all night." Recruitment, broadening the base
of the "movement," educating the community: all
these were significant themes in the development o'
the meeting's context. By its relatively stronger
emphasis on the more violent rhetoric, in particular
Professor Franklin's, the majority has decided against
what seems to us a plausible, even persuasive, second
view of the matter.

The content of the second speech, of course, is not
available to us except through the testimony of
witnesses. According to Beyers, Professor Franklin
called for a "people's war against the occupation
army of the police," and he "suggested that people
should go back tot their dormitories, form meetings,
meet in small groups, decide whatever they wanted to
do, to do it as late at night as possible, and to do
things which would bring more of the occupation
here."' Professor Franklin's version in his affidavit is
only slightly different. He, too, calims to have said
that "when confronted with an occupation army we
must respond with the methods of people's war." Me
adds, "I ended by telling people that people's war
meant that they should go back into their
dormitories, organize people into small groups, talk
with them, play football, or whatever, as late into the
night as possible." These differences are not very
substantial; they can easily be accounted for by
differences in recollection.
The majority analyzes these collections of phrases
in such a way that they are strongly persuaded as to
their meaning and that the meaning sustains an
incitement charge, given such other factors as risk.
The logic consists essentially in the elimination of
various attenuative constructions that are more
benign. In our view this interpretation is not
"strongly persuasive." The phrases upon which
attention has been focused are isolated from a
substantial matrix of interstitial speech, the precise
construction of which we do not know, and about
which we must be careful not to draw too confident
appraisals. Two examples will illustrate the point.
First, Professor Franklin says that in the context in
which he used it, "People's war" was clearly indicated
to mean "thoroughly merging with the masses;" he
states that he used the football game as an example of
that kind of tactic. It is significant that virtually all of
the witnesses link the words "people's war" to the
example of the football game. Professor Franklin
states in his affidavit that this was the only exmaple
he used, and the cumulative testimony seems to bear
him out. Second, the phrase "as late into the night as
possible," interpreted by the majority as a call to
militant action by small groups, could equally have
appeared in a context in which it applied primarily to
late dormitory discussions and to legal (though
perhaps risky) methods of taking up the time of the
police. Such an interpretation gain in plausibility
from Professor Franklin's testimony that although he
does not in principle disapprove of trashing, he would
not have urged it on that occasion, both because of
the heavy presence of police on campus that night
and because it would have alienated those new to the
"movement."
The point is that none of these interpretations has
a great deal of certainty about it. The ones we have
just mentioned may be a little less plausible than
those favored by the majority, but only a little less.
The "hard" data on words are so fragmentary, and
depend so much on the kind of context-construction
that is very sensitive to whatever bias the witnesses
may have had, that we find them inadequate to meet
a "strongly persuasive" criterion that Professor
Franklin is guilty as charged by the University
administration.
We are not strongly persuaded by the impressions
of the speech given by various witnesses-as opposed
to actual reconstructions of wording. Such
impressions are especially subject to the bias of
expectations. The differing treatments of Professor
Franklin's account of the football game provide one
example among many. Some witnesses regarded it as
a euphemism for more violent activity, others
regarded it merely as an opportunity for a bad pun,
while still others interpreted it as we would, as an
invitation to occupy the time of the police.
In effect, the majority report argues that Professor
Franklin was employing words well understood to his
audience but not to others. But there is no convincing
evidence that any substantial number of the audience
would have translated his speech into an invitation to
commit violent acts. Each phrase, like "people's
war," has been subject to a number of conflicting
interpretations in the testimony. Furthermore, the
reconstruction of a code depends on one's ability to
capture a reasonably large portion of the message,
and in this instance we have only scattered elements.
Although we think it is quite possible that Professor
Franklin advocated a range of actions some of which
may have been illegal, we do no find the evidence
strongly persuasive that his speech constituted the
advocacy of imminent lawless action.
The majority emphasizes the extremity of the risk
in the situation; we do not disagree with their
evaluation, but we stress more heavily the doubts we
have about the context and the meaning of the words
actually spoken.
to find against Professor Franklin on this charge
might, we believe, force a faculty member addressing
a political rally in the future to guard against possible
cryptic meanings that his speech might convey to a
segment of his audience whenever a situation of high
risk obtains. The social cost of such a prohibition
must be balanced against the benefits to be derived
from being able to prosecute somewhat ambiguous
speech in dangerous situations. We find the costs too
great.
Accordingly, we do not sustain the charge against
Professor Franklin as stated in Paragraph 10.
A. CHARGES
The University Administration's charge concerning
Professor Franklin's conduct during the Old Union
Courtyard rally on February 10th reads as follows:
10. On the eveing of February 10, 1971, beginning at
approximately 8:00 p.m., a rally was held in the Old
Union Courtyard to, among other things, discuss
methods of protesting developments in the war in
Indochina. Over two hundred students and other
persons attended the rally. During the course of the
rally Professor Franklin intentionally urged and
incited students and other persons present to engage
in conduct calculated to disrupt activities of the
University and of members of the University
community and which threatened injury to
individuals and property. Shortly thereafter students
and other persons were assaulted by persons present
at the rally, and later that evening other acts of
violence occurred.
B. NATURE OF THE CHARGE IN PARAGRAPH 10
The charge centers on intentional incitement that
threatened: (1) disruption of University activities, both
individual and institutional; and (2) injury to persons
and property. It implies that a rish of coercive or violent
behavior existed at the time of the rally and that
Professor Franklin further increased the risk by the
content and manner of his participation. In determining
whether the facts fit the charges, the Board must inquite
(1) What is the entire context surrounding the alleged
incitement? (2) What is being communicated to the
audience? (3) What would the speaker judge to be the
effect of his communication on the audience?
C. FINDINGS OF FACT 1. Prominent Themes in the
1. Prominent Themes in the Old Union Rally,
February 10
On Wednesday, February 10 at 8:00 p.m. about 350
people attended a rally in the Old Union Courtyard.
Speakers debated tactics and demands. Professor
Franklin spoke twice. The themes that emerged
prominently in the course of the rally may he
summarized as follows:
a. There was general agreement on opposition to the
war in Southeast Asia and a wish to protest against
American involvement.
b. There was a major difference of opinion on the
scope of demands and of tactics. A contingent of
students from Roble Hall favored a single demand, an
effort to reach out for the broadest possible support
and strict adherence to non-violent tactics. Another
and larger faction favored a broader set of demands,
even at the risk of losing community support; and
they favored a broader range of tactics, including
coercive and violent ones, depending on
circumstances. This distinction between the two
groups was not only apparent in the speeches, but
was emphasized by a KZSU broadcast interview with
representatives of the Roble contingent near the end
of the rally.

c. Five speakers emphasized Stanford's major war
complicity and severe political repression. This
viewpoint may be illustrated with the following
quotation from one of the speakers.
I work at the phone company and I realize that
everyday one out of every two calls that I place
goes from Stanford University or SRI directly to
the Pentagon, to SRI all over the country and all
over the world, and people realize that Stanford
University is integrally linked with Pacific
Telephone Company, that all the business, you
know, that the whole service which Pacific
Telephone puts out is for the benefit of the
financial interest in this area and people who are
against the war, people that I work with who are
against the war, who are very, very angry and
outraged by the expansion of the war into Laos
realize that, because they have brothers, brothers
and uncles and fathers who are over there fighting,
who have been forced to go over there, they don't
have any choice, they can't afford to go to school,
they are forced to be over there. They have
brothers and sisters who are locked up in the
prisons all over America and they realize that
Stanford University, that the kind of research
Stanford does, the kind of money Stanford has,
which controls the black and brown communities
in the mid-peninsula, is a very dangerous thing and
they:re willing to fight against that for their very
survival and I think that the people here should
respect that, should respect the fact that telephone
workers are getting organized, that we're thinking
now about what kind of support demonstration
we can have when Stanford gets itself together and
the issues become clear to the people that
Stanford University is key in the war, key in the
oppression of political prisoners and it's just got to
go. (applause)
d. Eight speakers were very hostile to the police
especially to their presence on campus. Police had
been called to the campus to terminate the
occupation of the Computation Center and had
remained in view of the likelihood of further illegal
acts. It will be recalled that arson and "trashing" had
occurred on the nights of February 6 and 7. Early in
the Old Union rally of February 10, the presence of
police on campus was announced. No witness
testified that a single uniformed policeman entered
the Old Union courtyard, despite the fact that
Professor Franklin, in his affidavit shortly after the
event, said there were many police there. In the
hearing, he corrected this error. Thus, the police were
not visible to the people at the rally, but their
presence on campus was a focus of deep resentment.
They were often referred to as "pigs" and as an
occupation army or occupying forces. In conjunction
with the previous criticism of Stanford's complicity
in the war. the struggle on campus and the struggle in
Southeast Asia were portrayed as different facets of a
single struggle. Parallels were drawn between the

police on campus and imperialist armies in Asia. The
all-one-war theme was emphasized by urging
resistance to the police as analogous to resistance to
occupying forces in Vietnam.
e. On two occasions, members of the Free Campus
Movement were pointed out in a context of hostility,
and were linked to the police on campus.
112. In response to these various instigations, there was
a desire for action — not merely verbal demands, but
concrete, tangible steps to implement them. There
was a clear preference for strong, vivid action, though
some speakers, including those from the Roble
contingent, put their main emphasis on education.
Little reference was made to "strike" in this rally.
The actions mainly preferred by the speakers may be
illustrated by (he following remarks by the chairman:
Okay, I think it's still pretty clear that we want to
keep the demands as they are. Okay, at this point I
think we should go on to specific proposals for
how we act now. We've had a few proposals; one
guy suggested that after the Comp Center thing
today that in order to escalate rather than
de-escalate we should zero in on SRI, Another
person, other people have proposed that we deal
now with the police state that's on this campus
because if we're going to move against the war,
one of the things we have to do to be able to move
against the war in atmosphere where we're not
intimidated by pigs coming through to surround
our meetings and that kind of thing and that one
of the ways to do that is to begin any kind of
action people want to take to get the pigs off this
campus. I think that people should speak to these
proposals and add more proposals that they have.
g. Five speakers explicitly expressed and several
others implicitly expressed anger, using words and
imagery of fighting. Three speakers suggested actions
to embarrass, humiliate, or confront the police,
particularly late at night, while others made more
general comments advocating resistance to
intimidation.
h. Two speakers favored off-campus protests.
2. Professor Franklin's First Speech at Old Union
(Second speech of February 10)
Professor Franklin's first Old Union speech
(Appendix III) began with an effort to persuade the
Roble contingent of the correctness of the majority
position favoring a broad set of demands, including the
freeing of all "political prisoners" and the end of
Stanford's complicity in the war — not merely
immediate withdrawal of US forces from Southeast Asia.
He spoke with concern about people who must spend
time in jail, emphasized solidarity within the
"movement", and opposed betrayal of political
prisoners. Then, in an intense delivery, he said:
And we get very upset when we find our beautiful
campus crawling with pigs who stop and harass
people and rip off and beat half of the people. Well
this is just a very, very mild taste of what life is like in
the black and brown communities of this country
where the pigs come by every night and if you're
young and you're black and brown they stop you and
ask your I.D. and rip you off for suspicion of
burglary and where there are dogs there and where
there's a helicopter overhead and that's part of the
same struggle, and where they shoot you and the pigs
who are here tonight, that's those San Jose pigs have
just mundered a black brother in San Jose, the same
San Jose pig just murdered a black brother down in
San Jose and that's normal life down there. People
murdered in the streets and that's why we call them
pigs. Although it's a little unfair to the four-footed
variety, because they don't do that kind of thing.
[Applause]
Continuing to speak in the same delivery, he next
alluded to the Black Panther party's leadership and made
the following remarks:
And the Black Panther Party teaches us that the
people of Laos and the people of South Vietnam are
not another separate nation state. That they are our
brothers and sisters because they are just other
oppressed communities of the same empire. The
Black Panther Party teaches us that today while this
meeting was going on brothers and sisters, blood
brothers and sisters of us, were killed in Laos, in
Vietnam and Cambodia, in the black and brown
communities of the United States of America. They
teach us this is all one struggle and the
interconnections are every place. Even if you thing
about what Laos is all about; what is the chief cash
export of Laos, who knows?
[crowd | Opium, heroin?
Opium, all the heroin on this coast comes from Laos.
And it's all brought in by the CIA. It is grown and
harvested by Meo tribesmen and flown out on Air
America, the CIA airline. And it is brought in to this
state as part of the oppression, particularly of black
and brown people here, but also of white youth. . . .
(brief KZSU interruption). . . . and is just as much a
part of the counter-insurgency system as the pigs are
war on this campus.
He urged that others be taught about such evils as
Stanford's complicity in the war and the necessity to
free all political prisoners. He expressed the view that
the student strike a year earlier had been a success. He
closed by restating the necessity to continue the struggle
to win others to his viewpoint.
3. Professor Franklin 's Second Speech at the Old Union
(Third speech of February 10)
This speech lasted about two minutes, but because
KZSU was conducting an interview at the time, it can
only be heard in the background on the tape recording.
The pitch of his voice is high, with only a few of his
words and intermittent responses from the crowd being
clearly discernible on the tape. The crowd responses
increase toward the end. The content of the speech can
only be reconstructed from testimony, but this poses
little difficulty. There is substantial agreement as to
what Professor Franklin said amont his witnesses, the
University Administration's witnesses, and Professor
Franklin's own affidavit and testimony. The differences,
as might be expected, are in the interpretation of his
speech.
a. Professor Franklin's interpretation of his second
Old Union speech.
In his affidavit he describes the speech as follows:
A number of speakers at the meeting rose to describe
specific instances of police harassment and brutality.
Several proposed that we go to the dormitories to
discuss die police state on campus and what to do
about it, as well as what to do about the situation in
Southeast Asia. One speaker said that many squads of
six to eight police were roaming the campus, and that
if we marched to the dorms some of these squads
would follow us, and that it would be a good
education for people in the dorms to see them. Two
speakers said that the police were attempting to keep
people from knowing what was happening, and that
they had temporarily confiscated a walkie-talkie from
a KZSU reporter and threatened to arrest him for
listening to police frequencies. Another speaker said
that if we march in one group it will be too easy for
the police and we should confuse them by dividing
into many groups. Another speaker siad "there are
pigs all over this campus and we have to show people
who the pigs are and who the people are, and we
cannot tolerate a police state here or any place else."
It was generally agreed that we would go back to the
dormitories to build support for the strike and to
raise consciousness about the police occupation of
the campus. I rose to speak again. 1 said that it was
unfortunate that the people from Roble had not felt
that they were really part of the movement and that
it was necessary to go into the dorms and discuss all
their questions further. I said that it was very
important for people to understand that this is a
united front, and that people will respond on
different levels of action and with different degrees of
consciousness to the war. I said that it was important
for people to accept these different levels, and that if
people are sincere it is correct for them to do their
own thing, to do whatever they think best, and that
that is how all of us learn. I pointed out that with the
police saturation on campus, however, it would be
suicide for people to engage in any militant action in
a large group. I said that we must learn from the
peoples of Southeast Asia that when confronted with
an occupation army, we must respond with the
methods of people's war. Then 1 explained that this
means thoroughly merging with the people. I gave
one and only one example of what I meant by this. I
said that I had been told that a few nights before,
during a similar police occupation, several people had
begun a game of touch football. They moved from
place to place on the campus, forcing the police to
follow them. Several police complained to them that
they were supposed to be in fixed positions, and that
this was preventing them from maintaining those
positions. Finally, when the football game
appraoched the area of the computation center, the
police had asked to examine the football. I said that I
wasn't sure whether this was because they thought it
was a bomb or because they just wanted to examine a
real pigskin. I ended by teliing people that people's

war meant that they should go back to the
dormitories, organize people into small groups, and
talk with them, or play football, or whatever, as late
into the night as possible.
b. Hearing witnesses' interpretation of Professor
Franklin's second Old Union Speech
(i) Administration witnesses-There is considerable
agreement among administration and defense
witnesses on the content (though not on the
interpretation) of this speech. This can be
illustrated by comparing Professor Franklin's
version of his speech after the event given above
with testimony of Robert Beyers, of the Stanford
News Service. He testified that he had attended
many rallies at Stanford over a period of years,
and had often heard Professor Franklin speak. He
described Professor Franklin's speech on this
occasion as very critical of the police. He testified
that Professor Franklin called specifically for
people's war against the occupation army-i.e., the
police. Professor Franklin suggested that people go
back to their dormitories, meet in small groups,
decide to do whatever they wanted to do as late at
night as possible so as to bring more police onto
the campus to help out their brethren in other
communities. At this point, in Beyer's view, the
nature of the meeting changed dramatically,
leading him to expect that illegal or disruptive
incidents would follow. Immediately after the
speech, the rally ended and Beyers said three FCM
students were badly beaten by some of the Old
Union crowd. Under cross-examination, he
indicated that Professor Franklin did not specify
the exact nature of the violent acts to be carried
out.
Brimelow felt there was much tension and
restlessness in the meeting, and that the crowd got
very excited as a result of the speech. After the
speech he saw the crowd stream off in all
directions and he heard "war cries" (something of
this sort is audible on the tape recording). Almas
heard the speech from the balcony of the Women's
Clubhouse, thought it was impassioned and was
startled by it. Almas had heard Professor Franklin
speak about a dozen times but had never heard
him encourage this level of action. Almas felt
Professor Franklin had not been as careful as
usual, and the witness had the expectation that
there was going to be violence.
R. Jacobs, also on the balcony, thought
Professor Franklin had made inflammatory
statements. Grav felt Professor Franklin was
playing the role of a leader giving instructions to
the group in a serious vein.
(ii) Professor Franklin's witnesses
Witnesses for Professor Franklin heard phrases
similar to those reported by Administration
witnesses but to some extent interpreted them
differently. This is well illustrated by an affidavit
of Bennion, who also testified at the hearing.
. . .It became clear that there was some opposition
forming, basically between going back into the
dorms for further discussion and staying in the
area the police were patrolling in order to show
them that the occupation of the campus would
not be tolerated. At this point Professor Franklin
spoke and tried to explain that these two
tendencies were not really opposed, but could be
carried out at the same time and could mutually
serve each other. He discussed at length the tenets
of "people's war" which is based on the concept
of a united front. In essence this means that
everyone can contribute what they can to a
movement, with one person's greater contribution
or risk should not be seen as invalidating another's.
This leads to many levels of action which mutually
reinforce other levels, rather than detracting from
each other. He pointed out that in advanced stages
of "people's war" such as in Vietnam, many
different levels of action are still employed, not
merely the military level of the National
Liberation Front. He also stated that in the
present case it would be suicidal to engage in any
large-scale militant action. He gave one example of
what "people's war" would mean that evening.
Some people could go back to the dorms and
persuade others to join the movement, while
others could play touch football in the area being
patrolled by the police to show that they were not
intimidated by the occupation of the campus. At
no time did say or even remotely imply or suggest
that he advocated a militant action that evening,
nor did his in-depth analysis of "people's war"
make such an interpretation possible for any
person who had ears to hear and a mind to think.
These witnesses were much preoccupied with the
presence of police. They expressed fear and anger,
and were inclined to expect trouble with the
police that night. They were determined not to be
intimidated by the police, and to harass them
where possible, by and large, Professor Franklin
was seen as speaking to these issues in a way that
fostered resistance but not violence. His task was
seen as uniting the people against the common
foe: putting together the university's complicity in
the war, the linkage of the struggle here iwth the
struggle in Asia, the necessity to respond
vigorously on many levels of action. For example
Pat Faulkner testified that he understood
Professor Franklin to mean that all levels of
actions are all right, even writing letters, and that
it is necessary to wage war on many levels to win.
He felt that Professor Franklin gave a speech in
which he approved a wide range of actions,
including trashing, but did not emphasize violent
responses.
Professor Franklin's witnesses gave the term
"people's war" a variety of emphases, but the
words were generally udnerstood to have a range
of connotations. These included (1) harassment of
police; (2) taking control of our own lives; (3)
brining the war home; (4) strike; (5) learning from
the peoples of Southeast Asia; (6) attention to our
war here, not only the one in Indochina; (7) doing
whatever conscience dictates, which might include
trashing; (8) determinationnot to be intimidated
by police, not to shrink from threats.
4. Post-Rally Events
In the course of the hearing, on October 28, the
Advisory Board made the following statement on
post-rally events:
With respect to the Old Union courtyard speech, the
Board is now in a position to give its view of the value
of testimony about events following the rally. We
admitted testimony on these matters because the

University Administration, in order to demonstrate
that there was a risk that prohibited conduct would
follow the speech, introduced evidence for the
limited purpose of showing that such conduct did in
fact occur. We now feel that this
evidence concerning the light on White Plaza, the
alleged false alarms, the shootings, and other
incidents-need not be rebutted. We have reached this
decision because, in our view, the existence of risk is
adequately shown by pre-and co-existing conditions,
and does not require demonstration by referring to
subsequent events.
It is a matter ol record that untoward events of the
sort mentioned above did in fact occur that night,
beginning immediately after the rally. We limited
testimony on these matters for two reasons: (1) the
charges did not contain any references to Professor
Franklin's post-rally conduct; (2) we had good reason to
believe that significant risk existed without reference to
post-rally events.
D. DEFENSES AND THEIR ANALYSES
1. Principal Points made in Defense Against Charges in
Paragraph 10.
Professor Franklin, in testimony and argument, made
several points in defending against these charges:
a. The speeches were brief, especially the second one
at the very end of the evening's program. Such brief
speeches could hardly have had the impact ascribed
to them by the University Administration.
b. It was difficult to hear the speeches. Except for
those near the speakers, consisting to a considerable
extent of Professor Franklin's close associates,
audibility was a problem. The testimony of several
witnesses who were not close to the speaker was
challenged by Professor Franklin.
c. What could be heard was innocuous. It was meant
to inform, educate, and persuade to a political
viewpoint. It was not intended to incite, inflame, or
cause violence.
d. Most of the people at the rally had already decided
what they were going to do by the time Professor
Franklin gave his second and closing spcech. In this
speech, he essentially gave them a political rationale
for what they had already decided to do.
e. Even if his speeches were taken as inflamatory by
some members of his audience, they were well
justified by Stanford's condition as a fascist and
imperialist institution, and by the presence on the
campus of an occupation army consisting of police
who frequently kill black and brown people, and
indeed had just killed a black brother.
112. In any event. Professor Franklin should be able to
give such speeches with impunity, since all speech
should be considered to be constitutionally
protected, even where appreciable risks are posed.
g. If speech is to be restricted at all, it must be done
within a very narrow band. Such a band could not
include general prescritpions for hostile actiona or
even for violence. Specific prescriptions for violent
acts would be required, and tchse must be confirmed
by specific evidence that individuals had been moved
to carry out those same specific acts by the speech in
question.
2. Analysis of the Defenses
The length of the speeches is much less important
than other characteristics: content, delivery, context,
audience. In any event, the first speech was not
particularly brief, and the second was in a crucial
position: at the very end of the rally.
In regard to audibility, we conclude that those who
wanted to hear the speeches could do so. This is
admitted by some defense witnesses, and to a certain
extent by Professor Franklin himself who testified that
at the time he felt he could reach those who really
wanted to hear him. The main variable seems to have
been attention; some members of the audience paid
close attention to his speeches, others little. Among
those who did pay attention, there is considerable
agreement as to content, though witnesses differe as to
interpretation.
There is no meaningful way to consider Professor
Franklin's behavior in the Old Union rally without a
firm grasp of the context in which the rally occurred.
The mood that evening was tense and angry. After the
passage of so many months it is difficult to recapture the
sense of anxious expectation that characterized the
campus that evening. The Old Union rally followed
several days of continually escalating events: threats of
coercion, actual coercion, arson, police action, and
hostile confrontations on campus. We have already
summarized recurrent themes of the immediately
preceding rallies at Dinkelspiel on February 9th and
White Plaza on February 10th. As the Board concluded
in its statement of October 28th, cited above, substantial
risk existed on the Stanford campus before and during
the Old Union rally.
There are additional aspects of the context for the
Old Union rally that deserve consideration. Professor
Franklin rose to speak as a well-known and respected
leader of the "movement". Defense witnesses testified
that he was viewed with admiration and his ideas were
taken seriously. Professor Franklin testified that the
time of these events in February was a crucial one for
the "movement", a time when the "movement" might
transcend itself.
Testimony in the hearing, mainly from defense
witnesses, brought out the fact that this occasion stirred
memories of other similar occasions which also provide
meaningful context for the Old Union rally. The events
approximately a year earlier at the time of the military
action in Cambodia came up repeatedly. Indeed, one of
Professor Franklin's main contentions is that he was
attempting to foster a "Cambodia-type strike". A
number of defense witnesses, including especially
Braumstein and Professor Franklin, discussed the events
of the Cambodian period and compared them with the
events during the Laotian invasion. It became clear that
the protest events of the Cambodian period, viewed with
approbation, included a spectrum of activities, some of
which were nonviolent, some of which were patently
coercive, and some of which were overtly violent. The
coercive and violent activities included: forcible blocking
of entries into buildings for sustained periods, large-scale
breaking of windows, bombings, and lire bombings.
The Old Union rally also brought back recollections
of other night rallies held in similar circumstances,
especially when police were on campus, not only during
the Cambodian protest but at other times in the past few

years as well. There lias been a clear tendency for such
occasions to be followed by violent behavior. This fact
was knwon to Professor Franklin, since several of the
defense witnesses commented on his participation in
these protests.
Two of the major themes permeating the three rallies
of February 9th and February 10, advanced by Professor
Franklin and many of his close associates, are especially
pertinent to his closing speech at the Old Union rally:
(1) all-one-war; (2) multiple-levels-of-action.
(1) All-one-war is the theme linking the struggle at
Stanford with the struggle in Southeast Asia. It is the
heart of the problem, emphasized by Professor Franklin
in his speeches, affidavit, testimony and argument.
The speeches attack Stanford's war complicity, draw
parallels between racial oppression in America and Asia,
and emphasize the necessity to learn from the peoples of
Southeast Asia how to resist oppression at home. By the
end of the Old Union rally, the cumulative weight of
these linkages suggests that one way to fight the war
now is to fight the police and administration here.
In his testimony Professor Franklin says:
. . .what I say there basically is that we can't separate
the war in Southeast Asia from the war at home. Now
on all these points, all four of these speeches that
were given in this 24-hour period -that is from the
night belore in Dink through this—all four of those
speeches are essentially saying-are saying the same
thing. They're expressing a set of ideas which 1
consider the most important ideas. . . . And then this
seems to me the most essential thing, both in this
speech and in the second speech, to try to show
people just as clearly as possible that in fact that
occupation army of police that was on the campus
was part of the same war that was being waged in
Southeast Asia and that was being waged in the Black
ghettos and in the barrios of the United States.
This point is further clarified in Braunstein's defense
testimony, under cross-examination:
And the people fighting the United States in South
east Asia are fighting the same battles that people
fighting the police.. .who were on campus in the Old
Union Courtyard one and two of the year before and
are fighting the same battle as the people trying to get
rotten research off this campus and are fighting all
these battles, and they're all the same battles.
Then if it's all one battle, the word 'opposing forces'
relates to all the people on the other side in this big
global battle.
I've later learned that that is what's known as
'People's War'; is part of what is known as 'People's
War'.
Q. I take it in the context in which you were speaking
you at least included the police in that reference?
A. Oh, certainly. Especially that night, yes. I also
included the University administrators.
(2) The war is to be waged with the
multiple-levels-of-action formula. Each person is to do
his own thing, whatever he can, whatever he thinks best,
using his imagination to find ways of resisting the
occupying forces. This theme has a familiar ring from its
recurrence during the preceding few days. We have
earlier quoted Braunstein's remarks on this subject at the
Dinkelspiel rally on February 9th. It is clear from a
variety of references in several rallies that this
formulation is meant to advocate a spectrum of activities
which might include contacting Congressmen,
persuading students in dormitories, being active on
campus at night, refusing to be intimidated by the
police, blocking doorways, occupying buildings,
breaking windows, putting the computer out of service
for a long time, destroying the computer, or doing other
things for which one might not wish to "take credit."
In his testimony Professor Franklin said he felt
impelled at the end of the rally to speak about:
. . .that action that was going to be taken, which
was essentially gpomg back to the dorms to talk
about the war in Southeast Asia and about the
police occupation of the campus and—for people
to be there and exercise their right. That it was
important for somebody to explain to people that
that action itself was, you know, just as legitimate
a part of this war as, say, the armed self defense of
the Vietnamese people or the people of Laos. . ..
And in that speech I mentioned using the methods
of people's war. And at that point I was speaking
very directly to the people there, I think, who
considered themselves revolutionaries. Because I
knew that they would have a basic understanding
of what that meant, and that that phrase summed
up a whole lot of experience.
Braunstein testified for Professor Franklin, 'There are
all sorts of actions on various levels, including people
breaking windows with rocks and people burning down
buildings, as yet unidentified people burning down
buildings, and so on, that sometimes have the same goals
in mind and sometimes don't."
Significant in this context was the term "people's
war." It was interpreted by various witnesses in different
ways. It seems to include a wide range of suggested
actions, some of which are nonviolent, and some of
which are violent. It can clearly include guerilla warfare.
Some witnesses interpreted this as its primary meaning,
others gave this meaning less prominence. Maoist
writings use the term "People's war" for all action, in
particular guerilla warfare, in which the warriors merge
with the masses. Professor Franklin acknowledge in his
testimony that guerilla warfare, including assassination
and bombings, is one important component of people's
war, but denied it was the one he had in mind when he
used the term in his spcech. Defense testimony indicated
that the concept of people's war extends beyond
military action, but did not deny that it prominently
includes military action. Given the repeated explicit
linkages of the struggle against the police occupation
army here and the war in Southeast Asia, in the context
of recent night violence on campus and an afternoon of
police confrontation, it is difficult to believe that most
listeners would be insensitive to the violent connotations
of this term. Why repeatedly use warlike terms and
images—such as Professor Franklin's "war on this
campus" if peaceful actions are intended?
Similar considerations apply to Professor Franklin's
advocacy of action to be taken against the occupation
army in small groups. It is clear that small groups can
conduct dormitory discussions and other peacefully
persuasive activities, and that this did in fact occur,
though we learned very little about the focus of such
discussions e.g., whether they were intended to foster
particular nonviolent or violent tactics of protest. In any
event, such dormitory discussions may well have been
one of the meanings of his alleged recommendation for
reliance upon affinity groups. He advised against mass
militant action, meaning essentially violent
confrontation with the police, on tactical grounds. Such
action was not feasible because the police were too
strong. It is alos clear that the smaller groups could
engage in violent activities as has often happened in
similar circumstances at Stanford during the past few
years-i.e., following night rallies permeated by angry
speech. Two days earlier, February 8, after a night of
"trashing", a sheet was distributed at a "movement"
rally under the title "Do It!" It endorsed the previous
night's activity and called for more of the same,
indicating that tight affinity groups can be helpful in
doing whatever people want to do.
Whatever the activities that Professor Franklin was
urging upon individuals and small groups, it appears that
lateness of the hour was positively desirable-"as late
into the night as possible". In view of the behavior ot
some individuals and affinity groups at Stanford in
similar circumstances during the past few years, it is
reasonable to suppose that lateness might be useful as a
cover for violent activities—though it could of course be
used for peaceful activities as well.
Professor Franklin's two Old Union speeches were
given in a hostile tone. This is apparent in the content of
the first speech, and the effect is heightened when one
listens to the tape and hears his tone of voice. Even
when the speech is briefly interrupted by a KZSU
interview, the angry tone and the emotional crowd
response can be clearly detected. Although thesecond
speech is covered over by a KZSU interview, similar
indications are available from the tape and from
testimony.
In the course of the hearing, both Professor Franklin
and Braunstein indicated that ambiguity about tactics
was desirable to these rally speeches because KZSU was
broadcasting them and the police would presumably
have tape recordings. To advocate violent tactics openly
in this context would have exposed the speaker to later
sanctions. We were informed in the hearing by Professor
Franklin of his "political decision" to keep his position
at Stanford, hence caution about open calls for
"revolutionary violence".
Thus, we are faced with a difficult problem: how to
interpret speech deliberately given in ambiguous terms.
But we have seen already that considerable clarification
emerges from a close examination of the text, from the
full context provided by preceding events, and from the
way in which the speech was delivered. In essence,
Professor Franklin came into a combustible situation,
focused hostility on certain targets, intensified existing
hostility toward those targets, and urged a spectrum of
actions against them: some peaceful, some coercive,
some violent. We must now turn our attention to his
audience in order to inquire whether they were likely to
understand him and whether Professor Franklin must
have expected the risk of prohibited conduct to be
increased by his behavior.
The tone and content of Professor Franklin's
speeches must have been particularly significant for two
groups: 1) people in the movement; 2) people who are
violence-prone for whatever reason. In respect to the
first, these are people who are responsive to Professor
Franklin by virtue of past association, respect,
dedication, and sharing of common goals. They tend to
understand the nuances of his speech, as was evident at
the hearing itself. As for the second grou, it is well
known that public meetings characterized by intense
anger and hints of violence tend to attract, both at the
meeting and via media coverage, individuals who are
drawn to violence for a variety of reasons, not
necessarily political. Whatever the reason for their
susceptibility to violence, they tend to find such
occasions exciting. They may be induced by angry
rhetoric to commit acts of gravity, particularly in the
context of recent examples of violent behavior.
Professor Franklin testified that he was aware of the
long-term, bitter antagonism between Venceremos and
FCM; and he was aware of the immediate, clearly
expressed hostility toward the small FCM group at the
rally. The presence of these mutually hostile groups at
the rally certainly added to the risk. The use of violent
rhetoric in such circumstances increased the probability
of attack and counter-attack.
We think that "movement" people were capable of
understanding the messages. We refer here to familiar
connotations understood by a group sharing common
intersts and values. For example, reference to "militant
action on campus" in 1971 is understood by many
people to mean "trashing " which in turn is understood
to mean "window-breaking." These are not the only
connotations of the terms, nor are they understood by
everyone who comes on campus. A few years ago, the
terms did not have these connotations. But common
usage in concrete situations has led to a widely shared
understanding.
Those devoted to the "movement" had a rich
refresher course in such terms during the rallies of the
preceding few days which we have already summarized.
Professor Franklin is explicit in his testimony that he
was aiming his remarks specifically at them, wanting
primarily to be un derstood by them. Braunstein
testified that there is special communication within the
"movement" and pointed out that Professor Franklin
referred to "us" at the rally. But the defense, in effect,
asks us to believe that, on the night of February 10,
individuals in the "movement" failed to understand the
coercive and violent connotations of phrases like "war
on this campus", taking action on multiple levels to
resist oppression here, and "we must learn from the
peoples of Southeast Asia that when confronted with an
occupation army, we must respond with the methods of
people's war". The defense puts forwards its bland
interpretation of such phrases even though they were
expressed in a very angry tone and in a context of
profound hostility toward the university by a respected
leader who generally approves coercive and violent
tactics in campus disputes (though he denies he
advocated them on this occasion). We must therefore
examine possible reasons why the audience might not
have detected the menacing connotations of his remarks
on the evening of February 10.
From the testimony in the hearing, we do not believe
members of the "movement" were obtuse; nor is there
anything credible in the record to suggest that they were
in such a conciliatory mood that his angry rhetoric failed
to rcach them. Were the "movement" members of
Professor Franklin's audience so concerned with trying
to win over the Roble group that they rejected all

coercive and violent connotations of his remarks? This
possibility deserves further consideration.
During the rally, "movement" people in control of
the meeting showed little consideration for the feelings
ol the Roble students. Indeed, Professor Franklin seems
to have been concerned about this situation, since he
devoted a good deal of his first speech to persuading the
Roble group to accept the "movement's" view of the
situation. As a Roble speaker made clear in the KZSU
interview, the difference between the Roble contingent
and the "movement" was not only one of demands
(narrow vs. broad) but of tactics (non-violent vs.
violent). In this episode, Professor Franklin
demonstrated his authority as a leader of the
"movement" when he easily stopped the flow of the
meeting, re-opened the question, made a major speech,
and got a re-vote.
In his way, Professor Franklin was trying to persuade
the Roble contingent to link up with the "movement" in
a united front, at least for the moment. His way of
undertaking this persuasion was itself inflamatory. He
made assertions of such hostile content in such an angry
manner regarding the University and the police that,
whatever their effect on the Roble group, they must
surely have intensified the resentment of many persons
favorable to the "movement" and thereby raised the
probability of violent actions later. We have earlier
quoted a portion of his first Old Union speech pertinent
to this point. Finally, his do-your-own-thing formula
permitted some encouragement for Roble students to
take peaceful actions and still leave room for
encouragement of "militant" actions by the
"movement".
This brings us again to one of the central themes in
the entire case. At Old Union as at White Plaza, the
actions urged by Professor Franklin were not exclusively
coercive or violent. He advocated a wide range of protest
actions: some peaceful, some coercive, some violent. If a
person removes valuable merchandise from a store,
paying for half, but not paying for the other half, is he
culpable for the part he stole? We believe that the
presence of peaceful recommendations cannot immunize
a person from sanctions if he has urged imminent
coercion and violence as well.
Once again, as at White Plaza, Professor Franklin was
the final speaker, and once again his speech was
promptly followed by events of a disruptive, coercive or
violent nature. The probability of this occurring by
chance is very small. At the least, it reflects his
leadership position in the "movement" and the riskiness
of those situations in which he spoke. He cannot avoid
the conclusion that his pseeches, the last on each
occasion, increased the probability that illegal acts
would follow the two rallies.
In an earlier section on "Fundamental Issues and
Standards", we have indicated that the University must
have the right to put some constraints on speech in
dangerous circumstances, but only with great caution.
This applies to acts of incitement to imminent lawless
action that arc likely to produce such action. "Lawless"
in the university context includes state or local laws, the
Policy on Campus Disruptions or other university
regulations, or common-law understandings of
professorial responsibility.
In judging the applicability of this standard to the
present charge, we have been guided by these questions:
(1) What is the entire context surrounding the alleged
incitement? (2) What was conmunicated to the
audience? (3) What would the speiker judge to be the
effect of his communication on the audience?
Since we wish to sustain the university's vital
tradition of fostering free expression in its widest
diversity, we are exceedingly cautious in considering
possible constraints on speech. If such constraints are
ever to be invoked, they must be reserved for extreme
situations. We are asking whether the context here was
that of a highly combustible situation, whether the
speaker gave an inflammatory message in that context,
and whether the speaker had good reason to anticipate
lhat his message would increase the risk of imminent
lawless action. If indeed we find that the speaker issued
a call to violence, he is not protected by having issued it
in euphemistic jargon. Such a call may be quite as
effective as one issued in more stark terms. In any event,
the language used here was hardly occult.
Although Professor Franklin's witnesses were inclined
to protect him by minimizing their understanding of
coercive and violent connotations in his speeches, they
did not exclude such connotations—nor did he. The
difference between them and administration witnesses
was mainly one of emphasis. In the spectrum of
activities advocated by Professof Franklin, the defense
emphasized the legal end, whereas the administration
emphasized the illegal end.
In our detailed analysis of the context for his Old
Union speeches, we have determined that persons active
in the "movement" must have been quite familiar with
the coercive and violent connotations of Professor
Franklin's phrases, that they were responsive to such
connotations, and that Professor Franklin must have
been aware of these facts.
Finally, we must consider the line of defense that,
even if Professor Franklin were considered to have
carried out such an incitement, he would nevertheless be
justified by his perception of Stanford as a fascist
institution playing an important role in an imperialist
war.
We recognize that Professor Franklin is pressing for
reform in important areas of social concern. Can this
justify coercive behavior in campus disputes, or the
fostering of a climate of violence on campus? Once any
person is granted this privilege in the name of a good
cause, we must grant it also to others who feel they have
worthy aims. When these rights conflict, as they
inevitably must, are we to condone low-grade guerilla
warfare on campus? If we deny to others what we grant
to Professor Franklin, we have adopted a double
standard: coercion and violence in the university may be
condoned if we approve its aims, but restricted if we
disapprove its aims. Then it becomes a simple question
of whose ox is gored. But every cause is fervently
supported by some, eloquently justified by some,
pursued with passion by some. In a way, every war is a
holy war. If we accept Professor Franklin's holiness, how
arc we to reject the holiness of other true believers? In
our view, this course is not morally defensible. We must
do our best to apply one standard across all political
preferences and that standard must not condone
violence on campus.

K. CONCLUSION
Taking into accoutn content, context, delivery, and
audience, did Professor Franklin's two Old Union
speeches include urging and inciting to disruption of
university activities, or threat to persons or property?
Must he have known that this exhortation would be
widely interpreted as immediate advocacy of disruptive
or violent behavior?
1. The situation was risky. Illegal acts had occurred
earlier that day. There was intense resentment toward
the war, the police, and the university; there had been
serious frustration for the "movement" earlier in the
day; bitter political adversaries were present at the rally
and identified by the chairman; protest actions including
coercive and violent possibilities were under discussion;
the police were present on campus; there was a well
known history of violence in similar circumstances at
Stanford. In general, the higher the risk, the less it takes
to trigger coercive and violent behavior.
2. The targets of Professor Franklin's animosity were
quite explicit-the police and the university. He made an
intensive effort in the two speeches to generate further
hostility toward these targets. He provided justification
for coercive and violent behavior toward them, without
specifying precisely what the nature of such acts might
be, leaving that to the judgment and imagination of each
individual or small group.
3. The urging of immediate retaliatory action towards
the police and the university was clear. A great sense of
urgency was conveyed by both the tone and the content
of his remarks. While no detailed blueprint for action
was provided, the necessity for prompt action wis a
strong message. The overall effect was to increase the
likelihood of imminent lawless action.
Taking into account the full context surround his
speeches at the Old Union rally, hte messages he
communicated to his audience, and what he should be
able to judge about the effect of these messages under
the circumstances, we reach the conclusion that
Professor Franklin intentionally urged and incited his
audience to engage in conduct which would disrupt
activities of the University and of members of the
University Community and threaten injury to individuals
an; property.
The Advisory Board thus finds that the charge in No.
10 is sustained.
DISSENTING OPINIONS
Professors Brown and Kennedy, while agreeing with
substantial portions of the majority's account, dissent as
follows:
The majority sustains the charge of incitement
against Professor Franklin citing (1) an extensive
background of material from speeches at this and
other rallies that supply context for his last speech;
(2) Professor Franklin's first speech at this rally,
which also supplies context and reveals relevant
attitudes of his own; and (3) words in the second
speech that constitute, in the majority's view,
sufficiently explicit invitations to do violence against
persons and property.
We dissent regarding some matters of context, as
well as on the finding with respect to Professor
Franklin's own speeches.
In describing the context of the rally, we would
give more weight than does the majority to the
presence of the Roble students and to their impact
upon events in the Old Union Courtyard. The
interaction between the group of Roble moderates
(concerned about the invasion of Laos but not part of
the "movement") and the "movement" group itself
provides a central theme for the rally. Professor
Franklin's own first speech is directed predominantly
to an attenuation of those tensions and to a
reconciliation that would accommodate the new
recruits to "movement" objectives. It is, in essence, a
long argument that political prisoners must not be
forgotten, and that there is a fundamental identity
between the struggle of Asian peoples against U.S.
imperialism and the struggle of oppressed people and
anti-war students against repressive forces at home.
As the majority states, the speech contains a heavy
tone of anger against the police and other forces that,
to Professor Franklin, sumbolize this oppression. We
nevertheless believe it plausible that the speech was
intended to make a group of Stanford students
identify, perhaps for the first time, with oppressed
people; we do not see evidence that Professor
Franklin's intention was to turn them explicitly to
violent actions. In no sense can this first Old Union
speech be regarded as actionable; indeed, the
University administration does not attempt to
persuade us to find against Professor Franklin on the
basis of its content. To the extent that it contains
intensity and anger, and to the extent that these are
directed against the police and the University, the
speech might be said to have added-along with other
speeches at the rally-to the risk that prohibited
conduct might follow. But all agree that nothing in
the content of this speech approaches incitement.
Indeed, we feel that the speech presented, in however
objectionable a style, some legitimate concerns about
the plight of prisoners, the existence of police
brutality, and other significant issues.
Clearly Professor Franklin and other speakers
believed that a major mission of the "movement"
people at the rally was to undertake the "education"
of the rest of the Stanford community. Professor
Franklin's own first speech concludes with a plea that
those present go out to the people "and teach them
what we have learned in the movement," and that
any who are not persuaded should "get up here [ile.
to the microphone] and we should discuss it." At the
conclusion of his speech he testifies that he went over
to discuss the matter further with the Roble group.
The speaker who followed Professor Franklin to the
podium commented that the important thing was to
"go to the dorms, go to the people we want to talk
t0...." A later speaker extends the suggestion by
hoping that those at the rally will go to the dorms
and "rap all night." Recruitment, broadening the base
of the "movement," educating the community: all
these were significant themes in the development o'
the meeting's context. By its relatively stronger
emphasis on the more violent rhetoric, in particular
Professor Franklin's, the majority has decided against
what seems to us a plausible, even persuasive, second
view of the matter.

The content of the second speech, of course, is not
available to us except through the testimony of
witnesses. According to Beyers, Professor Franklin
called for a "people's war against the occupation
army of the police," and he "suggested that people
should go back tot their dormitories, form meetings,
meet in small groups, decide whatever they wanted to
do, to do it as late at night as possible, and to do
things which would bring more of the occupation
here."' Professor Franklin's version in his affidavit is
only slightly different. He, too, calims to have said
that "when confronted with an occupation army we
must respond with the methods of people's war." Me
adds, "I ended by telling people that people's war
meant that they should go back into their
dormitories, organize people into small groups, talk
with them, play football, or whatever, as late into the
night as possible." These differences are not very
substantial; they can easily be accounted for by
differences in recollection.
The majority analyzes these collections of phrases
in such a way that they are strongly persuaded as to
their meaning and that the meaning sustains an
incitement charge, given such other factors as risk.
The logic consists essentially in the elimination of
various attenuative constructions that are more
benign. In our view this interpretation is not
"strongly persuasive." The phrases upon which
attention has been focused are isolated from a
substantial matrix of interstitial speech, the precise
construction of which we do not know, and about
which we must be careful not to draw too confident
appraisals. Two examples will illustrate the point.
First, Professor Franklin says that in the context in
which he used it, "People's war" was clearly indicated
to mean "thoroughly merging with the masses;" he
states that he used the football game as an example of
that kind of tactic. It is significant that virtually all of
the witnesses link the words "people's war" to the
example of the football game. Professor Franklin
states in his affidavit that this was the only exmaple
he used, and the cumulative testimony seems to bear
him out. Second, the phrase "as late into the night as
possible," interpreted by the majority as a call to
militant action by small groups, could equally have
appeared in a context in which it applied primarily to
late dormitory discussions and to legal (though
perhaps risky) methods of taking up the time of the
police. Such an interpretation gain in plausibility
from Professor Franklin's testimony that although he
does not in principle disapprove of trashing, he would
not have urged it on that occasion, both because of
the heavy presence of police on campus that night
and because it would have alienated those new to the
"movement."
The point is that none of these interpretations has
a great deal of certainty about it. The ones we have
just mentioned may be a little less plausible than
those favored by the majority, but only a little less.
The "hard" data on words are so fragmentary, and
depend so much on the kind of context-construction
that is very sensitive to whatever bias the witnesses
may have had, that we find them inadequate to meet
a "strongly persuasive" criterion that Professor
Franklin is guilty as charged by the University
administration.
We are not strongly persuaded by the impressions
of the speech given by various witnesses-as opposed
to actual reconstructions of wording. Such
impressions are especially subject to the bias of
expectations. The differing treatments of Professor
Franklin's account of the football game provide one
example among many. Some witnesses regarded it as
a euphemism for more violent activity, others
regarded it merely as an opportunity for a bad pun,
while still others interpreted it as we would, as an
invitation to occupy the time of the police.
In effect, the majority report argues that Professor
Franklin was employing words well understood to his
audience but not to others. But there is no convincing
evidence that any substantial number of the audience
would have translated his speech into an invitation to
commit violent acts. Each phrase, like "people's
war," has been subject to a number of conflicting
interpretations in the testimony. Furthermore, the
reconstruction of a code depends on one's ability to
capture a reasonably large portion of the message,
and in this instance we have only scattered elements.
Although we think it is quite possible that Professor
Franklin advocated a range of actions some of which
may have been illegal, we do no find the evidence
strongly persuasive that his speech constituted the
advocacy of imminent lawless action.
The majority emphasizes the extremity of the risk
in the situation; we do not disagree with their
evaluation, but we stress more heavily the doubts we
have about the context and the meaning of the words
actually spoken.
to find against Professor Franklin on this charge
might, we believe, force a faculty member addressing
a political rally in the future to guard against possible
cryptic meanings that his speech might convey to a
segment of his audience whenever a situation of high
risk obtains. The social cost of such a prohibition
must be balanced against the benefits to be derived
from being able to prosecute somewhat ambiguous
speech in dangerous situations. We find the costs too
great.
Accordingly, we do not sustain the charge against
Professor Franklin as stated in Paragraph 10.
A. CHARGES
The University Administration's charge concerning
Professor Franklin's conduct during the Old Union
Courtyard rally on February 10th reads as follows:
10. On the eveing of February 10, 1971, beginning at
approximately 8:00 p.m., a rally was held in the Old
Union Courtyard to, among other things, discuss
methods of protesting developments in the war in
Indochina. Over two hundred students and other
persons attended the rally. During the course of the
rally Professor Franklin intentionally urged and
incited students and other persons present to engage
in conduct calculated to disrupt activities of the
University and of members of the University
community and which threatened injury to
individuals and property. Shortly thereafter students
and other persons were assaulted by persons present
at the rally, and later that evening other acts of
violence occurred.
B. NATURE OF THE CHARGE IN PARAGRAPH 10
The charge centers on intentional incitement that
threatened: (1) disruption of University activities, both
individual and institutional; and (2) injury to persons
and property. It implies that a rish of coercive or violent
behavior existed at the time of the rally and that
Professor Franklin further increased the risk by the
content and manner of his participation. In determining
whether the facts fit the charges, the Board must inquite
(1) What is the entire context surrounding the alleged
incitement? (2) What is being communicated to the
audience? (3) What would the speaker judge to be the
effect of his communication on the audience?
C. FINDINGS OF FACT 1. Prominent Themes in the
1. Prominent Themes in the Old Union Rally,
February 10
On Wednesday, February 10 at 8:00 p.m. about 350
people attended a rally in the Old Union Courtyard.
Speakers debated tactics and demands. Professor
Franklin spoke twice. The themes that emerged
prominently in the course of the rally may he
summarized as follows:
a. There was general agreement on opposition to the
war in Southeast Asia and a wish to protest against
American involvement.
b. There was a major difference of opinion on the
scope of demands and of tactics. A contingent of
students from Roble Hall favored a single demand, an
effort to reach out for the broadest possible support
and strict adherence to non-violent tactics. Another
and larger faction favored a broader set of demands,
even at the risk of losing community support; and
they favored a broader range of tactics, including
coercive and violent ones, depending on
circumstances. This distinction between the two
groups was not only apparent in the speeches, but
was emphasized by a KZSU broadcast interview with
representatives of the Roble contingent near the end
of the rally.

c. Five speakers emphasized Stanford's major war
complicity and severe political repression. This
viewpoint may be illustrated with the following
quotation from one of the speakers.
I work at the phone company and I realize that
everyday one out of every two calls that I place
goes from Stanford University or SRI directly to
the Pentagon, to SRI all over the country and all
over the world, and people realize that Stanford
University is integrally linked with Pacific
Telephone Company, that all the business, you
know, that the whole service which Pacific
Telephone puts out is for the benefit of the
financial interest in this area and people who are
against the war, people that I work with who are
against the war, who are very, very angry and
outraged by the expansion of the war into Laos
realize that, because they have brothers, brothers
and uncles and fathers who are over there fighting,
who have been forced to go over there, they don't
have any choice, they can't afford to go to school,
they are forced to be over there. They have
brothers and sisters who are locked up in the
prisons all over America and they realize that
Stanford University, that the kind of research
Stanford does, the kind of money Stanford has,
which controls the black and brown communities
in the mid-peninsula, is a very dangerous thing and
they:re willing to fight against that for their very
survival and I think that the people here should
respect that, should respect the fact that telephone
workers are getting organized, that we're thinking
now about what kind of support demonstration
we can have when Stanford gets itself together and
the issues become clear to the people that
Stanford University is key in the war, key in the
oppression of political prisoners and it's just got to
go. (applause)
d. Eight speakers were very hostile to the police
especially to their presence on campus. Police had
been called to the campus to terminate the
occupation of the Computation Center and had
remained in view of the likelihood of further illegal
acts. It will be recalled that arson and "trashing" had
occurred on the nights of February 6 and 7. Early in
the Old Union rally of February 10, the presence of
police on campus was announced. No witness
testified that a single uniformed policeman entered
the Old Union courtyard, despite the fact that
Professor Franklin, in his affidavit shortly after the
event, said there were many police there. In the
hearing, he corrected this error. Thus, the police were
not visible to the people at the rally, but their
presence on campus was a focus of deep resentment.
They were often referred to as "pigs" and as an
occupation army or occupying forces. In conjunction
with the previous criticism of Stanford's complicity
in the war. the struggle on campus and the struggle in
Southeast Asia were portrayed as different facets of a
single struggle. Parallels were drawn between the

police on campus and imperialist armies in Asia. The
all-one-war theme was emphasized by urging
resistance to the police as analogous to resistance to
occupying forces in Vietnam.
e. On two occasions, members of the Free Campus
Movement were pointed out in a context of hostility,
and were linked to the police on campus.
112. In response to these various instigations, there was
a desire for action — not merely verbal demands, but
concrete, tangible steps to implement them. There
was a clear preference for strong, vivid action, though
some speakers, including those from the Roble
contingent, put their main emphasis on education.
Little reference was made to "strike" in this rally.
The actions mainly preferred by the speakers may be
illustrated by (he following remarks by the chairman:
Okay, I think it's still pretty clear that we want to
keep the demands as they are. Okay, at this point I
think we should go on to specific proposals for
how we act now. We've had a few proposals; one
guy suggested that after the Comp Center thing
today that in order to escalate rather than
de-escalate we should zero in on SRI, Another
person, other people have proposed that we deal
now with the police state that's on this campus
because if we're going to move against the war,
one of the things we have to do to be able to move
against the war in atmosphere where we're not
intimidated by pigs coming through to surround
our meetings and that kind of thing and that one
of the ways to do that is to begin any kind of
action people want to take to get the pigs off this
campus. I think that people should speak to these
proposals and add more proposals that they have.
g. Five speakers explicitly expressed and several
others implicitly expressed anger, using words and
imagery of fighting. Three speakers suggested actions
to embarrass, humiliate, or confront the police,
particularly late at night, while others made more
general comments advocating resistance to
intimidation.
h. Two speakers favored off-campus protests.
2. Professor Franklin's First Speech at Old Union
(Second speech of February 10)
Professor Franklin's first Old Union speech
(Appendix III) began with an effort to persuade the
Roble contingent of the correctness of the majority
position favoring a broad set of demands, including the
freeing of all "political prisoners" and the end of
Stanford's complicity in the war — not merely
immediate withdrawal of US forces from Southeast Asia.
He spoke with concern about people who must spend
time in jail, emphasized solidarity within the
"movement", and opposed betrayal of political
prisoners. Then, in an intense delivery, he said:
And we get very upset when we find our beautiful
campus crawling with pigs who stop and harass
people and rip off and beat half of the people. Well
this is just a very, very mild taste of what life is like in
the black and brown communities of this country
where the pigs come by every night and if you're
young and you're black and brown they stop you and
ask your I.D. and rip you off for suspicion of
burglary and where there are dogs there and where
there's a helicopter overhead and that's part of the
same struggle, and where they shoot you and the pigs
who are here tonight, that's those San Jose pigs have
just mundered a black brother in San Jose, the same
San Jose pig just murdered a black brother down in
San Jose and that's normal life down there. People
murdered in the streets and that's why we call them
pigs. Although it's a little unfair to the four-footed
variety, because they don't do that kind of thing.
[Applause]
Continuing to speak in the same delivery, he next
alluded to the Black Panther party's leadership and made
the following remarks:
And the Black Panther Party teaches us that the
people of Laos and the people of South Vietnam are
not another separate nation state. That they are our
brothers and sisters because they are just other
oppressed communities of the same empire. The
Black Panther Party teaches us that today while this
meeting was going on brothers and sisters, blood
brothers and sisters of us, were killed in Laos, in
Vietnam and Cambodia, in the black and brown
communities of the United States of America. They
teach us this is all one struggle and the
interconnections are every place. Even if you thing
about what Laos is all about; what is the chief cash
export of Laos, who knows?
[crowd | Opium, heroin?
Opium, all the heroin on this coast comes from Laos.
And it's all brought in by the CIA. It is grown and
harvested by Meo tribesmen and flown out on Air
America, the CIA airline. And it is brought in to this
state as part of the oppression, particularly of black
and brown people here, but also of white youth. . . .
(brief KZSU interruption). . . . and is just as much a
part of the counter-insurgency system as the pigs are
war on this campus.
He urged that others be taught about such evils as
Stanford's complicity in the war and the necessity to
free all political prisoners. He expressed the view that
the student strike a year earlier had been a success. He
closed by restating the necessity to continue the struggle
to win others to his viewpoint.
3. Professor Franklin 's Second Speech at the Old Union
(Third speech of February 10)
This speech lasted about two minutes, but because
KZSU was conducting an interview at the time, it can
only be heard in the background on the tape recording.
The pitch of his voice is high, with only a few of his
words and intermittent responses from the crowd being
clearly discernible on the tape. The crowd responses
increase toward the end. The content of the speech can
only be reconstructed from testimony, but this poses
little difficulty. There is substantial agreement as to
what Professor Franklin said amont his witnesses, the
University Administration's witnesses, and Professor
Franklin's own affidavit and testimony. The differences,
as might be expected, are in the interpretation of his
speech.
a. Professor Franklin's interpretation of his second
Old Union speech.
In his affidavit he describes the speech as follows:
A number of speakers at the meeting rose to describe
specific instances of police harassment and brutality.
Several proposed that we go to the dormitories to
discuss die police state on campus and what to do
about it, as well as what to do about the situation in
Southeast Asia. One speaker said that many squads of
six to eight police were roaming the campus, and that
if we marched to the dorms some of these squads
would follow us, and that it would be a good
education for people in the dorms to see them. Two
speakers said that the police were attempting to keep
people from knowing what was happening, and that
they had temporarily confiscated a walkie-talkie from
a KZSU reporter and threatened to arrest him for
listening to police frequencies. Another speaker said
that if we march in one group it will be too easy for
the police and we should confuse them by dividing
into many groups. Another speaker siad "there are
pigs all over this campus and we have to show people
who the pigs are and who the people are, and we
cannot tolerate a police state here or any place else."
It was generally agreed that we would go back to the
dormitories to build support for the strike and to
raise consciousness about the police occupation of
the campus. I rose to speak again. 1 said that it was
unfortunate that the people from Roble had not felt
that they were really part of the movement and that
it was necessary to go into the dorms and discuss all
their questions further. I said that it was very
important for people to understand that this is a
united front, and that people will respond on
different levels of action and with different degrees of
consciousness to the war. I said that it was important
for people to accept these different levels, and that if
people are sincere it is correct for them to do their
own thing, to do whatever they think best, and that
that is how all of us learn. I pointed out that with the
police saturation on campus, however, it would be
suicide for people to engage in any militant action in
a large group. I said that we must learn from the
peoples of Southeast Asia that when confronted with
an occupation army, we must respond with the
methods of people's war. Then 1 explained that this
means thoroughly merging with the people. I gave
one and only one example of what I meant by this. I
said that I had been told that a few nights before,
during a similar police occupation, several people had
begun a game of touch football. They moved from
place to place on the campus, forcing the police to
follow them. Several police complained to them that
they were supposed to be in fixed positions, and that
this was preventing them from maintaining those
positions. Finally, when the football game
appraoched the area of the computation center, the
police had asked to examine the football. I said that I
wasn't sure whether this was because they thought it
was a bomb or because they just wanted to examine a
real pigskin. I ended by teliing people that people's

war meant that they should go back to the
dormitories, organize people into small groups, and
talk with them, or play football, or whatever, as late
into the night as possible.
b. Hearing witnesses' interpretation of Professor
Franklin's second Old Union Speech
(i) Administration witnesses-There is considerable
agreement among administration and defense
witnesses on the content (though not on the
interpretation) of this speech. This can be
illustrated by comparing Professor Franklin's
version of his speech after the event given above
with testimony of Robert Beyers, of the Stanford
News Service. He testified that he had attended
many rallies at Stanford over a period of years,
and had often heard Professor Franklin speak. He
described Professor Franklin's speech on this
occasion as very critical of the police. He testified
that Professor Franklin called specifically for
people's war against the occupation army-i.e., the
police. Professor Franklin suggested that people go
back to their dormitories, meet in small groups,
decide to do whatever they wanted to do as late at
night as possible so as to bring more police onto
the campus to help out their brethren in other
communities. At this point, in Beyer's view, the
nature of the meeting changed dramatically,
leading him to expect that illegal or disruptive
incidents would follow. Immediately after the
speech, the rally ended and Beyers said three FCM
students were badly beaten by some of the Old
Union crowd. Under cross-examination, he
indicated that Professor Franklin did not specify
the exact nature of the violent acts to be carried
out.
Brimelow felt there was much tension and
restlessness in the meeting, and that the crowd got
very excited as a result of the speech. After the
speech he saw the crowd stream off in all
directions and he heard "war cries" (something of
this sort is audible on the tape recording). Almas
heard the speech from the balcony of the Women's
Clubhouse, thought it was impassioned and was
startled by it. Almas had heard Professor Franklin
speak about a dozen times but had never heard
him encourage this level of action. Almas felt
Professor Franklin had not been as careful as
usual, and the witness had the expectation that
there was going to be violence.
R. Jacobs, also on the balcony, thought
Professor Franklin had made inflammatory
statements. Grav felt Professor Franklin was
playing the role of a leader giving instructions to
the group in a serious vein.
(ii) Professor Franklin's witnesses
Witnesses for Professor Franklin heard phrases
similar to those reported by Administration
witnesses but to some extent interpreted them
differently. This is well illustrated by an affidavit
of Bennion, who also testified at the hearing.
. . .It became clear that there was some opposition
forming, basically between going back into the
dorms for further discussion and staying in the
area the police were patrolling in order to show
them that the occupation of the campus would
not be tolerated. At this point Professor Franklin
spoke and tried to explain that these two
tendencies were not really opposed, but could be
carried out at the same time and could mutually
serve each other. He discussed at length the tenets
of "people's war" which is based on the concept
of a united front. In essence this means that
everyone can contribute what they can to a
movement, with one person's greater contribution
or risk should not be seen as invalidating another's.
This leads to many levels of action which mutually
reinforce other levels, rather than detracting from
each other. He pointed out that in advanced stages
of "people's war" such as in Vietnam, many
different levels of action are still employed, not
merely the military level of the National
Liberation Front. He also stated that in the
present case it would be suicidal to engage in any
large-scale militant action. He gave one example of
what "people's war" would mean that evening.
Some people could go back to the dorms and
persuade others to join the movement, while
others could play touch football in the area being
patrolled by the police to show that they were not
intimidated by the occupation of the campus. At
no time did say or even remotely imply or suggest
that he advocated a militant action that evening,
nor did his in-depth analysis of "people's war"
make such an interpretation possible for any
person who had ears to hear and a mind to think.
These witnesses were much preoccupied with the
presence of police. They expressed fear and anger,
and were inclined to expect trouble with the
police that night. They were determined not to be
intimidated by the police, and to harass them
where possible, by and large, Professor Franklin
was seen as speaking to these issues in a way that
fostered resistance but not violence. His task was
seen as uniting the people against the common
foe: putting together the university's complicity in
the war, the linkage of the struggle here iwth the
struggle in Asia, the necessity to respond
vigorously on many levels of action. For example
Pat Faulkner testified that he understood
Professor Franklin to mean that all levels of
actions are all right, even writing letters, and that
it is necessary to wage war on many levels to win.
He felt that Professor Franklin gave a speech in
which he approved a wide range of actions,
including trashing, but did not emphasize violent
responses.
Professor Franklin's witnesses gave the term
"people's war" a variety of emphases, but the
words were generally udnerstood to have a range
of connotations. These included (1) harassment of
police; (2) taking control of our own lives; (3)
brining the war home; (4) strike; (5) learning from
the peoples of Southeast Asia; (6) attention to our
war here, not only the one in Indochina; (7) doing
whatever conscience dictates, which might include
trashing; (8) determinationnot to be intimidated
by police, not to shrink from threats.
4. Post-Rally Events
In the course of the hearing, on October 28, the
Advisory Board made the following statement on
post-rally events:
With respect to the Old Union courtyard speech, the
Board is now in a position to give its view of the value
of testimony about events following the rally. We
admitted testimony on these matters because the

University Administration, in order to demonstrate
that there was a risk that prohibited conduct would
follow the speech, introduced evidence for the
limited purpose of showing that such conduct did in
fact occur. We now feel that this
evidence concerning the light on White Plaza, the
alleged false alarms, the shootings, and other
incidents-need not be rebutted. We have reached this
decision because, in our view, the existence of risk is
adequately shown by pre-and co-existing conditions,
and does not require demonstration by referring to
subsequent events.
It is a matter ol record that untoward events of the
sort mentioned above did in fact occur that night,
beginning immediately after the rally. We limited
testimony on these matters for two reasons: (1) the
charges did not contain any references to Professor
Franklin's post-rally conduct; (2) we had good reason to
believe that significant risk existed without reference to
post-rally events.
D. DEFENSES AND THEIR ANALYSES
1. Principal Points made in Defense Against Charges in
Paragraph 10.
Professor Franklin, in testimony and argument, made
several points in defending against these charges:
a. The speeches were brief, especially the second one
at the very end of the evening's program. Such brief
speeches could hardly have had the impact ascribed
to them by the University Administration.
b. It was difficult to hear the speeches. Except for
those near the speakers, consisting to a considerable
extent of Professor Franklin's close associates,
audibility was a problem. The testimony of several
witnesses who were not close to the speaker was
challenged by Professor Franklin.
c. What could be heard was innocuous. It was meant
to inform, educate, and persuade to a political
viewpoint. It was not intended to incite, inflame, or
cause violence.
d. Most of the people at the rally had already decided
what they were going to do by the time Professor
Franklin gave his second and closing spcech. In this
speech, he essentially gave them a political rationale
for what they had already decided to do.
e. Even if his speeches were taken as inflamatory by
some members of his audience, they were well
justified by Stanford's condition as a fascist and
imperialist institution, and by the presence on the
campus of an occupation army consisting of police
who frequently kill black and brown people, and
indeed had just killed a black brother.
112. In any event. Professor Franklin should be able to
give such speeches with impunity, since all speech
should be considered to be constitutionally
protected, even where appreciable risks are posed.
g. If speech is to be restricted at all, it must be done
within a very narrow band. Such a band could not
include general prescritpions for hostile actiona or
even for violence. Specific prescriptions for violent
acts would be required, and tchse must be confirmed
by specific evidence that individuals had been moved
to carry out those same specific acts by the speech in
question.
2. Analysis of the Defenses
The length of the speeches is much less important
than other characteristics: content, delivery, context,
audience. In any event, the first speech was not
particularly brief, and the second was in a crucial
position: at the very end of the rally.
In regard to audibility, we conclude that those who
wanted to hear the speeches could do so. This is
admitted by some defense witnesses, and to a certain
extent by Professor Franklin himself who testified that
at the time he felt he could reach those who really
wanted to hear him. The main variable seems to have
been attention; some members of the audience paid
close attention to his speeches, others little. Among
those who did pay attention, there is considerable
agreement as to content, though witnesses differe as to
interpretation.
There is no meaningful way to consider Professor
Franklin's behavior in the Old Union rally without a
firm grasp of the context in which the rally occurred.
The mood that evening was tense and angry. After the
passage of so many months it is difficult to recapture the
sense of anxious expectation that characterized the
campus that evening. The Old Union rally followed
several days of continually escalating events: threats of
coercion, actual coercion, arson, police action, and
hostile confrontations on campus. We have already
summarized recurrent themes of the immediately
preceding rallies at Dinkelspiel on February 9th and
White Plaza on February 10th. As the Board concluded
in its statement of October 28th, cited above, substantial
risk existed on the Stanford campus before and during
the Old Union rally.
There are additional aspects of the context for the
Old Union rally that deserve consideration. Professor
Franklin rose to speak as a well-known and respected
leader of the "movement". Defense witnesses testified
that he was viewed with admiration and his ideas were
taken seriously. Professor Franklin testified that the
time of these events in February was a crucial one for
the "movement", a time when the "movement" might
transcend itself.
Testimony in the hearing, mainly from defense
witnesses, brought out the fact that this occasion stirred
memories of other similar occasions which also provide
meaningful context for the Old Union rally. The events
approximately a year earlier at the time of the military
action in Cambodia came up repeatedly. Indeed, one of
Professor Franklin's main contentions is that he was
attempting to foster a "Cambodia-type strike". A
number of defense witnesses, including especially
Braumstein and Professor Franklin, discussed the events
of the Cambodian period and compared them with the
events during the Laotian invasion. It became clear that
the protest events of the Cambodian period, viewed with
approbation, included a spectrum of activities, some of
which were nonviolent, some of which were patently
coercive, and some of which were overtly violent. The
coercive and violent activities included: forcible blocking
of entries into buildings for sustained periods, large-scale
breaking of windows, bombings, and lire bombings.
The Old Union rally also brought back recollections
of other night rallies held in similar circumstances,
especially when police were on campus, not only during
the Cambodian protest but at other times in the past few

years as well. There lias been a clear tendency for such
occasions to be followed by violent behavior. This fact
was knwon to Professor Franklin, since several of the
defense witnesses commented on his participation in
these protests.
Two of the major themes permeating the three rallies
of February 9th and February 10, advanced by Professor
Franklin and many of his close associates, are especially
pertinent to his closing speech at the Old Union rally:
(1) all-one-war; (2) multiple-levels-of-action.
(1) All-one-war is the theme linking the struggle at
Stanford with the struggle in Southeast Asia. It is the
heart of the problem, emphasized by Professor Franklin
in his speeches, affidavit, testimony and argument.
The speeches attack Stanford's war complicity, draw
parallels between racial oppression in America and Asia,
and emphasize the necessity to learn from the peoples of
Southeast Asia how to resist oppression at home. By the
end of the Old Union rally, the cumulative weight of
these linkages suggests that one way to fight the war
now is to fight the police and administration here.
In his testimony Professor Franklin says:
. . .what I say there basically is that we can't separate
the war in Southeast Asia from the war at home. Now
on all these points, all four of these speeches that
were given in this 24-hour period -that is from the
night belore in Dink through this—all four of those
speeches are essentially saying-are saying the same
thing. They're expressing a set of ideas which 1
consider the most important ideas. . . . And then this
seems to me the most essential thing, both in this
speech and in the second speech, to try to show
people just as clearly as possible that in fact that
occupation army of police that was on the campus
was part of the same war that was being waged in
Southeast Asia and that was being waged in the Black
ghettos and in the barrios of the United States.
This point is further clarified in Braunstein's defense
testimony, under cross-examination:
And the people fighting the United States in South
east Asia are fighting the same battles that people
fighting the police.. .who were on campus in the Old
Union Courtyard one and two of the year before and
are fighting the same battle as the people trying to get
rotten research off this campus and are fighting all
these battles, and they're all the same battles.
Then if it's all one battle, the word 'opposing forces'
relates to all the people on the other side in this big
global battle.
I've later learned that that is what's known as
'People's War'; is part of what is known as 'People's
War'.
Q. I take it in the context in which you were speaking
you at least included the police in that reference?
A. Oh, certainly. Especially that night, yes. I also
included the University administrators.
(2) The war is to be waged with the
multiple-levels-of-action formula. Each person is to do
his own thing, whatever he can, whatever he thinks best,
using his imagination to find ways of resisting the
occupying forces. This theme has a familiar ring from its
recurrence during the preceding few days. We have
earlier quoted Braunstein's remarks on this subject at the
Dinkelspiel rally on February 9th. It is clear from a
variety of references in several rallies that this
formulation is meant to advocate a spectrum of activities
which might include contacting Congressmen,
persuading students in dormitories, being active on
campus at night, refusing to be intimidated by the
police, blocking doorways, occupying buildings,
breaking windows, putting the computer out of service
for a long time, destroying the computer, or doing other
things for which one might not wish to "take credit."
In his testimony Professor Franklin said he felt
impelled at the end of the rally to speak about:
. . .that action that was going to be taken, which
was essentially gpomg back to the dorms to talk
about the war in Southeast Asia and about the
police occupation of the campus and—for people
to be there and exercise their right. That it was
important for somebody to explain to people that
that action itself was, you know, just as legitimate
a part of this war as, say, the armed self defense of
the Vietnamese people or the people of Laos. . ..
And in that speech I mentioned using the methods
of people's war. And at that point I was speaking
very directly to the people there, I think, who
considered themselves revolutionaries. Because I
knew that they would have a basic understanding
of what that meant, and that that phrase summed
up a whole lot of experience.
Braunstein testified for Professor Franklin, 'There are
all sorts of actions on various levels, including people
breaking windows with rocks and people burning down
buildings, as yet unidentified people burning down
buildings, and so on, that sometimes have the same goals
in mind and sometimes don't."
Significant in this context was the term "people's
war." It was interpreted by various witnesses in different
ways. It seems to include a wide range of suggested
actions, some of which are nonviolent, and some of
which are violent. It can clearly include guerilla warfare.
Some witnesses interpreted this as its primary meaning,
others gave this meaning less prominence. Maoist
writings use the term "People's war" for all action, in
particular guerilla warfare, in which the warriors merge
with the masses. Professor Franklin acknowledge in his
testimony that guerilla warfare, including assassination
and bombings, is one important component of people's
war, but denied it was the one he had in mind when he
used the term in his spcech. Defense testimony indicated
that the concept of people's war extends beyond
military action, but did not deny that it prominently
includes military action. Given the repeated explicit
linkages of the struggle against the police occupation
army here and the war in Southeast Asia, in the context
of recent night violence on campus and an afternoon of
police confrontation, it is difficult to believe that most
listeners would be insensitive to the violent connotations
of this term. Why repeatedly use warlike terms and
images—such as Professor Franklin's "war on this
campus" if peaceful actions are intended?
Similar considerations apply to Professor Franklin's
advocacy of action to be taken against the occupation
army in small groups. It is clear that small groups can
conduct dormitory discussions and other peacefully
persuasive activities, and that this did in fact occur,
though we learned very little about the focus of such
discussions e.g., whether they were intended to foster
particular nonviolent or violent tactics of protest. In any
event, such dormitory discussions may well have been
one of the meanings of his alleged recommendation for
reliance upon affinity groups. He advised against mass
militant action, meaning essentially violent
confrontation with the police, on tactical grounds. Such
action was not feasible because the police were too
strong. It is alos clear that the smaller groups could
engage in violent activities as has often happened in
similar circumstances at Stanford during the past few
years-i.e., following night rallies permeated by angry
speech. Two days earlier, February 8, after a night of
"trashing", a sheet was distributed at a "movement"
rally under the title "Do It!" It endorsed the previous
night's activity and called for more of the same,
indicating that tight affinity groups can be helpful in
doing whatever people want to do.
Whatever the activities that Professor Franklin was
urging upon individuals and small groups, it appears that
lateness of the hour was positively desirable-"as late
into the night as possible". In view of the behavior ot
some individuals and affinity groups at Stanford in
similar circumstances during the past few years, it is
reasonable to suppose that lateness might be useful as a
cover for violent activities—though it could of course be
used for peaceful activities as well.
Professor Franklin's two Old Union speeches were
given in a hostile tone. This is apparent in the content of
the first speech, and the effect is heightened when one
listens to the tape and hears his tone of voice. Even
when the speech is briefly interrupted by a KZSU
interview, the angry tone and the emotional crowd
response can be clearly detected. Although thesecond
speech is covered over by a KZSU interview, similar
indications are available from the tape and from
testimony.
In the course of the hearing, both Professor Franklin
and Braunstein indicated that ambiguity about tactics
was desirable to these rally speeches because KZSU was
broadcasting them and the police would presumably
have tape recordings. To advocate violent tactics openly
in this context would have exposed the speaker to later
sanctions. We were informed in the hearing by Professor
Franklin of his "political decision" to keep his position
at Stanford, hence caution about open calls for
"revolutionary violence".
Thus, we are faced with a difficult problem: how to
interpret speech deliberately given in ambiguous terms.
But we have seen already that considerable clarification
emerges from a close examination of the text, from the
full context provided by preceding events, and from the
way in which the speech was delivered. In essence,
Professor Franklin came into a combustible situation,
focused hostility on certain targets, intensified existing
hostility toward those targets, and urged a spectrum of
actions against them: some peaceful, some coercive,
some violent. We must now turn our attention to his
audience in order to inquire whether they were likely to
understand him and whether Professor Franklin must
have expected the risk of prohibited conduct to be
increased by his behavior.
The tone and content of Professor Franklin's
speeches must have been particularly significant for two
groups: 1) people in the movement; 2) people who are
violence-prone for whatever reason. In respect to the
first, these are people who are responsive to Professor
Franklin by virtue of past association, respect,
dedication, and sharing of common goals. They tend to
understand the nuances of his speech, as was evident at
the hearing itself. As for the second grou, it is well
known that public meetings characterized by intense
anger and hints of violence tend to attract, both at the
meeting and via media coverage, individuals who are
drawn to violence for a variety of reasons, not
necessarily political. Whatever the reason for their
susceptibility to violence, they tend to find such
occasions exciting. They may be induced by angry
rhetoric to commit acts of gravity, particularly in the
context of recent examples of violent behavior.
Professor Franklin testified that he was aware of the
long-term, bitter antagonism between Venceremos and
FCM; and he was aware of the immediate, clearly
expressed hostility toward the small FCM group at the
rally. The presence of these mutually hostile groups at
the rally certainly added to the risk. The use of violent
rhetoric in such circumstances increased the probability
of attack and counter-attack.
We think that "movement" people were capable of
understanding the messages. We refer here to familiar
connotations understood by a group sharing common
intersts and values. For example, reference to "militant
action on campus" in 1971 is understood by many
people to mean "trashing " which in turn is understood
to mean "window-breaking." These are not the only
connotations of the terms, nor are they understood by
everyone who comes on campus. A few years ago, the
terms did not have these connotations. But common
usage in concrete situations has led to a widely shared
understanding.
Those devoted to the "movement" had a rich
refresher course in such terms during the rallies of the
preceding few days which we have already summarized.
Professor Franklin is explicit in his testimony that he
was aiming his remarks specifically at them, wanting
primarily to be un derstood by them. Braunstein
testified that there is special communication within the
"movement" and pointed out that Professor Franklin
referred to "us" at the rally. But the defense, in effect,
asks us to believe that, on the night of February 10,
individuals in the "movement" failed to understand the
coercive and violent connotations of phrases like "war
on this campus", taking action on multiple levels to
resist oppression here, and "we must learn from the
peoples of Southeast Asia that when confronted with an
occupation army, we must respond with the methods of
people's war". The defense puts forwards its bland
interpretation of such phrases even though they were
expressed in a very angry tone and in a context of
profound hostility toward the university by a respected
leader who generally approves coercive and violent
tactics in campus disputes (though he denies he
advocated them on this occasion). We must therefore
examine possible reasons why the audience might not
have detected the menacing connotations of his remarks
on the evening of February 10.
From the testimony in the hearing, we do not believe
members of the "movement" were obtuse; nor is there
anything credible in the record to suggest that they were
in such a conciliatory mood that his angry rhetoric failed
to rcach them. Were the "movement" members of
Professor Franklin's audience so concerned with trying
to win over the Roble group that they rejected all

coercive and violent connotations of his remarks? This
possibility deserves further consideration.
During the rally, "movement" people in control of
the meeting showed little consideration for the feelings
ol the Roble students. Indeed, Professor Franklin seems
to have been concerned about this situation, since he
devoted a good deal of his first speech to persuading the
Roble group to accept the "movement's" view of the
situation. As a Roble speaker made clear in the KZSU
interview, the difference between the Roble contingent
and the "movement" was not only one of demands
(narrow vs. broad) but of tactics (non-violent vs.
violent). In this episode, Professor Franklin
demonstrated his authority as a leader of the
"movement" when he easily stopped the flow of the
meeting, re-opened the question, made a major speech,
and got a re-vote.
In his way, Professor Franklin was trying to persuade
the Roble contingent to link up with the "movement" in
a united front, at least for the moment. His way of
undertaking this persuasion was itself inflamatory. He
made assertions of such hostile content in such an angry
manner regarding the University and the police that,
whatever their effect on the Roble group, they must
surely have intensified the resentment of many persons
favorable to the "movement" and thereby raised the
probability of violent actions later. We have earlier
quoted a portion of his first Old Union speech pertinent
to this point. Finally, his do-your-own-thing formula
permitted some encouragement for Roble students to
take peaceful actions and still leave room for
encouragement of "militant" actions by the
"movement".
This brings us again to one of the central themes in
the entire case. At Old Union as at White Plaza, the
actions urged by Professor Franklin were not exclusively
coercive or violent. He advocated a wide range of protest
actions: some peaceful, some coercive, some violent. If a
person removes valuable merchandise from a store,
paying for half, but not paying for the other half, is he
culpable for the part he stole? We believe that the
presence of peaceful recommendations cannot immunize
a person from sanctions if he has urged imminent
coercion and violence as well.
Once again, as at White Plaza, Professor Franklin was
the final speaker, and once again his speech was
promptly followed by events of a disruptive, coercive or
violent nature. The probability of this occurring by
chance is very small. At the least, it reflects his
leadership position in the "movement" and the riskiness
of those situations in which he spoke. He cannot avoid
the conclusion that his pseeches, the last on each
occasion, increased the probability that illegal acts
would follow the two rallies.
In an earlier section on "Fundamental Issues and
Standards", we have indicated that the University must
have the right to put some constraints on speech in
dangerous circumstances, but only with great caution.
This applies to acts of incitement to imminent lawless
action that arc likely to produce such action. "Lawless"
in the university context includes state or local laws, the
Policy on Campus Disruptions or other university
regulations, or common-law understandings of
professorial responsibility.
In judging the applicability of this standard to the
present charge, we have been guided by these questions:
(1) What is the entire context surrounding the alleged
incitement? (2) What was conmunicated to the
audience? (3) What would the speiker judge to be the
effect of his communication on the audience?
Since we wish to sustain the university's vital
tradition of fostering free expression in its widest
diversity, we are exceedingly cautious in considering
possible constraints on speech. If such constraints are
ever to be invoked, they must be reserved for extreme
situations. We are asking whether the context here was
that of a highly combustible situation, whether the
speaker gave an inflammatory message in that context,
and whether the speaker had good reason to anticipate
lhat his message would increase the risk of imminent
lawless action. If indeed we find that the speaker issued
a call to violence, he is not protected by having issued it
in euphemistic jargon. Such a call may be quite as
effective as one issued in more stark terms. In any event,
the language used here was hardly occult.
Although Professor Franklin's witnesses were inclined
to protect him by minimizing their understanding of
coercive and violent connotations in his speeches, they
did not exclude such connotations—nor did he. The
difference between them and administration witnesses
was mainly one of emphasis. In the spectrum of
activities advocated by Professof Franklin, the defense
emphasized the legal end, whereas the administration
emphasized the illegal end.
In our detailed analysis of the context for his Old
Union speeches, we have determined that persons active
in the "movement" must have been quite familiar with
the coercive and violent connotations of Professor
Franklin's phrases, that they were responsive to such
connotations, and that Professor Franklin must have
been aware of these facts.
Finally, we must consider the line of defense that,
even if Professor Franklin were considered to have
carried out such an incitement, he would nevertheless be
justified by his perception of Stanford as a fascist
institution playing an important role in an imperialist
war.
We recognize that Professor Franklin is pressing for
reform in important areas of social concern. Can this
justify coercive behavior in campus disputes, or the
fostering of a climate of violence on campus? Once any
person is granted this privilege in the name of a good
cause, we must grant it also to others who feel they have
worthy aims. When these rights conflict, as they
inevitably must, are we to condone low-grade guerilla
warfare on campus? If we deny to others what we grant
to Professor Franklin, we have adopted a double
standard: coercion and violence in the university may be
condoned if we approve its aims, but restricted if we
disapprove its aims. Then it becomes a simple question
of whose ox is gored. But every cause is fervently
supported by some, eloquently justified by some,
pursued with passion by some. In a way, every war is a
holy war. If we accept Professor Franklin's holiness, how
arc we to reject the holiness of other true believers? In
our view, this course is not morally defensible. We must
do our best to apply one standard across all political
preferences and that standard must not condone
violence on campus.

K. CONCLUSION
Taking into accoutn content, context, delivery, and
audience, did Professor Franklin's two Old Union
speeches include urging and inciting to disruption of
university activities, or threat to persons or property?
Must he have known that this exhortation would be
widely interpreted as immediate advocacy of disruptive
or violent behavior?
1. The situation was risky. Illegal acts had occurred
earlier that day. There was intense resentment toward
the war, the police, and the university; there had been
serious frustration for the "movement" earlier in the
day; bitter political adversaries were present at the rally
and identified by the chairman; protest actions including
coercive and violent possibilities were under discussion;
the police were present on campus; there was a well
known history of violence in similar circumstances at
Stanford. In general, the higher the risk, the less it takes
to trigger coercive and violent behavior.
2. The targets of Professor Franklin's animosity were
quite explicit-the police and the university. He made an
intensive effort in the two speeches to generate further
hostility toward these targets. He provided justification
for coercive and violent behavior toward them, without
specifying precisely what the nature of such acts might
be, leaving that to the judgment and imagination of each
individual or small group.
3. The urging of immediate retaliatory action towards
the police and the university was clear. A great sense of
urgency was conveyed by both the tone and the content
of his remarks. While no detailed blueprint for action
was provided, the necessity for prompt action wis a
strong message. The overall effect was to increase the
likelihood of imminent lawless action.
Taking into account the full context surround his
speeches at the Old Union rally, hte messages he
communicated to his audience, and what he should be
able to judge about the effect of these messages under
the circumstances, we reach the conclusion that
Professor Franklin intentionally urged and incited his
audience to engage in conduct which would disrupt
activities of the University and of members of the
University Community and threaten injury to individuals
an; property.
The Advisory Board thus finds that the charge in No.
10 is sustained.
DISSENTING OPINIONS
Professors Brown and Kennedy, while agreeing with
substantial portions of the majority's account, dissent as
follows:
The majority sustains the charge of incitement
against Professor Franklin citing (1) an extensive
background of material from speeches at this and
other rallies that supply context for his last speech;
(2) Professor Franklin's first speech at this rally,
which also supplies context and reveals relevant
attitudes of his own; and (3) words in the second
speech that constitute, in the majority's view,
sufficiently explicit invitations to do violence against
persons and property.
We dissent regarding some matters of context, as
well as on the finding with respect to Professor
Franklin's own speeches.
In describing the context of the rally, we would
give more weight than does the majority to the
presence of the Roble students and to their impact
upon events in the Old Union Courtyard. The
interaction between the group of Roble moderates
(concerned about the invasion of Laos but not part of
the "movement") and the "movement" group itself
provides a central theme for the rally. Professor
Franklin's own first speech is directed predominantly
to an attenuation of those tensions and to a
reconciliation that would accommodate the new
recruits to "movement" objectives. It is, in essence, a
long argument that political prisoners must not be
forgotten, and that there is a fundamental identity
between the struggle of Asian peoples against U.S.
imperialism and the struggle of oppressed people and
anti-war students against repressive forces at home.
As the majority states, the speech contains a heavy
tone of anger against the police and other forces that,
to Professor Franklin, sumbolize this oppression. We
nevertheless believe it plausible that the speech was
intended to make a group of Stanford students
identify, perhaps for the first time, with oppressed
people; we do not see evidence that Professor
Franklin's intention was to turn them explicitly to
violent actions. In no sense can this first Old Union
speech be regarded as actionable; indeed, the
University administration does not attempt to
persuade us to find against Professor Franklin on the
basis of its content. To the extent that it contains
intensity and anger, and to the extent that these are
directed against the police and the University, the
speech might be said to have added-along with other
speeches at the rally-to the risk that prohibited
conduct might follow. But all agree that nothing in
the content of this speech approaches incitement.
Indeed, we feel that the speech presented, in however
objectionable a style, some legitimate concerns about
the plight of prisoners, the existence of police
brutality, and other significant issues.
Clearly Professor Franklin and other speakers
believed that a major mission of the "movement"
people at the rally was to undertake the "education"
of the rest of the Stanford community. Professor
Franklin's own first speech concludes with a plea that
those present go out to the people "and teach them
what we have learned in the movement," and that
any who are not persuaded should "get up here [ile.
to the microphone] and we should discuss it." At the
conclusion of his speech he testifies that he went over
to discuss the matter further with the Roble group.
The speaker who followed Professor Franklin to the
podium commented that the important thing was to
"go to the dorms, go to the people we want to talk
t0...." A later speaker extends the suggestion by
hoping that those at the rally will go to the dorms
and "rap all night." Recruitment, broadening the base
of the "movement," educating the community: all
these were significant themes in the development o'
the meeting's context. By its relatively stronger
emphasis on the more violent rhetoric, in particular
Professor Franklin's, the majority has decided against
what seems to us a plausible, even persuasive, second
view of the matter.

The content of the second speech, of course, is not
available to us except through the testimony of
witnesses. According to Beyers, Professor Franklin
called for a "people's war against the occupation
army of the police," and he "suggested that people
should go back tot their dormitories, form meetings,
meet in small groups, decide whatever they wanted to
do, to do it as late at night as possible, and to do
things which would bring more of the occupation
here."' Professor Franklin's version in his affidavit is
only slightly different. He, too, calims to have said
that "when confronted with an occupation army we
must respond with the methods of people's war." Me
adds, "I ended by telling people that people's war
meant that they should go back into their
dormitories, organize people into small groups, talk
with them, play football, or whatever, as late into the
night as possible." These differences are not very
substantial; they can easily be accounted for by
differences in recollection.
The majority analyzes these collections of phrases
in such a way that they are strongly persuaded as to
their meaning and that the meaning sustains an
incitement charge, given such other factors as risk.
The logic consists essentially in the elimination of
various attenuative constructions that are more
benign. In our view this interpretation is not
"strongly persuasive." The phrases upon which
attention has been focused are isolated from a
substantial matrix of interstitial speech, the precise
construction of which we do not know, and about
which we must be careful not to draw too confident
appraisals. Two examples will illustrate the point.
First, Professor Franklin says that in the context in
which he used it, "People's war" was clearly indicated
to mean "thoroughly merging with the masses;" he
states that he used the football game as an example of
that kind of tactic. It is significant that virtually all of
the witnesses link the words "people's war" to the
example of the football game. Professor Franklin
states in his affidavit that this was the only exmaple
he used, and the cumulative testimony seems to bear
him out. Second, the phrase "as late into the night as
possible," interpreted by the majority as a call to
militant action by small groups, could equally have
appeared in a context in which it applied primarily to
late dormitory discussions and to legal (though
perhaps risky) methods of taking up the time of the
police. Such an interpretation gain in plausibility
from Professor Franklin's testimony that although he
does not in principle disapprove of trashing, he would
not have urged it on that occasion, both because of
the heavy presence of police on campus that night
and because it would have alienated those new to the
"movement."
The point is that none of these interpretations has
a great deal of certainty about it. The ones we have
just mentioned may be a little less plausible than
those favored by the majority, but only a little less.
The "hard" data on words are so fragmentary, and
depend so much on the kind of context-construction
that is very sensitive to whatever bias the witnesses
may have had, that we find them inadequate to meet
a "strongly persuasive" criterion that Professor
Franklin is guilty as charged by the University
administration.
We are not strongly persuaded by the impressions
of the speech given by various witnesses-as opposed
to actual reconstructions of wording. Such
impressions are especially subject to the bias of
expectations. The differing treatments of Professor
Franklin's account of the football game provide one
example among many. Some witnesses regarded it as
a euphemism for more violent activity, others
regarded it merely as an opportunity for a bad pun,
while still others interpreted it as we would, as an
invitation to occupy the time of the police.
In effect, the majority report argues that Professor
Franklin was employing words well understood to his
audience but not to others. But there is no convincing
evidence that any substantial number of the audience
would have translated his speech into an invitation to
commit violent acts. Each phrase, like "people's
war," has been subject to a number of conflicting
interpretations in the testimony. Furthermore, the
reconstruction of a code depends on one's ability to
capture a reasonably large portion of the message,
and in this instance we have only scattered elements.
Although we think it is quite possible that Professor
Franklin advocated a range of actions some of which
may have been illegal, we do no find the evidence
strongly persuasive that his speech constituted the
advocacy of imminent lawless action.
The majority emphasizes the extremity of the risk
in the situation; we do not disagree with their
evaluation, but we stress more heavily the doubts we
have about the context and the meaning of the words
actually spoken.
to find against Professor Franklin on this charge
might, we believe, force a faculty member addressing
a political rally in the future to guard against possible
cryptic meanings that his speech might convey to a
segment of his audience whenever a situation of high
risk obtains. The social cost of such a prohibition
must be balanced against the benefits to be derived
from being able to prosecute somewhat ambiguous
speech in dangerous situations. We find the costs too
great.
Accordingly, we do not sustain the charge against
Professor Franklin as stated in Paragraph 10.
A. CHARGES
The University Administration's charge concerning
Professor Franklin's conduct during the Old Union
Courtyard rally on February 10th reads as follows:
10. On the eveing of February 10, 1971, beginning at
approximately 8:00 p.m., a rally was held in the Old
Union Courtyard to, among other things, discuss
methods of protesting developments in the war in
Indochina. Over two hundred students and other
persons attended the rally. During the course of the
rally Professor Franklin intentionally urged and
incited students and other persons present to engage
in conduct calculated to disrupt activities of the
University and of members of the University
community and which threatened injury to
individuals and property. Shortly thereafter students
and other persons were assaulted by persons present
at the rally, and later that evening other acts of
violence occurred.
B. NATURE OF THE CHARGE IN PARAGRAPH 10
The charge centers on intentional incitement that
threatened: (1) disruption of University activities, both
individual and institutional; and (2) injury to persons
and property. It implies that a rish of coercive or violent
behavior existed at the time of the rally and that
Professor Franklin further increased the risk by the
content and manner of his participation. In determining
whether the facts fit the charges, the Board must inquite
(1) What is the entire context surrounding the alleged
incitement? (2) What is being communicated to the
audience? (3) What would the speaker judge to be the
effect of his communication on the audience?
C. FINDINGS OF FACT 1. Prominent Themes in the
1. Prominent Themes in the Old Union Rally,
February 10
On Wednesday, February 10 at 8:00 p.m. about 350
people attended a rally in the Old Union Courtyard.
Speakers debated tactics and demands. Professor
Franklin spoke twice. The themes that emerged
prominently in the course of the rally may he
summarized as follows:
a. There was general agreement on opposition to the
war in Southeast Asia and a wish to protest against
American involvement.
b. There was a major difference of opinion on the
scope of demands and of tactics. A contingent of
students from Roble Hall favored a single demand, an
effort to reach out for the broadest possible support
and strict adherence to non-violent tactics. Another
and larger faction favored a broader set of demands,
even at the risk of losing community support; and
they favored a broader range of tactics, including
coercive and violent ones, depending on
circumstances. This distinction between the two
groups was not only apparent in the speeches, but
was emphasized by a KZSU broadcast interview with
representatives of the Roble contingent near the end
of the rally.

c. Five speakers emphasized Stanford's major war
complicity and severe political repression. This
viewpoint may be illustrated with the following
quotation from one of the speakers.
I work at the phone company and I realize that
everyday one out of every two calls that I place
goes from Stanford University or SRI directly to
the Pentagon, to SRI all over the country and all
over the world, and people realize that Stanford
University is integrally linked with Pacific
Telephone Company, that all the business, you
know, that the whole service which Pacific
Telephone puts out is for the benefit of the
financial interest in this area and people who are
against the war, people that I work with who are
against the war, who are very, very angry and
outraged by the expansion of the war into Laos
realize that, because they have brothers, brothers
and uncles and fathers who are over there fighting,
who have been forced to go over there, they don't
have any choice, they can't afford to go to school,
they are forced to be over there. They have
brothers and sisters who are locked up in the
prisons all over America and they realize that
Stanford University, that the kind of research
Stanford does, the kind of money Stanford has,
which controls the black and brown communities
in the mid-peninsula, is a very dangerous thing and
they:re willing to fight against that for their very
survival and I think that the people here should
respect that, should respect the fact that telephone
workers are getting organized, that we're thinking
now about what kind of support demonstration
we can have when Stanford gets itself together and
the issues become clear to the people that
Stanford University is key in the war, key in the
oppression of political prisoners and it's just got to
go. (applause)
d. Eight speakers were very hostile to the police
especially to their presence on campus. Police had
been called to the campus to terminate the
occupation of the Computation Center and had
remained in view of the likelihood of further illegal
acts. It will be recalled that arson and "trashing" had
occurred on the nights of February 6 and 7. Early in
the Old Union rally of February 10, the presence of
police on campus was announced. No witness
testified that a single uniformed policeman entered
the Old Union courtyard, despite the fact that
Professor Franklin, in his affidavit shortly after the
event, said there were many police there. In the
hearing, he corrected this error. Thus, the police were
not visible to the people at the rally, but their
presence on campus was a focus of deep resentment.
They were often referred to as "pigs" and as an
occupation army or occupying forces. In conjunction
with the previous criticism of Stanford's complicity
in the war. the struggle on campus and the struggle in
Southeast Asia were portrayed as different facets of a
single struggle. Parallels were drawn between the

police on campus and imperialist armies in Asia. The
all-one-war theme was emphasized by urging
resistance to the police as analogous to resistance to
occupying forces in Vietnam.
e. On two occasions, members of the Free Campus
Movement were pointed out in a context of hostility,
and were linked to the police on campus.
112. In response to these various instigations, there was
a desire for action — not merely verbal demands, but
concrete, tangible steps to implement them. There
was a clear preference for strong, vivid action, though
some speakers, including those from the Roble
contingent, put their main emphasis on education.
Little reference was made to "strike" in this rally.
The actions mainly preferred by the speakers may be
illustrated by (he following remarks by the chairman:
Okay, I think it's still pretty clear that we want to
keep the demands as they are. Okay, at this point I
think we should go on to specific proposals for
how we act now. We've had a few proposals; one
guy suggested that after the Comp Center thing
today that in order to escalate rather than
de-escalate we should zero in on SRI, Another
person, other people have proposed that we deal
now with the police state that's on this campus
because if we're going to move against the war,
one of the things we have to do to be able to move
against the war in atmosphere where we're not
intimidated by pigs coming through to surround
our meetings and that kind of thing and that one
of the ways to do that is to begin any kind of
action people want to take to get the pigs off this
campus. I think that people should speak to these
proposals and add more proposals that they have.
g. Five speakers explicitly expressed and several
others implicitly expressed anger, using words and
imagery of fighting. Three speakers suggested actions
to embarrass, humiliate, or confront the police,
particularly late at night, while others made more
general comments advocating resistance to
intimidation.
h. Two speakers favored off-campus protests.
2. Professor Franklin's First Speech at Old Union
(Second speech of February 10)
Professor Franklin's first Old Union speech
(Appendix III) began with an effort to persuade the
Roble contingent of the correctness of the majority
position favoring a broad set of demands, including the
freeing of all "political prisoners" and the end of
Stanford's complicity in the war — not merely
immediate withdrawal of US forces from Southeast Asia.
He spoke with concern about people who must spend
time in jail, emphasized solidarity within the
"movement", and opposed betrayal of political
prisoners. Then, in an intense delivery, he said:
And we get very upset when we find our beautiful
campus crawling with pigs who stop and harass
people and rip off and beat half of the people. Well
this is just a very, very mild taste of what life is like in
the black and brown communities of this country
where the pigs come by every night and if you're
young and you're black and brown they stop you and
ask your I.D. and rip you off for suspicion of
burglary and where there are dogs there and where
there's a helicopter overhead and that's part of the
same struggle, and where they shoot you and the pigs
who are here tonight, that's those San Jose pigs have
just mundered a black brother in San Jose, the same
San Jose pig just murdered a black brother down in
San Jose and that's normal life down there. People
murdered in the streets and that's why we call them
pigs. Although it's a little unfair to the four-footed
variety, because they don't do that kind of thing.
[Applause]
Continuing to speak in the same delivery, he next
alluded to the Black Panther party's leadership and made
the following remarks:
And the Black Panther Party teaches us that the
people of Laos and the people of South Vietnam are
not another separate nation state. That they are our
brothers and sisters because they are just other
oppressed communities of the same empire. The
Black Panther Party teaches us that today while this
meeting was going on brothers and sisters, blood
brothers and sisters of us, were killed in Laos, in
Vietnam and Cambodia, in the black and brown
communities of the United States of America. They
teach us this is all one struggle and the
interconnections are every place. Even if you thing
about what Laos is all about; what is the chief cash
export of Laos, who knows?
[crowd | Opium, heroin?
Opium, all the heroin on this coast comes from Laos.
And it's all brought in by the CIA. It is grown and
harvested by Meo tribesmen and flown out on Air
America, the CIA airline. And it is brought in to this
state as part of the oppression, particularly of black
and brown people here, but also of white youth. . . .
(brief KZSU interruption). . . . and is just as much a
part of the counter-insurgency system as the pigs are
war on this campus.
He urged that others be taught about such evils as
Stanford's complicity in the war and the necessity to
free all political prisoners. He expressed the view that
the student strike a year earlier had been a success. He
closed by restating the necessity to continue the struggle
to win others to his viewpoint.
3. Professor Franklin 's Second Speech at the Old Union
(Third speech of February 10)
This speech lasted about two minutes, but because
KZSU was conducting an interview at the time, it can
only be heard in the background on the tape recording.
The pitch of his voice is high, with only a few of his
words and intermittent responses from the crowd being
clearly discernible on the tape. The crowd responses
increase toward the end. The content of the speech can
only be reconstructed from testimony, but this poses
little difficulty. There is substantial agreement as to
what Professor Franklin said amont his witnesses, the
University Administration's witnesses, and Professor
Franklin's own affidavit and testimony. The differences,
as might be expected, are in the interpretation of his
speech.
a. Professor Franklin's interpretation of his second
Old Union speech.
In his affidavit he describes the speech as follows:
A number of speakers at the meeting rose to describe
specific instances of police harassment and brutality.
Several proposed that we go to the dormitories to
discuss die police state on campus and what to do
about it, as well as what to do about the situation in
Southeast Asia. One speaker said that many squads of
six to eight police were roaming the campus, and that
if we marched to the dorms some of these squads
would follow us, and that it would be a good
education for people in the dorms to see them. Two
speakers said that the police were attempting to keep
people from knowing what was happening, and that
they had temporarily confiscated a walkie-talkie from
a KZSU reporter and threatened to arrest him for
listening to police frequencies. Another speaker said
that if we march in one group it will be too easy for
the police and we should confuse them by dividing
into many groups. Another speaker siad "there are
pigs all over this campus and we have to show people
who the pigs are and who the people are, and we
cannot tolerate a police state here or any place else."
It was generally agreed that we would go back to the
dormitories to build support for the strike and to
raise consciousness about the police occupation of
the campus. I rose to speak again. 1 said that it was
unfortunate that the people from Roble had not felt
that they were really part of the movement and that
it was necessary to go into the dorms and discuss all
their questions further. I said that it was very
important for people to understand that this is a
united front, and that people will respond on
different levels of action and with different degrees of
consciousness to the war. I said that it was important
for people to accept these different levels, and that if
people are sincere it is correct for them to do their
own thing, to do whatever they think best, and that
that is how all of us learn. I pointed out that with the
police saturation on campus, however, it would be
suicide for people to engage in any militant action in
a large group. I said that we must learn from the
peoples of Southeast Asia that when confronted with
an occupation army, we must respond with the
methods of people's war. Then 1 explained that this
means thoroughly merging with the people. I gave
one and only one example of what I meant by this. I
said that I had been told that a few nights before,
during a similar police occupation, several people had
begun a game of touch football. They moved from
place to place on the campus, forcing the police to
follow them. Several police complained to them that
they were supposed to be in fixed positions, and that
this was preventing them from maintaining those
positions. Finally, when the football game
appraoched the area of the computation center, the
police had asked to examine the football. I said that I
wasn't sure whether this was because they thought it
was a bomb or because they just wanted to examine a
real pigskin. I ended by teliing people that people's

war meant that they should go back to the
dormitories, organize people into small groups, and
talk with them, or play football, or whatever, as late
into the night as possible.
b. Hearing witnesses' interpretation of Professor
Franklin's second Old Union Speech
(i) Administration witnesses-There is considerable
agreement among administration and defense
witnesses on the content (though not on the
interpretation) of this speech. This can be
illustrated by comparing Professor Franklin's
version of his speech after the event given above
with testimony of Robert Beyers, of the Stanford
News Service. He testified that he had attended
many rallies at Stanford over a period of years,
and had often heard Professor Franklin speak. He
described Professor Franklin's speech on this
occasion as very critical of the police. He testified
that Professor Franklin called specifically for
people's war against the occupation army-i.e., the
police. Professor Franklin suggested that people go
back to their dormitories, meet in small groups,
decide to do whatever they wanted to do as late at
night as possible so as to bring more police onto
the campus to help out their brethren in other
communities. At this point, in Beyer's view, the
nature of the meeting changed dramatically,
leading him to expect that illegal or disruptive
incidents would follow. Immediately after the
speech, the rally ended and Beyers said three FCM
students were badly beaten by some of the Old
Union crowd. Under cross-examination, he
indicated that Professor Franklin did not specify
the exact nature of the violent acts to be carried
out.
Brimelow felt there was much tension and
restlessness in the meeting, and that the crowd got
very excited as a result of the speech. After the
speech he saw the crowd stream off in all
directions and he heard "war cries" (something of
this sort is audible on the tape recording). Almas
heard the speech from the balcony of the Women's
Clubhouse, thought it was impassioned and was
startled by it. Almas had heard Professor Franklin
speak about a dozen times but had never heard
him encourage this level of action. Almas felt
Professor Franklin had not been as careful as
usual, and the witness had the expectation that
there was going to be violence.
R. Jacobs, also on the balcony, thought
Professor Franklin had made inflammatory
statements. Grav felt Professor Franklin was
playing the role of a leader giving instructions to
the group in a serious vein.
(ii) Professor Franklin's witnesses
Witnesses for Professor Franklin heard phrases
similar to those reported by Administration
witnesses but to some extent interpreted them
differently. This is well illustrated by an affidavit
of Bennion, who also testified at the hearing.
. . .It became clear that there was some opposition
forming, basically between going back into the
dorms for further discussion and staying in the
area the police were patrolling in order to show
them that the occupation of the campus would
not be tolerated. At this point Professor Franklin
spoke and tried to explain that these two
tendencies were not really opposed, but could be
carried out at the same time and could mutually
serve each other. He discussed at length the tenets
of "people's war" which is based on the concept
of a united front. In essence this means that
everyone can contribute what they can to a
movement, with one person's greater contribution
or risk should not be seen as invalidating another's.
This leads to many levels of action which mutually
reinforce other levels, rather than detracting from
each other. He pointed out that in advanced stages
of "people's war" such as in Vietnam, many
different levels of action are still employed, not
merely the military level of the National
Liberation Front. He also stated that in the
present case it would be suicidal to engage in any
large-scale militant action. He gave one example of
what "people's war" would mean that evening.
Some people could go back to the dorms and
persuade others to join the movement, while
others could play touch football in the area being
patrolled by the police to show that they were not
intimidated by the occupation of the campus. At
no time did say or even remotely imply or suggest
that he advocated a militant action that evening,
nor did his in-depth analysis of "people's war"
make such an interpretation possible for any
person who had ears to hear and a mind to think.
These witnesses were much preoccupied with the
presence of police. They expressed fear and anger,
and were inclined to expect trouble with the
police that night. They were determined not to be
intimidated by the police, and to harass them
where possible, by and large, Professor Franklin
was seen as speaking to these issues in a way that
fostered resistance but not violence. His task was
seen as uniting the people against the common
foe: putting together the university's complicity in
the war, the linkage of the struggle here iwth the
struggle in Asia, the necessity to respond
vigorously on many levels of action. For example
Pat Faulkner testified that he understood
Professor Franklin to mean that all levels of
actions are all right, even writing letters, and that
it is necessary to wage war on many levels to win.
He felt that Professor Franklin gave a speech in
which he approved a wide range of actions,
including trashing, but did not emphasize violent
responses.
Professor Franklin's witnesses gave the term
"people's war" a variety of emphases, but the
words were generally udnerstood to have a range
of connotations. These included (1) harassment of
police; (2) taking control of our own lives; (3)
brining the war home; (4) strike; (5) learning from
the peoples of Southeast Asia; (6) attention to our
war here, not only the one in Indochina; (7) doing
whatever conscience dictates, which might include
trashing; (8) determinationnot to be intimidated
by police, not to shrink from threats.
4. Post-Rally Events
In the course of the hearing, on October 28, the
Advisory Board made the following statement on
post-rally events:
With respect to the Old Union courtyard speech, the
Board is now in a position to give its view of the value
of testimony about events following the rally. We
admitted testimony on these matters because the

University Administration, in order to demonstrate
that there was a risk that prohibited conduct would
follow the speech, introduced evidence for the
limited purpose of showing that such conduct did in
fact occur. We now feel that this
evidence concerning the light on White Plaza, the
alleged false alarms, the shootings, and other
incidents-need not be rebutted. We have reached this
decision because, in our view, the existence of risk is
adequately shown by pre-and co-existing conditions,
and does not require demonstration by referring to
subsequent events.
It is a matter ol record that untoward events of the
sort mentioned above did in fact occur that night,
beginning immediately after the rally. We limited
testimony on these matters for two reasons: (1) the
charges did not contain any references to Professor
Franklin's post-rally conduct; (2) we had good reason to
believe that significant risk existed without reference to
post-rally events.
D. DEFENSES AND THEIR ANALYSES
1. Principal Points made in Defense Against Charges in
Paragraph 10.
Professor Franklin, in testimony and argument, made
several points in defending against these charges:
a. The speeches were brief, especially the second one
at the very end of the evening's program. Such brief
speeches could hardly have had the impact ascribed
to them by the University Administration.
b. It was difficult to hear the speeches. Except for
those near the speakers, consisting to a considerable
extent of Professor Franklin's close associates,
audibility was a problem. The testimony of several
witnesses who were not close to the speaker was
challenged by Professor Franklin.
c. What could be heard was innocuous. It was meant
to inform, educate, and persuade to a political
viewpoint. It was not intended to incite, inflame, or
cause violence.
d. Most of the people at the rally had already decided
what they were going to do by the time Professor
Franklin gave his second and closing spcech. In this
speech, he essentially gave them a political rationale
for what they had already decided to do.
e. Even if his speeches were taken as inflamatory by
some members of his audience, they were well
justified by Stanford's condition as a fascist and
imperialist institution, and by the presence on the
campus of an occupation army consisting of police
who frequently kill black and brown people, and
indeed had just killed a black brother.
112. In any event. Professor Franklin should be able to
give such speeches with impunity, since all speech
should be considered to be constitutionally
protected, even where appreciable risks are posed.
g. If speech is to be restricted at all, it must be done
within a very narrow band. Such a band could not
include general prescritpions for hostile actiona or
even for violence. Specific prescriptions for violent
acts would be required, and tchse must be confirmed
by specific evidence that individuals had been moved
to carry out those same specific acts by the speech in
question.
2. Analysis of the Defenses
The length of the speeches is much less important
than other characteristics: content, delivery, context,
audience. In any event, the first speech was not
particularly brief, and the second was in a crucial
position: at the very end of the rally.
In regard to audibility, we conclude that those who
wanted to hear the speeches could do so. This is
admitted by some defense witnesses, and to a certain
extent by Professor Franklin himself who testified that
at the time he felt he could reach those who really
wanted to hear him. The main variable seems to have
been attention; some members of the audience paid
close attention to his speeches, others little. Among
those who did pay attention, there is considerable
agreement as to content, though witnesses differe as to
interpretation.
There is no meaningful way to consider Professor
Franklin's behavior in the Old Union rally without a
firm grasp of the context in which the rally occurred.
The mood that evening was tense and angry. After the
passage of so many months it is difficult to recapture the
sense of anxious expectation that characterized the
campus that evening. The Old Union rally followed
several days of continually escalating events: threats of
coercion, actual coercion, arson, police action, and
hostile confrontations on campus. We have already
summarized recurrent themes of the immediately
preceding rallies at Dinkelspiel on February 9th and
White Plaza on February 10th. As the Board concluded
in its statement of October 28th, cited above, substantial
risk existed on the Stanford campus before and during
the Old Union rally.
There are additional aspects of the context for the
Old Union rally that deserve consideration. Professor
Franklin rose to speak as a well-known and respected
leader of the "movement". Defense witnesses testified
that he was viewed with admiration and his ideas were
taken seriously. Professor Franklin testified that the
time of these events in February was a crucial one for
the "movement", a time when the "movement" might
transcend itself.
Testimony in the hearing, mainly from defense
witnesses, brought out the fact that this occasion stirred
memories of other similar occasions which also provide
meaningful context for the Old Union rally. The events
approximately a year earlier at the time of the military
action in Cambodia came up repeatedly. Indeed, one of
Professor Franklin's main contentions is that he was
attempting to foster a "Cambodia-type strike". A
number of defense witnesses, including especially
Braumstein and Professor Franklin, discussed the events
of the Cambodian period and compared them with the
events during the Laotian invasion. It became clear that
the protest events of the Cambodian period, viewed with
approbation, included a spectrum of activities, some of
which were nonviolent, some of which were patently
coercive, and some of which were overtly violent. The
coercive and violent activities included: forcible blocking
of entries into buildings for sustained periods, large-scale
breaking of windows, bombings, and lire bombings.
The Old Union rally also brought back recollections
of other night rallies held in similar circumstances,
especially when police were on campus, not only during
the Cambodian protest but at other times in the past few

years as well. There lias been a clear tendency for such
occasions to be followed by violent behavior. This fact
was knwon to Professor Franklin, since several of the
defense witnesses commented on his participation in
these protests.
Two of the major themes permeating the three rallies
of February 9th and February 10, advanced by Professor
Franklin and many of his close associates, are especially
pertinent to his closing speech at the Old Union rally:
(1) all-one-war; (2) multiple-levels-of-action.
(1) All-one-war is the theme linking the struggle at
Stanford with the struggle in Southeast Asia. It is the
heart of the problem, emphasized by Professor Franklin
in his speeches, affidavit, testimony and argument.
The speeches attack Stanford's war complicity, draw
parallels between racial oppression in America and Asia,
and emphasize the necessity to learn from the peoples of
Southeast Asia how to resist oppression at home. By the
end of the Old Union rally, the cumulative weight of
these linkages suggests that one way to fight the war
now is to fight the police and administration here.
In his testimony Professor Franklin says:
. . .what I say there basically is that we can't separate
the war in Southeast Asia from the war at home. Now
on all these points, all four of these speeches that
were given in this 24-hour period -that is from the
night belore in Dink through this—all four of those
speeches are essentially saying-are saying the same
thing. They're expressing a set of ideas which 1
consider the most important ideas. . . . And then this
seems to me the most essential thing, both in this
speech and in the second speech, to try to show
people just as clearly as possible that in fact that
occupation army of police that was on the campus
was part of the same war that was being waged in
Southeast Asia and that was being waged in the Black
ghettos and in the barrios of the United States.
This point is further clarified in Braunstein's defense
testimony, under cross-examination:
And the people fighting the United States in South
east Asia are fighting the same battles that people
fighting the police.. .who were on campus in the Old
Union Courtyard one and two of the year before and
are fighting the same battle as the people trying to get
rotten research off this campus and are fighting all
these battles, and they're all the same battles.
Then if it's all one battle, the word 'opposing forces'
relates to all the people on the other side in this big
global battle.
I've later learned that that is what's known as
'People's War'; is part of what is known as 'People's
War'.
Q. I take it in the context in which you were speaking
you at least included the police in that reference?
A. Oh, certainly. Especially that night, yes. I also
included the University administrators.
(2) The war is to be waged with the
multiple-levels-of-action formula. Each person is to do
his own thing, whatever he can, whatever he thinks best,
using his imagination to find ways of resisting the
occupying forces. This theme has a familiar ring from its
recurrence during the preceding few days. We have
earlier quoted Braunstein's remarks on this subject at the
Dinkelspiel rally on February 9th. It is clear from a
variety of references in several rallies that this
formulation is meant to advocate a spectrum of activities
which might include contacting Congressmen,
persuading students in dormitories, being active on
campus at night, refusing to be intimidated by the
police, blocking doorways, occupying buildings,
breaking windows, putting the computer out of service
for a long time, destroying the computer, or doing other
things for which one might not wish to "take credit."
In his testimony Professor Franklin said he felt
impelled at the end of the rally to speak about:
. . .that action that was going to be taken, which
was essentially gpomg back to the dorms to talk
about the war in Southeast Asia and about the
police occupation of the campus and—for people
to be there and exercise their right. That it was
important for somebody to explain to people that
that action itself was, you know, just as legitimate
a part of this war as, say, the armed self defense of
the Vietnamese people or the people of Laos. . ..
And in that speech I mentioned using the methods
of people's war. And at that point I was speaking
very directly to the people there, I think, who
considered themselves revolutionaries. Because I
knew that they would have a basic understanding
of what that meant, and that that phrase summed
up a whole lot of experience.
Braunstein testified for Professor Franklin, 'There are
all sorts of actions on various levels, including people
breaking windows with rocks and people burning down
buildings, as yet unidentified people burning down
buildings, and so on, that sometimes have the same goals
in mind and sometimes don't."
Significant in this context was the term "people's
war." It was interpreted by various witnesses in different
ways. It seems to include a wide range of suggested
actions, some of which are nonviolent, and some of
which are violent. It can clearly include guerilla warfare.
Some witnesses interpreted this as its primary meaning,
others gave this meaning less prominence. Maoist
writings use the term "People's war" for all action, in
particular guerilla warfare, in which the warriors merge
with the masses. Professor Franklin acknowledge in his
testimony that guerilla warfare, including assassination
and bombings, is one important component of people's
war, but denied it was the one he had in mind when he
used the term in his spcech. Defense testimony indicated
that the concept of people's war extends beyond
military action, but did not deny that it prominently
includes military action. Given the repeated explicit
linkages of the struggle against the police occupation
army here and the war in Southeast Asia, in the context
of recent night violence on campus and an afternoon of
police confrontation, it is difficult to believe that most
listeners would be insensitive to the violent connotations
of this term. Why repeatedly use warlike terms and
images—such as Professor Franklin's "war on this
campus" if peaceful actions are intended?
Similar considerations apply to Professor Franklin's
advocacy of action to be taken against the occupation
army in small groups. It is clear that small groups can
conduct dormitory discussions and other peacefully
persuasive activities, and that this did in fact occur,
though we learned very little about the focus of such
discussions e.g., whether they were intended to foster
particular nonviolent or violent tactics of protest. In any
event, such dormitory discussions may well have been
one of the meanings of his alleged recommendation for
reliance upon affinity groups. He advised against mass
militant action, meaning essentially violent
confrontation with the police, on tactical grounds. Such
action was not feasible because the police were too
strong. It is alos clear that the smaller groups could
engage in violent activities as has often happened in
similar circumstances at Stanford during the past few
years-i.e., following night rallies permeated by angry
speech. Two days earlier, February 8, after a night of
"trashing", a sheet was distributed at a "movement"
rally under the title "Do It!" It endorsed the previous
night's activity and called for more of the same,
indicating that tight affinity groups can be helpful in
doing whatever people want to do.
Whatever the activities that Professor Franklin was
urging upon individuals and small groups, it appears that
lateness of the hour was positively desirable-"as late
into the night as possible". In view of the behavior ot
some individuals and affinity groups at Stanford in
similar circumstances during the past few years, it is
reasonable to suppose that lateness might be useful as a
cover for violent activities—though it could of course be
used for peaceful activities as well.
Professor Franklin's two Old Union speeches were
given in a hostile tone. This is apparent in the content of
the first speech, and the effect is heightened when one
listens to the tape and hears his tone of voice. Even
when the speech is briefly interrupted by a KZSU
interview, the angry tone and the emotional crowd
response can be clearly detected. Although thesecond
speech is covered over by a KZSU interview, similar
indications are available from the tape and from
testimony.
In the course of the hearing, both Professor Franklin
and Braunstein indicated that ambiguity about tactics
was desirable to these rally speeches because KZSU was
broadcasting them and the police would presumably
have tape recordings. To advocate violent tactics openly
in this context would have exposed the speaker to later
sanctions. We were informed in the hearing by Professor
Franklin of his "political decision" to keep his position
at Stanford, hence caution about open calls for
"revolutionary violence".
Thus, we are faced with a difficult problem: how to
interpret speech deliberately given in ambiguous terms.
But we have seen already that considerable clarification
emerges from a close examination of the text, from the
full context provided by preceding events, and from the
way in which the speech was delivered. In essence,
Professor Franklin came into a combustible situation,
focused hostility on certain targets, intensified existing
hostility toward those targets, and urged a spectrum of
actions against them: some peaceful, some coercive,
some violent. We must now turn our attention to his
audience in order to inquire whether they were likely to
understand him and whether Professor Franklin must
have expected the risk of prohibited conduct to be
increased by his behavior.
The tone and content of Professor Franklin's
speeches must have been particularly significant for two
groups: 1) people in the movement; 2) people who are
violence-prone for whatever reason. In respect to the
first, these are people who are responsive to Professor
Franklin by virtue of past association, respect,
dedication, and sharing of common goals. They tend to
understand the nuances of his speech, as was evident at
the hearing itself. As for the second grou, it is well
known that public meetings characterized by intense
anger and hints of violence tend to attract, both at the
meeting and via media coverage, individuals who are
drawn to violence for a variety of reasons, not
necessarily political. Whatever the reason for their
susceptibility to violence, they tend to find such
occasions exciting. They may be induced by angry
rhetoric to commit acts of gravity, particularly in the
context of recent examples of violent behavior.
Professor Franklin testified that he was aware of the
long-term, bitter antagonism between Venceremos and
FCM; and he was aware of the immediate, clearly
expressed hostility toward the small FCM group at the
rally. The presence of these mutually hostile groups at
the rally certainly added to the risk. The use of violent
rhetoric in such circumstances increased the probability
of attack and counter-attack.
We think that "movement" people were capable of
understanding the messages. We refer here to familiar
connotations understood by a group sharing common
intersts and values. For example, reference to "militant
action on campus" in 1971 is understood by many
people to mean "trashing " which in turn is understood
to mean "window-breaking." These are not the only
connotations of the terms, nor are they understood by
everyone who comes on campus. A few years ago, the
terms did not have these connotations. But common
usage in concrete situations has led to a widely shared
understanding.
Those devoted to the "movement" had a rich
refresher course in such terms during the rallies of the
preceding few days which we have already summarized.
Professor Franklin is explicit in his testimony that he
was aiming his remarks specifically at them, wanting
primarily to be un derstood by them. Braunstein
testified that there is special communication within the
"movement" and pointed out that Professor Franklin
referred to "us" at the rally. But the defense, in effect,
asks us to believe that, on the night of February 10,
individuals in the "movement" failed to understand the
coercive and violent connotations of phrases like "war
on this campus", taking action on multiple levels to
resist oppression here, and "we must learn from the
peoples of Southeast Asia that when confronted with an
occupation army, we must respond with the methods of
people's war". The defense puts forwards its bland
interpretation of such phrases even though they were
expressed in a very angry tone and in a context of
profound hostility toward the university by a respected
leader who generally approves coercive and violent
tactics in campus disputes (though he denies he
advocated them on this occasion). We must therefore
examine possible reasons why the audience might not
have detected the menacing connotations of his remarks
on the evening of February 10.
From the testimony in the hearing, we do not believe
members of the "movement" were obtuse; nor is there
anything credible in the record to suggest that they were
in such a conciliatory mood that his angry rhetoric failed
to rcach them. Were the "movement" members of
Professor Franklin's audience so concerned with trying
to win over the Roble group that they rejected all

coercive and violent connotations of his remarks? This
possibility deserves further consideration.
During the rally, "movement" people in control of
the meeting showed little consideration for the feelings
ol the Roble students. Indeed, Professor Franklin seems
to have been concerned about this situation, since he
devoted a good deal of his first speech to persuading the
Roble group to accept the "movement's" view of the
situation. As a Roble speaker made clear in the KZSU
interview, the difference between the Roble contingent
and the "movement" was not only one of demands
(narrow vs. broad) but of tactics (non-violent vs.
violent). In this episode, Professor Franklin
demonstrated his authority as a leader of the
"movement" when he easily stopped the flow of the
meeting, re-opened the question, made a major speech,
and got a re-vote.
In his way, Professor Franklin was trying to persuade
the Roble contingent to link up with the "movement" in
a united front, at least for the moment. His way of
undertaking this persuasion was itself inflamatory. He
made assertions of such hostile content in such an angry
manner regarding the University and the police that,
whatever their effect on the Roble group, they must
surely have intensified the resentment of many persons
favorable to the "movement" and thereby raised the
probability of violent actions later. We have earlier
quoted a portion of his first Old Union speech pertinent
to this point. Finally, his do-your-own-thing formula
permitted some encouragement for Roble students to
take peaceful actions and still leave room for
encouragement of "militant" actions by the
"movement".
This brings us again to one of the central themes in
the entire case. At Old Union as at White Plaza, the
actions urged by Professor Franklin were not exclusively
coercive or violent. He advocated a wide range of protest
actions: some peaceful, some coercive, some violent. If a
person removes valuable merchandise from a store,
paying for half, but not paying for the other half, is he
culpable for the part he stole? We believe that the
presence of peaceful recommendations cannot immunize
a person from sanctions if he has urged imminent
coercion and violence as well.
Once again, as at White Plaza, Professor Franklin was
the final speaker, and once again his speech was
promptly followed by events of a disruptive, coercive or
violent nature. The probability of this occurring by
chance is very small. At the least, it reflects his
leadership position in the "movement" and the riskiness
of those situations in which he spoke. He cannot avoid
the conclusion that his pseeches, the last on each
occasion, increased the probability that illegal acts
would follow the two rallies.
In an earlier section on "Fundamental Issues and
Standards", we have indicated that the University must
have the right to put some constraints on speech in
dangerous circumstances, but only with great caution.
This applies to acts of incitement to imminent lawless
action that arc likely to produce such action. "Lawless"
in the university context includes state or local laws, the
Policy on Campus Disruptions or other university
regulations, or common-law understandings of
professorial responsibility.
In judging the applicability of this standard to the
present charge, we have been guided by these questions:
(1) What is the entire context surrounding the alleged
incitement? (2) What was conmunicated to the
audience? (3) What would the speiker judge to be the
effect of his communication on the audience?
Since we wish to sustain the university's vital
tradition of fostering free expression in its widest
diversity, we are exceedingly cautious in considering
possible constraints on speech. If such constraints are
ever to be invoked, they must be reserved for extreme
situations. We are asking whether the context here was
that of a highly combustible situation, whether the
speaker gave an inflammatory message in that context,
and whether the speaker had good reason to anticipate
lhat his message would increase the risk of imminent
lawless action. If indeed we find that the speaker issued
a call to violence, he is not protected by having issued it
in euphemistic jargon. Such a call may be quite as
effective as one issued in more stark terms. In any event,
the language used here was hardly occult.
Although Professor Franklin's witnesses were inclined
to protect him by minimizing their understanding of
coercive and violent connotations in his speeches, they
did not exclude such connotations—nor did he. The
difference between them and administration witnesses
was mainly one of emphasis. In the spectrum of
activities advocated by Professof Franklin, the defense
emphasized the legal end, whereas the administration
emphasized the illegal end.
In our detailed analysis of the context for his Old
Union speeches, we have determined that persons active
in the "movement" must have been quite familiar with
the coercive and violent connotations of Professor
Franklin's phrases, that they were responsive to such
connotations, and that Professor Franklin must have
been aware of these facts.
Finally, we must consider the line of defense that,
even if Professor Franklin were considered to have
carried out such an incitement, he would nevertheless be
justified by his perception of Stanford as a fascist
institution playing an important role in an imperialist
war.
We recognize that Professor Franklin is pressing for
reform in important areas of social concern. Can this
justify coercive behavior in campus disputes, or the
fostering of a climate of violence on campus? Once any
person is granted this privilege in the name of a good
cause, we must grant it also to others who feel they have
worthy aims. When these rights conflict, as they
inevitably must, are we to condone low-grade guerilla
warfare on campus? If we deny to others what we grant
to Professor Franklin, we have adopted a double
standard: coercion and violence in the university may be
condoned if we approve its aims, but restricted if we
disapprove its aims. Then it becomes a simple question
of whose ox is gored. But every cause is fervently
supported by some, eloquently justified by some,
pursued with passion by some. In a way, every war is a
holy war. If we accept Professor Franklin's holiness, how
arc we to reject the holiness of other true believers? In
our view, this course is not morally defensible. We must
do our best to apply one standard across all political
preferences and that standard must not condone
violence on campus.

K. CONCLUSION
Taking into accoutn content, context, delivery, and
audience, did Professor Franklin's two Old Union
speeches include urging and inciting to disruption of
university activities, or threat to persons or property?
Must he have known that this exhortation would be
widely interpreted as immediate advocacy of disruptive
or violent behavior?
1. The situation was risky. Illegal acts had occurred
earlier that day. There was intense resentment toward
the war, the police, and the university; there had been
serious frustration for the "movement" earlier in the
day; bitter political adversaries were present at the rally
and identified by the chairman; protest actions including
coercive and violent possibilities were under discussion;
the police were present on campus; there was a well
known history of violence in similar circumstances at
Stanford. In general, the higher the risk, the less it takes
to trigger coercive and violent behavior.
2. The targets of Professor Franklin's animosity were
quite explicit-the police and the university. He made an
intensive effort in the two speeches to generate further
hostility toward these targets. He provided justification
for coercive and violent behavior toward them, without
specifying precisely what the nature of such acts might
be, leaving that to the judgment and imagination of each
individual or small group.
3. The urging of immediate retaliatory action towards
the police and the university was clear. A great sense of
urgency was conveyed by both the tone and the content
of his remarks. While no detailed blueprint for action
was provided, the necessity for prompt action wis a
strong message. The overall effect was to increase the
likelihood of imminent lawless action.
Taking into account the full context surround his
speeches at the Old Union rally, hte messages he
communicated to his audience, and what he should be
able to judge about the effect of these messages under
the circumstances, we reach the conclusion that
Professor Franklin intentionally urged and incited his
audience to engage in conduct which would disrupt
activities of the University and of members of the
University Community and threaten injury to individuals
an; property.
The Advisory Board thus finds that the charge in No.
10 is sustained.
DISSENTING OPINIONS
Professors Brown and Kennedy, while agreeing with
substantial portions of the majority's account, dissent as
follows:
The majority sustains the charge of incitement
against Professor Franklin citing (1) an extensive
background of material from speeches at this and
other rallies that supply context for his last speech;
(2) Professor Franklin's first speech at this rally,
which also supplies context and reveals relevant
attitudes of his own; and (3) words in the second
speech that constitute, in the majority's view,
sufficiently explicit invitations to do violence against
persons and property.
We dissent regarding some matters of context, as
well as on the finding with respect to Professor
Franklin's own speeches.
In describing the context of the rally, we would
give more weight than does the majority to the
presence of the Roble students and to their impact
upon events in the Old Union Courtyard. The
interaction between the group of Roble moderates
(concerned about the invasion of Laos but not part of
the "movement") and the "movement" group itself
provides a central theme for the rally. Professor
Franklin's own first speech is directed predominantly
to an attenuation of those tensions and to a
reconciliation that would accommodate the new
recruits to "movement" objectives. It is, in essence, a
long argument that political prisoners must not be
forgotten, and that there is a fundamental identity
between the struggle of Asian peoples against U.S.
imperialism and the struggle of oppressed people and
anti-war students against repressive forces at home.
As the majority states, the speech contains a heavy
tone of anger against the police and other forces that,
to Professor Franklin, sumbolize this oppression. We
nevertheless believe it plausible that the speech was
intended to make a group of Stanford students
identify, perhaps for the first time, with oppressed
people; we do not see evidence that Professor
Franklin's intention was to turn them explicitly to
violent actions. In no sense can this first Old Union
speech be regarded as actionable; indeed, the
University administration does not attempt to
persuade us to find against Professor Franklin on the
basis of its content. To the extent that it contains
intensity and anger, and to the extent that these are
directed against the police and the University, the
speech might be said to have added-along with other
speeches at the rally-to the risk that prohibited
conduct might follow. But all agree that nothing in
the content of this speech approaches incitement.
Indeed, we feel that the speech presented, in however
objectionable a style, some legitimate concerns about
the plight of prisoners, the existence of police
brutality, and other significant issues.
Clearly Professor Franklin and other speakers
believed that a major mission of the "movement"
people at the rally was to undertake the "education"
of the rest of the Stanford community. Professor
Franklin's own first speech concludes with a plea that
those present go out to the people "and teach them
what we have learned in the movement," and that
any who are not persuaded should "get up here [ile.
to the microphone] and we should discuss it." At the
conclusion of his speech he testifies that he went over
to discuss the matter further with the Roble group.
The speaker who followed Professor Franklin to the
podium commented that the important thing was to
"go to the dorms, go to the people we want to talk
t0...." A later speaker extends the suggestion by
hoping that those at the rally will go to the dorms
and "rap all night." Recruitment, broadening the base
of the "movement," educating the community: all
these were significant themes in the development o'
the meeting's context. By its relatively stronger
emphasis on the more violent rhetoric, in particular
Professor Franklin's, the majority has decided against
what seems to us a plausible, even persuasive, second
view of the matter.

The content of the second speech, of course, is not
available to us except through the testimony of
witnesses. According to Beyers, Professor Franklin
called for a "people's war against the occupation
army of the police," and he "suggested that people
should go back tot their dormitories, form meetings,
meet in small groups, decide whatever they wanted to
do, to do it as late at night as possible, and to do
things which would bring more of the occupation
here."' Professor Franklin's version in his affidavit is
only slightly different. He, too, calims to have said
that "when confronted with an occupation army we
must respond with the methods of people's war." Me
adds, "I ended by telling people that people's war
meant that they should go back into their
dormitories, organize people into small groups, talk
with them, play football, or whatever, as late into the
night as possible." These differences are not very
substantial; they can easily be accounted for by
differences in recollection.
The majority analyzes these collections of phrases
in such a way that they are strongly persuaded as to
their meaning and that the meaning sustains an
incitement charge, given such other factors as risk.
The logic consists essentially in the elimination of
various attenuative constructions that are more
benign. In our view this interpretation is not
"strongly persuasive." The phrases upon which
attention has been focused are isolated from a
substantial matrix of interstitial speech, the precise
construction of which we do not know, and about
which we must be careful not to draw too confident
appraisals. Two examples will illustrate the point.
First, Professor Franklin says that in the context in
which he used it, "People's war" was clearly indicated
to mean "thoroughly merging with the masses;" he
states that he used the football game as an example of
that kind of tactic. It is significant that virtually all of
the witnesses link the words "people's war" to the
example of the football game. Professor Franklin
states in his affidavit that this was the only exmaple
he used, and the cumulative testimony seems to bear
him out. Second, the phrase "as late into the night as
possible," interpreted by the majority as a call to
militant action by small groups, could equally have
appeared in a context in which it applied primarily to
late dormitory discussions and to legal (though
perhaps risky) methods of taking up the time of the
police. Such an interpretation gain in plausibility
from Professor Franklin's testimony that although he
does not in principle disapprove of trashing, he would
not have urged it on that occasion, both because of
the heavy presence of police on campus that night
and because it would have alienated those new to the
"movement."
The point is that none of these interpretations has
a great deal of certainty about it. The ones we have
just mentioned may be a little less plausible than
those favored by the majority, but only a little less.
The "hard" data on words are so fragmentary, and
depend so much on the kind of context-construction
that is very sensitive to whatever bias the witnesses
may have had, that we find them inadequate to meet
a "strongly persuasive" criterion that Professor
Franklin is guilty as charged by the University
administration.
We are not strongly persuaded by the impressions
of the speech given by various witnesses-as opposed
to actual reconstructions of wording. Such
impressions are especially subject to the bias of
expectations. The differing treatments of Professor
Franklin's account of the football game provide one
example among many. Some witnesses regarded it as
a euphemism for more violent activity, others
regarded it merely as an opportunity for a bad pun,
while still others interpreted it as we would, as an
invitation to occupy the time of the police.
In effect, the majority report argues that Professor
Franklin was employing words well understood to his
audience but not to others. But there is no convincing
evidence that any substantial number of the audience
would have translated his speech into an invitation to
commit violent acts. Each phrase, like "people's
war," has been subject to a number of conflicting
interpretations in the testimony. Furthermore, the
reconstruction of a code depends on one's ability to
capture a reasonably large portion of the message,
and in this instance we have only scattered elements.
Although we think it is quite possible that Professor
Franklin advocated a range of actions some of which
may have been illegal, we do no find the evidence
strongly persuasive that his speech constituted the
advocacy of imminent lawless action.
The majority emphasizes the extremity of the risk
in the situation; we do not disagree with their
evaluation, but we stress more heavily the doubts we
have about the context and the meaning of the words
actually spoken.
to find against Professor Franklin on this charge
might, we believe, force a faculty member addressing
a political rally in the future to guard against possible
cryptic meanings that his speech might convey to a
segment of his audience whenever a situation of high
risk obtains. The social cost of such a prohibition
must be balanced against the benefits to be derived
from being able to prosecute somewhat ambiguous
speech in dangerous situations. We find the costs too
great.
Accordingly, we do not sustain the charge against
Professor Franklin as stated in Paragraph 10.
A. CHARGES
The University Administration's charge concerning
Professor Franklin's conduct during the Old Union
Courtyard rally on February 10th reads as follows:
10. On the eveing of February 10, 1971, beginning at
approximately 8:00 p.m., a rally was held in the Old
Union Courtyard to, among other things, discuss
methods of protesting developments in the war in
Indochina. Over two hundred students and other
persons attended the rally. During the course of the
rally Professor Franklin intentionally urged and
incited students and other persons present to engage
in conduct calculated to disrupt activities of the
University and of members of the University
community and which threatened injury to
individuals and property. Shortly thereafter students
and other persons were assaulted by persons present
at the rally, and later that evening other acts of
violence occurred.
B. NATURE OF THE CHARGE IN PARAGRAPH 10
The charge centers on intentional incitement that
threatened: (1) disruption of University activities, both
individual and institutional; and (2) injury to persons
and property. It implies that a rish of coercive or violent
behavior existed at the time of the rally and that
Professor Franklin further increased the risk by the
content and manner of his participation. In determining
whether the facts fit the charges, the Board must inquite
(1) What is the entire context surrounding the alleged
incitement? (2) What is being communicated to the
audience? (3) What would the speaker judge to be the
effect of his communication on the audience?
C. FINDINGS OF FACT 1. Prominent Themes in the
1. Prominent Themes in the Old Union Rally,
February 10
On Wednesday, February 10 at 8:00 p.m. about 350
people attended a rally in the Old Union Courtyard.
Speakers debated tactics and demands. Professor
Franklin spoke twice. The themes that emerged
prominently in the course of the rally may he
summarized as follows:
a. There was general agreement on opposition to the
war in Southeast Asia and a wish to protest against
American involvement.
b. There was a major difference of opinion on the
scope of demands and of tactics. A contingent of
students from Roble Hall favored a single demand, an
effort to reach out for the broadest possible support
and strict adherence to non-violent tactics. Another
and larger faction favored a broader set of demands,
even at the risk of losing community support; and
they favored a broader range of tactics, including
coercive and violent ones, depending on
circumstances. This distinction between the two
groups was not only apparent in the speeches, but
was emphasized by a KZSU broadcast interview with
representatives of the Roble contingent near the end
of the rally.

c. Five speakers emphasized Stanford's major war
complicity and severe political repression. This
viewpoint may be illustrated with the following
quotation from one of the speakers.
I work at the phone company and I realize that
everyday one out of every two calls that I place
goes from Stanford University or SRI directly to
the Pentagon, to SRI all over the country and all
over the world, and people realize that Stanford
University is integrally linked with Pacific
Telephone Company, that all the business, you
know, that the whole service which Pacific
Telephone puts out is for the benefit of the
financial interest in this area and people who are
against the war, people that I work with who are
against the war, who are very, very angry and
outraged by the expansion of the war into Laos
realize that, because they have brothers, brothers
and uncles and fathers who are over there fighting,
who have been forced to go over there, they don't
have any choice, they can't afford to go to school,
they are forced to be over there. They have
brothers and sisters who are locked up in the
prisons all over America and they realize that
Stanford University, that the kind of research
Stanford does, the kind of money Stanford has,
which controls the black and brown communities
in the mid-peninsula, is a very dangerous thing and
they:re willing to fight against that for their very
survival and I think that the people here should
respect that, should respect the fact that telephone
workers are getting organized, that we're thinking
now about what kind of support demonstration
we can have when Stanford gets itself together and
the issues become clear to the people that
Stanford University is key in the war, key in the
oppression of political prisoners and it's just got to
go. (applause)
d. Eight speakers were very hostile to the police
especially to their presence on campus. Police had
been called to the campus to terminate the
occupation of the Computation Center and had
remained in view of the likelihood of further illegal
acts. It will be recalled that arson and "trashing" had
occurred on the nights of February 6 and 7. Early in
the Old Union rally of February 10, the presence of
police on campus was announced. No witness
testified that a single uniformed policeman entered
the Old Union courtyard, despite the fact that
Professor Franklin, in his affidavit shortly after the
event, said there were many police there. In the
hearing, he corrected this error. Thus, the police were
not visible to the people at the rally, but their
presence on campus was a focus of deep resentment.
They were often referred to as "pigs" and as an
occupation army or occupying forces. In conjunction
with the previous criticism of Stanford's complicity
in the war. the struggle on campus and the struggle in
Southeast Asia were portrayed as different facets of a
single struggle. Parallels were drawn between the

police on campus and imperialist armies in Asia. The
all-one-war theme was emphasized by urging
resistance to the police as analogous to resistance to
occupying forces in Vietnam.
e. On two occasions, members of the Free Campus
Movement were pointed out in a context of hostility,
and were linked to the police on campus.
112. In response to these various instigations, there was
a desire for action — not merely verbal demands, but
concrete, tangible steps to implement them. There
was a clear preference for strong, vivid action, though
some speakers, including those from the Roble
contingent, put their main emphasis on education.
Little reference was made to "strike" in this rally.
The actions mainly preferred by the speakers may be
illustrated by (he following remarks by the chairman:
Okay, I think it's still pretty clear that we want to
keep the demands as they are. Okay, at this point I
think we should go on to specific proposals for
how we act now. We've had a few proposals; one
guy suggested that after the Comp Center thing
today that in order to escalate rather than
de-escalate we should zero in on SRI, Another
person, other people have proposed that we deal
now with the police state that's on this campus
because if we're going to move against the war,
one of the things we have to do to be able to move
against the war in atmosphere where we're not
intimidated by pigs coming through to surround
our meetings and that kind of thing and that one
of the ways to do that is to begin any kind of
action people want to take to get the pigs off this
campus. I think that people should speak to these
proposals and add more proposals that they have.
g. Five speakers explicitly expressed and several
others implicitly expressed anger, using words and
imagery of fighting. Three speakers suggested actions
to embarrass, humiliate, or confront the police,
particularly late at night, while others made more
general comments advocating resistance to
intimidation.
h. Two speakers favored off-campus protests.
2. Professor Franklin's First Speech at Old Union
(Second speech of February 10)
Professor Franklin's first Old Union speech
(Appendix III) began with an effort to persuade the
Roble contingent of the correctness of the majority
position favoring a broad set of demands, including the
freeing of all "political prisoners" and the end of
Stanford's complicity in the war — not merely
immediate withdrawal of US forces from Southeast Asia.
He spoke with concern about people who must spend
time in jail, emphasized solidarity within the
"movement", and opposed betrayal of political
prisoners. Then, in an intense delivery, he said:
And we get very upset when we find our beautiful
campus crawling with pigs who stop and harass
people and rip off and beat half of the people. Well
this is just a very, very mild taste of what life is like in
the black and brown communities of this country
where the pigs come by every night and if you're
young and you're black and brown they stop you and
ask your I.D. and rip you off for suspicion of
burglary and where there are dogs there and where
there's a helicopter overhead and that's part of the
same struggle, and where they shoot you and the pigs
who are here tonight, that's those San Jose pigs have
just mundered a black brother in San Jose, the same
San Jose pig just murdered a black brother down in
San Jose and that's normal life down there. People
murdered in the streets and that's why we call them
pigs. Although it's a little unfair to the four-footed
variety, because they don't do that kind of thing.
[Applause]
Continuing to speak in the same delivery, he next
alluded to the Black Panther party's leadership and made
the following remarks:
And the Black Panther Party teaches us that the
people of Laos and the people of South Vietnam are
not another separate nation state. That they are our
brothers and sisters because they are just other
oppressed communities of the same empire. The
Black Panther Party teaches us that today while this
meeting was going on brothers and sisters, blood
brothers and sisters of us, were killed in Laos, in
Vietnam and Cambodia, in the black and brown
communities of the United States of America. They
teach us this is all one struggle and the
interconnections are every place. Even if you thing
about what Laos is all about; what is the chief cash
export of Laos, who knows?
[crowd | Opium, heroin?
Opium, all the heroin on this coast comes from Laos.
And it's all brought in by the CIA. It is grown and
harvested by Meo tribesmen and flown out on Air
America, the CIA airline. And it is brought in to this
state as part of the oppression, particularly of black
and brown people here, but also of white youth. . . .
(brief KZSU interruption). . . . and is just as much a
part of the counter-insurgency system as the pigs are
war on this campus.
He urged that others be taught about such evils as
Stanford's complicity in the war and the necessity to
free all political prisoners. He expressed the view that
the student strike a year earlier had been a success. He
closed by restating the necessity to continue the struggle
to win others to his viewpoint.
3. Professor Franklin 's Second Speech at the Old Union
(Third speech of February 10)
This speech lasted about two minutes, but because
KZSU was conducting an interview at the time, it can
only be heard in the background on the tape recording.
The pitch of his voice is high, with only a few of his
words and intermittent responses from the crowd being
clearly discernible on the tape. The crowd responses
increase toward the end. The content of the speech can
only be reconstructed from testimony, but this poses
little difficulty. There is substantial agreement as to
what Professor Franklin said amont his witnesses, the
University Administration's witnesses, and Professor
Franklin's own affidavit and testimony. The differences,
as might be expected, are in the interpretation of his
speech.
a. Professor Franklin's interpretation of his second
Old Union speech.
In his affidavit he describes the speech as follows:
A number of speakers at the meeting rose to describe
specific instances of police harassment and brutality.
Several proposed that we go to the dormitories to
discuss die police state on campus and what to do
about it, as well as what to do about the situation in
Southeast Asia. One speaker said that many squads of
six to eight police were roaming the campus, and that
if we marched to the dorms some of these squads
would follow us, and that it would be a good
education for people in the dorms to see them. Two
speakers said that the police were attempting to keep
people from knowing what was happening, and that
they had temporarily confiscated a walkie-talkie from
a KZSU reporter and threatened to arrest him for
listening to police frequencies. Another speaker said
that if we march in one group it will be too easy for
the police and we should confuse them by dividing
into many groups. Another speaker siad "there are
pigs all over this campus and we have to show people
who the pigs are and who the people are, and we
cannot tolerate a police state here or any place else."
It was generally agreed that we would go back to the
dormitories to build support for the strike and to
raise consciousness about the police occupation of
the campus. I rose to speak again. 1 said that it was
unfortunate that the people from Roble had not felt
that they were really part of the movement and that
it was necessary to go into the dorms and discuss all
their questions further. I said that it was very
important for people to understand that this is a
united front, and that people will respond on
different levels of action and with different degrees of
consciousness to the war. I said that it was important
for people to accept these different levels, and that if
people are sincere it is correct for them to do their
own thing, to do whatever they think best, and that
that is how all of us learn. I pointed out that with the
police saturation on campus, however, it would be
suicide for people to engage in any militant action in
a large group. I said that we must learn from the
peoples of Southeast Asia that when confronted with
an occupation army, we must respond with the
methods of people's war. Then 1 explained that this
means thoroughly merging with the people. I gave
one and only one example of what I meant by this. I
said that I had been told that a few nights before,
during a similar police occupation, several people had
begun a game of touch football. They moved from
place to place on the campus, forcing the police to
follow them. Several police complained to them that
they were supposed to be in fixed positions, and that
this was preventing them from maintaining those
positions. Finally, when the football game
appraoched the area of the computation center, the
police had asked to examine the football. I said that I
wasn't sure whether this was because they thought it
was a bomb or because they just wanted to examine a
real pigskin. I ended by teliing people that people's

war meant that they should go back to the
dormitories, organize people into small groups, and
talk with them, or play football, or whatever, as late
into the night as possible.
b. Hearing witnesses' interpretation of Professor
Franklin's second Old Union Speech
(i) Administration witnesses-There is considerable
agreement among administration and defense
witnesses on the content (though not on the
interpretation) of this speech. This can be
illustrated by comparing Professor Franklin's
version of his speech after the event given above
with testimony of Robert Beyers, of the Stanford
News Service. He testified that he had attended
many rallies at Stanford over a period of years,
and had often heard Professor Franklin speak. He
described Professor Franklin's speech on this
occasion as very critical of the police. He testified
that Professor Franklin called specifically for
people's war against the occupation army-i.e., the
police. Professor Franklin suggested that people go
back to their dormitories, meet in small groups,
decide to do whatever they wanted to do as late at
night as possible so as to bring more police onto
the campus to help out their brethren in other
communities. At this point, in Beyer's view, the
nature of the meeting changed dramatically,
leading him to expect that illegal or disruptive
incidents would follow. Immediately after the
speech, the rally ended and Beyers said three FCM
students were badly beaten by some of the Old
Union crowd. Under cross-examination, he
indicated that Professor Franklin did not specify
the exact nature of the violent acts to be carried
out.
Brimelow felt there was much tension and
restlessness in the meeting, and that the crowd got
very excited as a result of the speech. After the
speech he saw the crowd stream off in all
directions and he heard "war cries" (something of
this sort is audible on the tape recording). Almas
heard the speech from the balcony of the Women's
Clubhouse, thought it was impassioned and was
startled by it. Almas had heard Professor Franklin
speak about a dozen times but had never heard
him encourage this level of action. Almas felt
Professor Franklin had not been as careful as
usual, and the witness had the expectation that
there was going to be violence.
R. Jacobs, also on the balcony, thought
Professor Franklin had made inflammatory
statements. Grav felt Professor Franklin was
playing the role of a leader giving instructions to
the group in a serious vein.
(ii) Professor Franklin's witnesses
Witnesses for Professor Franklin heard phrases
similar to those reported by Administration
witnesses but to some extent interpreted them
differently. This is well illustrated by an affidavit
of Bennion, who also testified at the hearing.
. . .It became clear that there was some opposition
forming, basically between going back into the
dorms for further discussion and staying in the
area the police were patrolling in order to show
them that the occupation of the campus would
not be tolerated. At this point Professor Franklin
spoke and tried to explain that these two
tendencies were not really opposed, but could be
carried out at the same time and could mutually
serve each other. He discussed at length the tenets
of "people's war" which is based on the concept
of a united front. In essence this means that
everyone can contribute what they can to a
movement, with one person's greater contribution
or risk should not be seen as invalidating another's.
This leads to many levels of action which mutually
reinforce other levels, rather than detracting from
each other. He pointed out that in advanced stages
of "people's war" such as in Vietnam, many
different levels of action are still employed, not
merely the military level of the National
Liberation Front. He also stated that in the
present case it would be suicidal to engage in any
large-scale militant action. He gave one example of
what "people's war" would mean that evening.
Some people could go back to the dorms and
persuade others to join the movement, while
others could play touch football in the area being
patrolled by the police to show that they were not
intimidated by the occupation of the campus. At
no time did say or even remotely imply or suggest
that he advocated a militant action that evening,
nor did his in-depth analysis of "people's war"
make such an interpretation possible for any
person who had ears to hear and a mind to think.
These witnesses were much preoccupied with the
presence of police. They expressed fear and anger,
and were inclined to expect trouble with the
police that night. They were determined not to be
intimidated by the police, and to harass them
where possible, by and large, Professor Franklin
was seen as speaking to these issues in a way that
fostered resistance but not violence. His task was
seen as uniting the people against the common
foe: putting together the university's complicity in
the war, the linkage of the struggle here iwth the
struggle in Asia, the necessity to respond
vigorously on many levels of action. For example
Pat Faulkner testified that he understood
Professor Franklin to mean that all levels of
actions are all right, even writing letters, and that
it is necessary to wage war on many levels to win.
He felt that Professor Franklin gave a speech in
which he approved a wide range of actions,
including trashing, but did not emphasize violent
responses.
Professor Franklin's witnesses gave the term
"people's war" a variety of emphases, but the
words were generally udnerstood to have a range
of connotations. These included (1) harassment of
police; (2) taking control of our own lives; (3)
brining the war home; (4) strike; (5) learning from
the peoples of Southeast Asia; (6) attention to our
war here, not only the one in Indochina; (7) doing
whatever conscience dictates, which might include
trashing; (8) determinationnot to be intimidated
by police, not to shrink from threats.
4. Post-Rally Events
In the course of the hearing, on October 28, the
Advisory Board made the following statement on
post-rally events:
With respect to the Old Union courtyard speech, the
Board is now in a position to give its view of the value
of testimony about events following the rally. We
admitted testimony on these matters because the

University Administration, in order to demonstrate
that there was a risk that prohibited conduct would
follow the speech, introduced evidence for the
limited purpose of showing that such conduct did in
fact occur. We now feel that this
evidence concerning the light on White Plaza, the
alleged false alarms, the shootings, and other
incidents-need not be rebutted. We have reached this
decision because, in our view, the existence of risk is
adequately shown by pre-and co-existing conditions,
and does not require demonstration by referring to
subsequent events.
It is a matter ol record that untoward events of the
sort mentioned above did in fact occur that night,
beginning immediately after the rally. We limited
testimony on these matters for two reasons: (1) the
charges did not contain any references to Professor
Franklin's post-rally conduct; (2) we had good reason to
believe that significant risk existed without reference to
post-rally events.
D. DEFENSES AND THEIR ANALYSES
1. Principal Points made in Defense Against Charges in
Paragraph 10.
Professor Franklin, in testimony and argument, made
several points in defending against these charges:
a. The speeches were brief, especially the second one
at the very end of the evening's program. Such brief
speeches could hardly have had the impact ascribed
to them by the University Administration.
b. It was difficult to hear the speeches. Except for
those near the speakers, consisting to a considerable
extent of Professor Franklin's close associates,
audibility was a problem. The testimony of several
witnesses who were not close to the speaker was
challenged by Professor Franklin.
c. What could be heard was innocuous. It was meant
to inform, educate, and persuade to a political
viewpoint. It was not intended to incite, inflame, or
cause violence.
d. Most of the people at the rally had already decided
what they were going to do by the time Professor
Franklin gave his second and closing spcech. In this
speech, he essentially gave them a political rationale
for what they had already decided to do.
e. Even if his speeches were taken as inflamatory by
some members of his audience, they were well
justified by Stanford's condition as a fascist and
imperialist institution, and by the presence on the
campus of an occupation army consisting of police
who frequently kill black and brown people, and
indeed had just killed a black brother.
112. In any event. Professor Franklin should be able to
give such speeches with impunity, since all speech
should be considered to be constitutionally
protected, even where appreciable risks are posed.
g. If speech is to be restricted at all, it must be done
within a very narrow band. Such a band could not
include general prescritpions for hostile actiona or
even for violence. Specific prescriptions for violent
acts would be required, and tchse must be confirmed
by specific evidence that individuals had been moved
to carry out those same specific acts by the speech in
question.
2. Analysis of the Defenses
The length of the speeches is much less important
than other characteristics: content, delivery, context,
audience. In any event, the first speech was not
particularly brief, and the second was in a crucial
position: at the very end of the rally.
In regard to audibility, we conclude that those who
wanted to hear the speeches could do so. This is
admitted by some defense witnesses, and to a certain
extent by Professor Franklin himself who testified that
at the time he felt he could reach those who really
wanted to hear him. The main variable seems to have
been attention; some members of the audience paid
close attention to his speeches, others little. Among
those who did pay attention, there is considerable
agreement as to content, though witnesses differe as to
interpretation.
There is no meaningful way to consider Professor
Franklin's behavior in the Old Union rally without a
firm grasp of the context in which the rally occurred.
The mood that evening was tense and angry. After the
passage of so many months it is difficult to recapture the
sense of anxious expectation that characterized the
campus that evening. The Old Union rally followed
several days of continually escalating events: threats of
coercion, actual coercion, arson, police action, and
hostile confrontations on campus. We have already
summarized recurrent themes of the immediately
preceding rallies at Dinkelspiel on February 9th and
White Plaza on February 10th. As the Board concluded
in its statement of October 28th, cited above, substantial
risk existed on the Stanford campus before and during
the Old Union rally.
There are additional aspects of the context for the
Old Union rally that deserve consideration. Professor
Franklin rose to speak as a well-known and respected
leader of the "movement". Defense witnesses testified
that he was viewed with admiration and his ideas were
taken seriously. Professor Franklin testified that the
time of these events in February was a crucial one for
the "movement", a time when the "movement" might
transcend itself.
Testimony in the hearing, mainly from defense
witnesses, brought out the fact that this occasion stirred
memories of other similar occasions which also provide
meaningful context for the Old Union rally. The events
approximately a year earlier at the time of the military
action in Cambodia came up repeatedly. Indeed, one of
Professor Franklin's main contentions is that he was
attempting to foster a "Cambodia-type strike". A
number of defense witnesses, including especially
Braumstein and Professor Franklin, discussed the events
of the Cambodian period and compared them with the
events during the Laotian invasion. It became clear that
the protest events of the Cambodian period, viewed with
approbation, included a spectrum of activities, some of
which were nonviolent, some of which were patently
coercive, and some of which were overtly violent. The
coercive and violent activities included: forcible blocking
of entries into buildings for sustained periods, large-scale
breaking of windows, bombings, and lire bombings.
The Old Union rally also brought back recollections
of other night rallies held in similar circumstances,
especially when police were on campus, not only during
the Cambodian protest but at other times in the past few

years as well. There lias been a clear tendency for such
occasions to be followed by violent behavior. This fact
was knwon to Professor Franklin, since several of the
defense witnesses commented on his participation in
these protests.
Two of the major themes permeating the three rallies
of February 9th and February 10, advanced by Professor
Franklin and many of his close associates, are especially
pertinent to his closing speech at the Old Union rally:
(1) all-one-war; (2) multiple-levels-of-action.
(1) All-one-war is the theme linking the struggle at
Stanford with the struggle in Southeast Asia. It is the
heart of the problem, emphasized by Professor Franklin
in his speeches, affidavit, testimony and argument.
The speeches attack Stanford's war complicity, draw
parallels between racial oppression in America and Asia,
and emphasize the necessity to learn from the peoples of
Southeast Asia how to resist oppression at home. By the
end of the Old Union rally, the cumulative weight of
these linkages suggests that one way to fight the war
now is to fight the police and administration here.
In his testimony Professor Franklin says:
. . .what I say there basically is that we can't separate
the war in Southeast Asia from the war at home. Now
on all these points, all four of these speeches that
were given in this 24-hour period -that is from the
night belore in Dink through this—all four of those
speeches are essentially saying-are saying the same
thing. They're expressing a set of ideas which 1
consider the most important ideas. . . . And then this
seems to me the most essential thing, both in this
speech and in the second speech, to try to show
people just as clearly as possible that in fact that
occupation army of police that was on the campus
was part of the same war that was being waged in
Southeast Asia and that was being waged in the Black
ghettos and in the barrios of the United States.
This point is further clarified in Braunstein's defense
testimony, under cross-examination:
And the people fighting the United States in South
east Asia are fighting the same battles that people
fighting the police.. .who were on campus in the Old
Union Courtyard one and two of the year before and
are fighting the same battle as the people trying to get
rotten research off this campus and are fighting all
these battles, and they're all the same battles.
Then if it's all one battle, the word 'opposing forces'
relates to all the people on the other side in this big
global battle.
I've later learned that that is what's known as
'People's War'; is part of what is known as 'People's
War'.
Q. I take it in the context in which you were speaking
you at least included the police in that reference?
A. Oh, certainly. Especially that night, yes. I also
included the University administrators.
(2) The war is to be waged with the
multiple-levels-of-action formula. Each person is to do
his own thing, whatever he can, whatever he thinks best,
using his imagination to find ways of resisting the
occupying forces. This theme has a familiar ring from its
recurrence during the preceding few days. We have
earlier quoted Braunstein's remarks on this subject at the
Dinkelspiel rally on February 9th. It is clear from a
variety of references in several rallies that this
formulation is meant to advocate a spectrum of activities
which might include contacting Congressmen,
persuading students in dormitories, being active on
campus at night, refusing to be intimidated by the
police, blocking doorways, occupying buildings,
breaking windows, putting the computer out of service
for a long time, destroying the computer, or doing other
things for which one might not wish to "take credit."
In his testimony Professor Franklin said he felt
impelled at the end of the rally to speak about:
. . .that action that was going to be taken, which
was essentially gpomg back to the dorms to talk
about the war in Southeast Asia and about the
police occupation of the campus and—for people
to be there and exercise their right. That it was
important for somebody to explain to people that
that action itself was, you know, just as legitimate
a part of this war as, say, the armed self defense of
the Vietnamese people or the people of Laos. . ..
And in that speech I mentioned using the methods
of people's war. And at that point I was speaking
very directly to the people there, I think, who
considered themselves revolutionaries. Because I
knew that they would have a basic understanding
of what that meant, and that that phrase summed
up a whole lot of experience.
Braunstein testified for Professor Franklin, 'There are
all sorts of actions on various levels, including people
breaking windows with rocks and people burning down
buildings, as yet unidentified people burning down
buildings, and so on, that sometimes have the same goals
in mind and sometimes don't."
Significant in this context was the term "people's
war." It was interpreted by various witnesses in different
ways. It seems to include a wide range of suggested
actions, some of which are nonviolent, and some of
which are violent. It can clearly include guerilla warfare.
Some witnesses interpreted this as its primary meaning,
others gave this meaning less prominence. Maoist
writings use the term "People's war" for all action, in
particular guerilla warfare, in which the warriors merge
with the masses. Professor Franklin acknowledge in his
testimony that guerilla warfare, including assassination
and bombings, is one important component of people's
war, but denied it was the one he had in mind when he
used the term in his spcech. Defense testimony indicated
that the concept of people's war extends beyond
military action, but did not deny that it prominently
includes military action. Given the repeated explicit
linkages of the struggle against the police occupation
army here and the war in Southeast Asia, in the context
of recent night violence on campus and an afternoon of
police confrontation, it is difficult to believe that most
listeners would be insensitive to the violent connotations
of this term. Why repeatedly use warlike terms and
images—such as Professor Franklin's "war on this
campus" if peaceful actions are intended?
Similar considerations apply to Professor Franklin's
advocacy of action to be taken against the occupation
army in small groups. It is clear that small groups can
conduct dormitory discussions and other peacefully
persuasive activities, and that this did in fact occur,
though we learned very little about the focus of such
discussions e.g., whether they were intended to foster
particular nonviolent or violent tactics of protest. In any
event, such dormitory discussions may well have been
one of the meanings of his alleged recommendation for
reliance upon affinity groups. He advised against mass
militant action, meaning essentially violent
confrontation with the police, on tactical grounds. Such
action was not feasible because the police were too
strong. It is alos clear that the smaller groups could
engage in violent activities as has often happened in
similar circumstances at Stanford during the past few
years-i.e., following night rallies permeated by angry
speech. Two days earlier, February 8, after a night of
"trashing", a sheet was distributed at a "movement"
rally under the title "Do It!" It endorsed the previous
night's activity and called for more of the same,
indicating that tight affinity groups can be helpful in
doing whatever people want to do.
Whatever the activities that Professor Franklin was
urging upon individuals and small groups, it appears that
lateness of the hour was positively desirable-"as late
into the night as possible". In view of the behavior ot
some individuals and affinity groups at Stanford in
similar circumstances during the past few years, it is
reasonable to suppose that lateness might be useful as a
cover for violent activities—though it could of course be
used for peaceful activities as well.
Professor Franklin's two Old Union speeches were
given in a hostile tone. This is apparent in the content of
the first speech, and the effect is heightened when one
listens to the tape and hears his tone of voice. Even
when the speech is briefly interrupted by a KZSU
interview, the angry tone and the emotional crowd
response can be clearly detected. Although thesecond
speech is covered over by a KZSU interview, similar
indications are available from the tape and from
testimony.
In the course of the hearing, both Professor Franklin
and Braunstein indicated that ambiguity about tactics
was desirable to these rally speeches because KZSU was
broadcasting them and the police would presumably
have tape recordings. To advocate violent tactics openly
in this context would have exposed the speaker to later
sanctions. We were informed in the hearing by Professor
Franklin of his "political decision" to keep his position
at Stanford, hence caution about open calls for
"revolutionary violence".
Thus, we are faced with a difficult problem: how to
interpret speech deliberately given in ambiguous terms.
But we have seen already that considerable clarification
emerges from a close examination of the text, from the
full context provided by preceding events, and from the
way in which the speech was delivered. In essence,
Professor Franklin came into a combustible situation,
focused hostility on certain targets, intensified existing
hostility toward those targets, and urged a spectrum of
actions against them: some peaceful, some coercive,
some violent. We must now turn our attention to his
audience in order to inquire whether they were likely to
understand him and whether Professor Franklin must
have expected the risk of prohibited conduct to be
increased by his behavior.
The tone and content of Professor Franklin's
speeches must have been particularly significant for two
groups: 1) people in the movement; 2) people who are
violence-prone for whatever reason. In respect to the
first, these are people who are responsive to Professor
Franklin by virtue of past association, respect,
dedication, and sharing of common goals. They tend to
understand the nuances of his speech, as was evident at
the hearing itself. As for the second grou, it is well
known that public meetings characterized by intense
anger and hints of violence tend to attract, both at the
meeting and via media coverage, individuals who are
drawn to violence for a variety of reasons, not
necessarily political. Whatever the reason for their
susceptibility to violence, they tend to find such
occasions exciting. They may be induced by angry
rhetoric to commit acts of gravity, particularly in the
context of recent examples of violent behavior.
Professor Franklin testified that he was aware of the
long-term, bitter antagonism between Venceremos and
FCM; and he was aware of the immediate, clearly
expressed hostility toward the small FCM group at the
rally. The presence of these mutually hostile groups at
the rally certainly added to the risk. The use of violent
rhetoric in such circumstances increased the probability
of attack and counter-attack.
We think that "movement" people were capable of
understanding the messages. We refer here to familiar
connotations understood by a group sharing common
intersts and values. For example, reference to "militant
action on campus" in 1971 is understood by many
people to mean "trashing " which in turn is understood
to mean "window-breaking." These are not the only
connotations of the terms, nor are they understood by
everyone who comes on campus. A few years ago, the
terms did not have these connotations. But common
usage in concrete situations has led to a widely shared
understanding.
Those devoted to the "movement" had a rich
refresher course in such terms during the rallies of the
preceding few days which we have already summarized.
Professor Franklin is explicit in his testimony that he
was aiming his remarks specifically at them, wanting
primarily to be un derstood by them. Braunstein
testified that there is special communication within the
"movement" and pointed out that Professor Franklin
referred to "us" at the rally. But the defense, in effect,
asks us to believe that, on the night of February 10,
individuals in the "movement" failed to understand the
coercive and violent connotations of phrases like "war
on this campus", taking action on multiple levels to
resist oppression here, and "we must learn from the
peoples of Southeast Asia that when confronted with an
occupation army, we must respond with the methods of
people's war". The defense puts forwards its bland
interpretation of such phrases even though they were
expressed in a very angry tone and in a context of
profound hostility toward the university by a respected
leader who generally approves coercive and violent
tactics in campus disputes (though he denies he
advocated them on this occasion). We must therefore
examine possible reasons why the audience might not
have detected the menacing connotations of his remarks
on the evening of February 10.
From the testimony in the hearing, we do not believe
members of the "movement" were obtuse; nor is there
anything credible in the record to suggest that they were
in such a conciliatory mood that his angry rhetoric failed
to rcach them. Were the "movement" members of
Professor Franklin's audience so concerned with trying
to win over the Roble group that they rejected all

coercive and violent connotations of his remarks? This
possibility deserves further consideration.
During the rally, "movement" people in control of
the meeting showed little consideration for the feelings
ol the Roble students. Indeed, Professor Franklin seems
to have been concerned about this situation, since he
devoted a good deal of his first speech to persuading the
Roble group to accept the "movement's" view of the
situation. As a Roble speaker made clear in the KZSU
interview, the difference between the Roble contingent
and the "movement" was not only one of demands
(narrow vs. broad) but of tactics (non-violent vs.
violent). In this episode, Professor Franklin
demonstrated his authority as a leader of the
"movement" when he easily stopped the flow of the
meeting, re-opened the question, made a major speech,
and got a re-vote.
In his way, Professor Franklin was trying to persuade
the Roble contingent to link up with the "movement" in
a united front, at least for the moment. His way of
undertaking this persuasion was itself inflamatory. He
made assertions of such hostile content in such an angry
manner regarding the University and the police that,
whatever their effect on the Roble group, they must
surely have intensified the resentment of many persons
favorable to the "movement" and thereby raised the
probability of violent actions later. We have earlier
quoted a portion of his first Old Union speech pertinent
to this point. Finally, his do-your-own-thing formula
permitted some encouragement for Roble students to
take peaceful actions and still leave room for
encouragement of "militant" actions by the
"movement".
This brings us again to one of the central themes in
the entire case. At Old Union as at White Plaza, the
actions urged by Professor Franklin were not exclusively
coercive or violent. He advocated a wide range of protest
actions: some peaceful, some coercive, some violent. If a
person removes valuable merchandise from a store,
paying for half, but not paying for the other half, is he
culpable for the part he stole? We believe that the
presence of peaceful recommendations cannot immunize
a person from sanctions if he has urged imminent
coercion and violence as well.
Once again, as at White Plaza, Professor Franklin was
the final speaker, and once again his speech was
promptly followed by events of a disruptive, coercive or
violent nature. The probability of this occurring by
chance is very small. At the least, it reflects his
leadership position in the "movement" and the riskiness
of those situations in which he spoke. He cannot avoid
the conclusion that his pseeches, the last on each
occasion, increased the probability that illegal acts
would follow the two rallies.
In an earlier section on "Fundamental Issues and
Standards", we have indicated that the University must
have the right to put some constraints on speech in
dangerous circumstances, but only with great caution.
This applies to acts of incitement to imminent lawless
action that arc likely to produce such action. "Lawless"
in the university context includes state or local laws, the
Policy on Campus Disruptions or other university
regulations, or common-law understandings of
professorial responsibility.
In judging the applicability of this standard to the
present charge, we have been guided by these questions:
(1) What is the entire context surrounding the alleged
incitement? (2) What was conmunicated to the
audience? (3) What would the speiker judge to be the
effect of his communication on the audience?
Since we wish to sustain the university's vital
tradition of fostering free expression in its widest
diversity, we are exceedingly cautious in considering
possible constraints on speech. If such constraints are
ever to be invoked, they must be reserved for extreme
situations. We are asking whether the context here was
that of a highly combustible situation, whether the
speaker gave an inflammatory message in that context,
and whether the speaker had good reason to anticipate
lhat his message would increase the risk of imminent
lawless action. If indeed we find that the speaker issued
a call to violence, he is not protected by having issued it
in euphemistic jargon. Such a call may be quite as
effective as one issued in more stark terms. In any event,
the language used here was hardly occult.
Although Professor Franklin's witnesses were inclined
to protect him by minimizing their understanding of
coercive and violent connotations in his speeches, they
did not exclude such connotations—nor did he. The
difference between them and administration witnesses
was mainly one of emphasis. In the spectrum of
activities advocated by Professof Franklin, the defense
emphasized the legal end, whereas the administration
emphasized the illegal end.
In our detailed analysis of the context for his Old
Union speeches, we have determined that persons active
in the "movement" must have been quite familiar with
the coercive and violent connotations of Professor
Franklin's phrases, that they were responsive to such
connotations, and that Professor Franklin must have
been aware of these facts.
Finally, we must consider the line of defense that,
even if Professor Franklin were considered to have
carried out such an incitement, he would nevertheless be
justified by his perception of Stanford as a fascist
institution playing an important role in an imperialist
war.
We recognize that Professor Franklin is pressing for
reform in important areas of social concern. Can this
justify coercive behavior in campus disputes, or the
fostering of a climate of violence on campus? Once any
person is granted this privilege in the name of a good
cause, we must grant it also to others who feel they have
worthy aims. When these rights conflict, as they
inevitably must, are we to condone low-grade guerilla
warfare on campus? If we deny to others what we grant
to Professor Franklin, we have adopted a double
standard: coercion and violence in the university may be
condoned if we approve its aims, but restricted if we
disapprove its aims. Then it becomes a simple question
of whose ox is gored. But every cause is fervently
supported by some, eloquently justified by some,
pursued with passion by some. In a way, every war is a
holy war. If we accept Professor Franklin's holiness, how
arc we to reject the holiness of other true believers? In
our view, this course is not morally defensible. We must
do our best to apply one standard across all political
preferences and that standard must not condone
violence on campus.

K. CONCLUSION
Taking into accoutn content, context, delivery, and
audience, did Professor Franklin's two Old Union
speeches include urging and inciting to disruption of
university activities, or threat to persons or property?
Must he have known that this exhortation would be
widely interpreted as immediate advocacy of disruptive
or violent behavior?
1. The situation was risky. Illegal acts had occurred
earlier that day. There was intense resentment toward
the war, the police, and the university; there had been
serious frustration for the "movement" earlier in the
day; bitter political adversaries were present at the rally
and identified by the chairman; protest actions including
coercive and violent possibilities were under discussion;
the police were present on campus; there was a well
known history of violence in similar circumstances at
Stanford. In general, the higher the risk, the less it takes
to trigger coercive and violent behavior.
2. The targets of Professor Franklin's animosity were
quite explicit-the police and the university. He made an
intensive effort in the two speeches to generate further
hostility toward these targets. He provided justification
for coercive and violent behavior toward them, without
specifying precisely what the nature of such acts might
be, leaving that to the judgment and imagination of each
individual or small group.
3. The urging of immediate retaliatory action towards
the police and the university was clear. A great sense of
urgency was conveyed by both the tone and the content
of his remarks. While no detailed blueprint for action
was provided, the necessity for prompt action wis a
strong message. The overall effect was to increase the
likelihood of imminent lawless action.
Taking into account the full context surround his
speeches at the Old Union rally, hte messages he
communicated to his audience, and what he should be
able to judge about the effect of these messages under
the circumstances, we reach the conclusion that
Professor Franklin intentionally urged and incited his
audience to engage in conduct which would disrupt
activities of the University and of members of the
University Community and threaten injury to individuals
an; property.
The Advisory Board thus finds that the charge in No.
10 is sustained.
DISSENTING OPINIONS
Professors Brown and Kennedy, while agreeing with
substantial portions of the majority's account, dissent as
follows:
The majority sustains the charge of incitement
against Professor Franklin citing (1) an extensive
background of material from speeches at this and
other rallies that supply context for his last speech;
(2) Professor Franklin's first speech at this rally,
which also supplies context and reveals relevant
attitudes of his own; and (3) words in the second
speech that constitute, in the majority's view,
sufficiently explicit invitations to do violence against
persons and property.
We dissent regarding some matters of context, as
well as on the finding with respect to Professor
Franklin's own speeches.
In describing the context of the rally, we would
give more weight than does the majority to the
presence of the Roble students and to their impact
upon events in the Old Union Courtyard. The
interaction between the group of Roble moderates
(concerned about the invasion of Laos but not part of
the "movement") and the "movement" group itself
provides a central theme for the rally. Professor
Franklin's own first speech is directed predominantly
to an attenuation of those tensions and to a
reconciliation that would accommodate the new
recruits to "movement" objectives. It is, in essence, a
long argument that political prisoners must not be
forgotten, and that there is a fundamental identity
between the struggle of Asian peoples against U.S.
imperialism and the struggle of oppressed people and
anti-war students against repressive forces at home.
As the majority states, the speech contains a heavy
tone of anger against the police and other forces that,
to Professor Franklin, sumbolize this oppression. We
nevertheless believe it plausible that the speech was
intended to make a group of Stanford students
identify, perhaps for the first time, with oppressed
people; we do not see evidence that Professor
Franklin's intention was to turn them explicitly to
violent actions. In no sense can this first Old Union
speech be regarded as actionable; indeed, the
University administration does not attempt to
persuade us to find against Professor Franklin on the
basis of its content. To the extent that it contains
intensity and anger, and to the extent that these are
directed against the police and the University, the
speech might be said to have added-along with other
speeches at the rally-to the risk that prohibited
conduct might follow. But all agree that nothing in
the content of this speech approaches incitement.
Indeed, we feel that the speech presented, in however
objectionable a style, some legitimate concerns about
the plight of prisoners, the existence of police
brutality, and other significant issues.
Clearly Professor Franklin and other speakers
believed that a major mission of the "movement"
people at the rally was to undertake the "education"
of the rest of the Stanford community. Professor
Franklin's own first speech concludes with a plea that
those present go out to the people "and teach them
what we have learned in the movement," and that
any who are not persuaded should "get up here [ile.
to the microphone] and we should discuss it." At the
conclusion of his speech he testifies that he went over
to discuss the matter further with the Roble group.
The speaker who followed Professor Franklin to the
podium commented that the important thing was to
"go to the dorms, go to the people we want to talk
t0...." A later speaker extends the suggestion by
hoping that those at the rally will go to the dorms
and "rap all night." Recruitment, broadening the base
of the "movement," educating the community: all
these were significant themes in the development o'
the meeting's context. By its relatively stronger
emphasis on the more violent rhetoric, in particular
Professor Franklin's, the majority has decided against
what seems to us a plausible, even persuasive, second
view of the matter.

The content of the second speech, of course, is not
available to us except through the testimony of
witnesses. According to Beyers, Professor Franklin
called for a "people's war against the occupation
army of the police," and he "suggested that people
should go back tot their dormitories, form meetings,
meet in small groups, decide whatever they wanted to
do, to do it as late at night as possible, and to do
things which would bring more of the occupation
here."' Professor Franklin's version in his affidavit is
only slightly different. He, too, calims to have said
that "when confronted with an occupation army we
must respond with the methods of people's war." Me
adds, "I ended by telling people that people's war
meant that they should go back into their
dormitories, organize people into small groups, talk
with them, play football, or whatever, as late into the
night as possible." These differences are not very
substantial; they can easily be accounted for by
differences in recollection.
The majority analyzes these collections of phrases
in such a way that they are strongly persuaded as to
their meaning and that the meaning sustains an
incitement charge, given such other factors as risk.
The logic consists essentially in the elimination of
various attenuative constructions that are more
benign. In our view this interpretation is not
"strongly persuasive." The phrases upon which
attention has been focused are isolated from a
substantial matrix of interstitial speech, the precise
construction of which we do not know, and about
which we must be careful not to draw too confident
appraisals. Two examples will illustrate the point.
First, Professor Franklin says that in the context in
which he used it, "People's war" was clearly indicated
to mean "thoroughly merging with the masses;" he
states that he used the football game as an example of
that kind of tactic. It is significant that virtually all of
the witnesses link the words "people's war" to the
example of the football game. Professor Franklin
states in his affidavit that this was the only exmaple
he used, and the cumulative testimony seems to bear
him out. Second, the phrase "as late into the night as
possible," interpreted by the majority as a call to
militant action by small groups, could equally have
appeared in a context in which it applied primarily to
late dormitory discussions and to legal (though
perhaps risky) methods of taking up the time of the
police. Such an interpretation gain in plausibility
from Professor Franklin's testimony that although he
does not in principle disapprove of trashing, he would
not have urged it on that occasion, both because of
the heavy presence of police on campus that night
and because it would have alienated those new to the
"movement."
The point is that none of these interpretations has
a great deal of certainty about it. The ones we have
just mentioned may be a little less plausible than
those favored by the majority, but only a little less.
The "hard" data on words are so fragmentary, and
depend so much on the kind of context-construction
that is very sensitive to whatever bias the witnesses
may have had, that we find them inadequate to meet
a "strongly persuasive" criterion that Professor
Franklin is guilty as charged by the University
administration.
We are not strongly persuaded by the impressions
of the speech given by various witnesses-as opposed
to actual reconstructions of wording. Such
impressions are especially subject to the bias of
expectations. The differing treatments of Professor
Franklin's account of the football game provide one
example among many. Some witnesses regarded it as
a euphemism for more violent activity, others
regarded it merely as an opportunity for a bad pun,
while still others interpreted it as we would, as an
invitation to occupy the time of the police.
In effect, the majority report argues that Professor
Franklin was employing words well understood to his
audience but not to others. But there is no convincing
evidence that any substantial number of the audience
would have translated his speech into an invitation to
commit violent acts. Each phrase, like "people's
war," has been subject to a number of conflicting
interpretations in the testimony. Furthermore, the
reconstruction of a code depends on one's ability to
capture a reasonably large portion of the message,
and in this instance we have only scattered elements.
Although we think it is quite possible that Professor
Franklin advocated a range of actions some of which
may have been illegal, we do no find the evidence
strongly persuasive that his speech constituted the
advocacy of imminent lawless action.
The majority emphasizes the extremity of the risk
in the situation; we do not disagree with their
evaluation, but we stress more heavily the doubts we
have about the context and the meaning of the words
actually spoken.
to find against Professor Franklin on this charge
might, we believe, force a faculty member addressing
a political rally in the future to guard against possible
cryptic meanings that his speech might convey to a
segment of his audience whenever a situation of high
risk obtains. The social cost of such a prohibition
must be balanced against the benefits to be derived
from being able to prosecute somewhat ambiguous
speech in dangerous situations. We find the costs too
great.
Accordingly, we do not sustain the charge against
Professor Franklin as stated in Paragraph 10.
A. CHARGES
The University Administration's charge concerning
Professor Franklin's conduct during the Old Union
Courtyard rally on February 10th reads as follows:
10. On the eveing of February 10, 1971, beginning at
approximately 8:00 p.m., a rally was held in the Old
Union Courtyard to, among other things, discuss
methods of protesting developments in the war in
Indochina. Over two hundred students and other
persons attended the rally. During the course of the
rally Professor Franklin intentionally urged and
incited students and other persons present to engage
in conduct calculated to disrupt activities of the
University and of members of the University
community and which threatened injury to
individuals and property. Shortly thereafter students
and other persons were assaulted by persons present
at the rally, and later that evening other acts of
violence occurred.
B. NATURE OF THE CHARGE IN PARAGRAPH 10
The charge centers on intentional incitement that
threatened: (1) disruption of University activities, both
individual and institutional; and (2) injury to persons
and property. It implies that a rish of coercive or violent
behavior existed at the time of the rally and that
Professor Franklin further increased the risk by the
content and manner of his participation. In determining
whether the facts fit the charges, the Board must inquite
(1) What is the entire context surrounding the alleged
incitement? (2) What is being communicated to the
audience? (3) What would the speaker judge to be the
effect of his communication on the audience?
C. FINDINGS OF FACT 1. Prominent Themes in the
1. Prominent Themes in the Old Union Rally,
February 10
On Wednesday, February 10 at 8:00 p.m. about 350
people attended a rally in the Old Union Courtyard.
Speakers debated tactics and demands. Professor
Franklin spoke twice. The themes that emerged
prominently in the course of the rally may he
summarized as follows:
a. There was general agreement on opposition to the
war in Southeast Asia and a wish to protest against
American involvement.
b. There was a major difference of opinion on the
scope of demands and of tactics. A contingent of
students from Roble Hall favored a single demand, an
effort to reach out for the broadest possible support
and strict adherence to non-violent tactics. Another
and larger faction favored a broader set of demands,
even at the risk of losing community support; and
they favored a broader range of tactics, including
coercive and violent ones, depending on
circumstances. This distinction between the two
groups was not only apparent in the speeches, but
was emphasized by a KZSU broadcast interview with
representatives of the Roble contingent near the end
of the rally.

c. Five speakers emphasized Stanford's major war
complicity and severe political repression. This
viewpoint may be illustrated with the following
quotation from one of the speakers.
I work at the phone company and I realize that
everyday one out of every two calls that I place
goes from Stanford University or SRI directly to
the Pentagon, to SRI all over the country and all
over the world, and people realize that Stanford
University is integrally linked with Pacific
Telephone Company, that all the business, you
know, that the whole service which Pacific
Telephone puts out is for the benefit of the
financial interest in this area and people who are
against the war, people that I work with who are
against the war, who are very, very angry and
outraged by the expansion of the war into Laos
realize that, because they have brothers, brothers
and uncles and fathers who are over there fighting,
who have been forced to go over there, they don't
have any choice, they can't afford to go to school,
they are forced to be over there. They have
brothers and sisters who are locked up in the
prisons all over America and they realize that
Stanford University, that the kind of research
Stanford does, the kind of money Stanford has,
which controls the black and brown communities
in the mid-peninsula, is a very dangerous thing and
they:re willing to fight against that for their very
survival and I think that the people here should
respect that, should respect the fact that telephone
workers are getting organized, that we're thinking
now about what kind of support demonstration
we can have when Stanford gets itself together and
the issues become clear to the people that
Stanford University is key in the war, key in the
oppression of political prisoners and it's just got to
go. (applause)
d. Eight speakers were very hostile to the police
especially to their presence on campus. Police had
been called to the campus to terminate the
occupation of the Computation Center and had
remained in view of the likelihood of further illegal
acts. It will be recalled that arson and "trashing" had
occurred on the nights of February 6 and 7. Early in
the Old Union rally of February 10, the presence of
police on campus was announced. No witness
testified that a single uniformed policeman entered
the Old Union courtyard, despite the fact that
Professor Franklin, in his affidavit shortly after the
event, said there were many police there. In the
hearing, he corrected this error. Thus, the police were
not visible to the people at the rally, but their
presence on campus was a focus of deep resentment.
They were often referred to as "pigs" and as an
occupation army or occupying forces. In conjunction
with the previous criticism of Stanford's complicity
in the war. the struggle on campus and the struggle in
Southeast Asia were portrayed as different facets of a
single struggle. Parallels were drawn between the

police on campus and imperialist armies in Asia. The
all-one-war theme was emphasized by urging
resistance to the police as analogous to resistance to
occupying forces in Vietnam.
e. On two occasions, members of the Free Campus
Movement were pointed out in a context of hostility,
and were linked to the police on campus.
112. In response to these various instigations, there was
a desire for action — not merely verbal demands, but
concrete, tangible steps to implement them. There
was a clear preference for strong, vivid action, though
some speakers, including those from the Roble
contingent, put their main emphasis on education.
Little reference was made to "strike" in this rally.
The actions mainly preferred by the speakers may be
illustrated by (he following remarks by the chairman:
Okay, I think it's still pretty clear that we want to
keep the demands as they are. Okay, at this point I
think we should go on to specific proposals for
how we act now. We've had a few proposals; one
guy suggested that after the Comp Center thing
today that in order to escalate rather than
de-escalate we should zero in on SRI, Another
person, other people have proposed that we deal
now with the police state that's on this campus
because if we're going to move against the war,
one of the things we have to do to be able to move
against the war in atmosphere where we're not
intimidated by pigs coming through to surround
our meetings and that kind of thing and that one
of the ways to do that is to begin any kind of
action people want to take to get the pigs off this
campus. I think that people should speak to these
proposals and add more proposals that they have.
g. Five speakers explicitly expressed and several
others implicitly expressed anger, using words and
imagery of fighting. Three speakers suggested actions
to embarrass, humiliate, or confront the police,
particularly late at night, while others made more
general comments advocating resistance to
intimidation.
h. Two speakers favored off-campus protests.
2. Professor Franklin's First Speech at Old Union
(Second speech of February 10)
Professor Franklin's first Old Union speech
(Appendix III) began with an effort to persuade the
Roble contingent of the correctness of the majority
position favoring a broad set of demands, including the
freeing of all "political prisoners" and the end of
Stanford's complicity in the war — not merely
immediate withdrawal of US forces from Southeast Asia.
He spoke with concern about people who must spend
time in jail, emphasized solidarity within the
"movement", and opposed betrayal of political
prisoners. Then, in an intense delivery, he said:
And we get very upset when we find our beautiful
campus crawling with pigs who stop and harass
people and rip off and beat half of the people. Well
this is just a very, very mild taste of what life is like in
the black and brown communities of this country
where the pigs come by every night and if you're
young and you're black and brown they stop you and
ask your I.D. and rip you off for suspicion of
burglary and where there are dogs there and where
there's a helicopter overhead and that's part of the
same struggle, and where they shoot you and the pigs
who are here tonight, that's those San Jose pigs have
just mundered a black brother in San Jose, the same
San Jose pig just murdered a black brother down in
San Jose and that's normal life down there. People
murdered in the streets and that's why we call them
pigs. Although it's a little unfair to the four-footed
variety, because they don't do that kind of thing.
[Applause]
Continuing to speak in the same delivery, he next
alluded to the Black Panther party's leadership and made
the following remarks:
And the Black Panther Party teaches us that the
people of Laos and the people of South Vietnam are
not another separate nation state. That they are our
brothers and sisters because they are just other
oppressed communities of the same empire. The
Black Panther Party teaches us that today while this
meeting was going on brothers and sisters, blood
brothers and sisters of us, were killed in Laos, in
Vietnam and Cambodia, in the black and brown
communities of the United States of America. They
teach us this is all one struggle and the
interconnections are every place. Even if you thing
about what Laos is all about; what is the chief cash
export of Laos, who knows?
[crowd | Opium, heroin?
Opium, all the heroin on this coast comes from Laos.
And it's all brought in by the CIA. It is grown and
harvested by Meo tribesmen and flown out on Air
America, the CIA airline. And it is brought in to this
state as part of the oppression, particularly of black
and brown people here, but also of white youth. . . .
(brief KZSU interruption). . . . and is just as much a
part of the counter-insurgency system as the pigs are
war on this campus.
He urged that others be taught about such evils as
Stanford's complicity in the war and the necessity to
free all political prisoners. He expressed the view that
the student strike a year earlier had been a success. He
closed by restating the necessity to continue the struggle
to win others to his viewpoint.
3. Professor Franklin 's Second Speech at the Old Union
(Third speech of February 10)
This speech lasted about two minutes, but because
KZSU was conducting an interview at the time, it can
only be heard in the background on the tape recording.
The pitch of his voice is high, with only a few of his
words and intermittent responses from the crowd being
clearly discernible on the tape. The crowd responses
increase toward the end. The content of the speech can
only be reconstructed from testimony, but this poses
little difficulty. There is substantial agreement as to
what Professor Franklin said amont his witnesses, the
University Administration's witnesses, and Professor
Franklin's own affidavit and testimony. The differences,
as might be expected, are in the interpretation of his
speech.
a. Professor Franklin's interpretation of his second
Old Union speech.
In his affidavit he describes the speech as follows:
A number of speakers at the meeting rose to describe
specific instances of police harassment and brutality.
Several proposed that we go to the dormitories to
discuss die police state on campus and what to do
about it, as well as what to do about the situation in
Southeast Asia. One speaker said that many squads of
six to eight police were roaming the campus, and that
if we marched to the dorms some of these squads
would follow us, and that it would be a good
education for people in the dorms to see them. Two
speakers said that the police were attempting to keep
people from knowing what was happening, and that
they had temporarily confiscated a walkie-talkie from
a KZSU reporter and threatened to arrest him for
listening to police frequencies. Another speaker said
that if we march in one group it will be too easy for
the police and we should confuse them by dividing
into many groups. Another speaker siad "there are
pigs all over this campus and we have to show people
who the pigs are and who the people are, and we
cannot tolerate a police state here or any place else."
It was generally agreed that we would go back to the
dormitories to build support for the strike and to
raise consciousness about the police occupation of
the campus. I rose to speak again. 1 said that it was
unfortunate that the people from Roble had not felt
that they were really part of the movement and that
it was necessary to go into the dorms and discuss all
their questions further. I said that it was very
important for people to understand that this is a
united front, and that people will respond on
different levels of action and with different degrees of
consciousness to the war. I said that it was important
for people to accept these different levels, and that if
people are sincere it is correct for them to do their
own thing, to do whatever they think best, and that
that is how all of us learn. I pointed out that with the
police saturation on campus, however, it would be
suicide for people to engage in any militant action in
a large group. I said that we must learn from the
peoples of Southeast Asia that when confronted with
an occupation army, we must respond with the
methods of people's war. Then 1 explained that this
means thoroughly merging with the people. I gave
one and only one example of what I meant by this. I
said that I had been told that a few nights before,
during a similar police occupation, several people had
begun a game of touch football. They moved from
place to place on the campus, forcing the police to
follow them. Several police complained to them that
they were supposed to be in fixed positions, and that
this was preventing them from maintaining those
positions. Finally, when the football game
appraoched the area of the computation center, the
police had asked to examine the football. I said that I
wasn't sure whether this was because they thought it
was a bomb or because they just wanted to examine a
real pigskin. I ended by teliing people that people's

war meant that they should go back to the
dormitories, organize people into small groups, and
talk with them, or play football, or whatever, as late
into the night as possible.
b. Hearing witnesses' interpretation of Professor
Franklin's second Old Union Speech
(i) Administration witnesses-There is considerable
agreement among administration and defense
witnesses on the content (though not on the
interpretation) of this speech. This can be
illustrated by comparing Professor Franklin's
version of his speech after the event given above
with testimony of Robert Beyers, of the Stanford
News Service. He testified that he had attended
many rallies at Stanford over a period of years,
and had often heard Professor Franklin speak. He
described Professor Franklin's speech on this
occasion as very critical of the police. He testified
that Professor Franklin called specifically for
people's war against the occupation army-i.e., the
police. Professor Franklin suggested that people go
back to their dormitories, meet in small groups,
decide to do whatever they wanted to do as late at
night as possible so as to bring more police onto
the campus to help out their brethren in other
communities. At this point, in Beyer's view, the
nature of the meeting changed dramatically,
leading him to expect that illegal or disruptive
incidents would follow. Immediately after the
speech, the rally ended and Beyers said three FCM
students were badly beaten by some of the Old
Union crowd. Under cross-examination, he
indicated that Professor Franklin did not specify
the exact nature of the violent acts to be carried
out.
Brimelow felt there was much tension and
restlessness in the meeting, and that the crowd got
very excited as a result of the speech. After the
speech he saw the crowd stream off in all
directions and he heard "war cries" (something of
this sort is audible on the tape recording). Almas
heard the speech from the balcony of the Women's
Clubhouse, thought it was impassioned and was
startled by it. Almas had heard Professor Franklin
speak about a dozen times but had never heard
him encourage this level of action. Almas felt
Professor Franklin had not been as careful as
usual, and the witness had the expectation that
there was going to be violence.
R. Jacobs, also on the balcony, thought
Professor Franklin had made inflammatory
statements. Grav felt Professor Franklin was
playing the role of a leader giving instructions to
the group in a serious vein.
(ii) Professor Franklin's witnesses
Witnesses for Professor Franklin heard phrases
similar to those reported by Administration
witnesses but to some extent interpreted them
differently. This is well illustrated by an affidavit
of Bennion, who also testified at the hearing.
. . .It became clear that there was some opposition
forming, basically between going back into the
dorms for further discussion and staying in the
area the police were patrolling in order to show
them that the occupation of the campus would
not be tolerated. At this point Professor Franklin
spoke and tried to explain that these two
tendencies were not really opposed, but could be
carried out at the same time and could mutually
serve each other. He discussed at length the tenets
of "people's war" which is based on the concept
of a united front. In essence this means that
everyone can contribute what they can to a
movement, with one person's greater contribution
or risk should not be seen as invalidating another's.
This leads to many levels of action which mutually
reinforce other levels, rather than detracting from
each other. He pointed out that in advanced stages
of "people's war" such as in Vietnam, many
different levels of action are still employed, not
merely the military level of the National
Liberation Front. He also stated that in the
present case it would be suicidal to engage in any
large-scale militant action. He gave one example of
what "people's war" would mean that evening.
Some people could go back to the dorms and
persuade others to join the movement, while
others could play touch football in the area being
patrolled by the police to show that they were not
intimidated by the occupation of the campus. At
no time did say or even remotely imply or suggest
that he advocated a militant action that evening,
nor did his in-depth analysis of "people's war"
make such an interpretation possible for any
person who had ears to hear and a mind to think.
These witnesses were much preoccupied with the
presence of police. They expressed fear and anger,
and were inclined to expect trouble with the
police that night. They were determined not to be
intimidated by the police, and to harass them
where possible, by and large, Professor Franklin
was seen as speaking to these issues in a way that
fostered resistance but not violence. His task was
seen as uniting the people against the common
foe: putting together the university's complicity in
the war, the linkage of the struggle here iwth the
struggle in Asia, the necessity to respond
vigorously on many levels of action. For example
Pat Faulkner testified that he understood
Professor Franklin to mean that all levels of
actions are all right, even writing letters, and that
it is necessary to wage war on many levels to win.
He felt that Professor Franklin gave a speech in
which he approved a wide range of actions,
including trashing, but did not emphasize violent
responses.
Professor Franklin's witnesses gave the term
"people's war" a variety of emphases, but the
words were generally udnerstood to have a range
of connotations. These included (1) harassment of
police; (2) taking control of our own lives; (3)
brining the war home; (4) strike; (5) learning from
the peoples of Southeast Asia; (6) attention to our
war here, not only the one in Indochina; (7) doing
whatever conscience dictates, which might include
trashing; (8) determinationnot to be intimidated
by police, not to shrink from threats.
4. Post-Rally Events
In the course of the hearing, on October 28, the
Advisory Board made the following statement on
post-rally events:
With respect to the Old Union courtyard speech, the
Board is now in a position to give its view of the value
of testimony about events following the rally. We
admitted testimony on these matters because the

University Administration, in order to demonstrate
that there was a risk that prohibited conduct would
follow the speech, introduced evidence for the
limited purpose of showing that such conduct did in
fact occur. We now feel that this
evidence concerning the light on White Plaza, the
alleged false alarms, the shootings, and other
incidents-need not be rebutted. We have reached this
decision because, in our view, the existence of risk is
adequately shown by pre-and co-existing conditions,
and does not require demonstration by referring to
subsequent events.
It is a matter ol record that untoward events of the
sort mentioned above did in fact occur that night,
beginning immediately after the rally. We limited
testimony on these matters for two reasons: (1) the
charges did not contain any references to Professor
Franklin's post-rally conduct; (2) we had good reason to
believe that significant risk existed without reference to
post-rally events.
D. DEFENSES AND THEIR ANALYSES
1. Principal Points made in Defense Against Charges in
Paragraph 10.
Professor Franklin, in testimony and argument, made
several points in defending against these charges:
a. The speeches were brief, especially the second one
at the very end of the evening's program. Such brief
speeches could hardly have had the impact ascribed
to them by the University Administration.
b. It was difficult to hear the speeches. Except for
those near the speakers, consisting to a considerable
extent of Professor Franklin's close associates,
audibility was a problem. The testimony of several
witnesses who were not close to the speaker was
challenged by Professor Franklin.
c. What could be heard was innocuous. It was meant
to inform, educate, and persuade to a political
viewpoint. It was not intended to incite, inflame, or
cause violence.
d. Most of the people at the rally had already decided
what they were going to do by the time Professor
Franklin gave his second and closing spcech. In this
speech, he essentially gave them a political rationale
for what they had already decided to do.
e. Even if his speeches were taken as inflamatory by
some members of his audience, they were well
justified by Stanford's condition as a fascist and
imperialist institution, and by the presence on the
campus of an occupation army consisting of police
who frequently kill black and brown people, and
indeed had just killed a black brother.
112. In any event. Professor Franklin should be able to
give such speeches with impunity, since all speech
should be considered to be constitutionally
protected, even where appreciable risks are posed.
g. If speech is to be restricted at all, it must be done
within a very narrow band. Such a band could not
include general prescritpions for hostile actiona or
even for violence. Specific prescriptions for violent
acts would be required, and tchse must be confirmed
by specific evidence that individuals had been moved
to carry out those same specific acts by the speech in
question.
2. Analysis of the Defenses
The length of the speeches is much less important
than other characteristics: content, delivery, context,
audience. In any event, the first speech was not
particularly brief, and the second was in a crucial
position: at the very end of the rally.
In regard to audibility, we conclude that those who
wanted to hear the speeches could do so. This is
admitted by some defense witnesses, and to a certain
extent by Professor Franklin himself who testified that
at the time he felt he could reach those who really
wanted to hear him. The main variable seems to have
been attention; some members of the audience paid
close attention to his speeches, others little. Among
those who did pay attention, there is considerable
agreement as to content, though witnesses differe as to
interpretation.
There is no meaningful way to consider Professor
Franklin's behavior in the Old Union rally without a
firm grasp of the context in which the rally occurred.
The mood that evening was tense and angry. After the
passage of so many months it is difficult to recapture the
sense of anxious expectation that characterized the
campus that evening. The Old Union rally followed
several days of continually escalating events: threats of
coercion, actual coercion, arson, police action, and
hostile confrontations on campus. We have already
summarized recurrent themes of the immediately
preceding rallies at Dinkelspiel on February 9th and
White Plaza on February 10th. As the Board concluded
in its statement of October 28th, cited above, substantial
risk existed on the Stanford campus before and during
the Old Union rally.
There are additional aspects of the context for the
Old Union rally that deserve consideration. Professor
Franklin rose to speak as a well-known and respected
leader of the "movement". Defense witnesses testified
that he was viewed with admiration and his ideas were
taken seriously. Professor Franklin testified that the
time of these events in February was a crucial one for
the "movement", a time when the "movement" might
transcend itself.
Testimony in the hearing, mainly from defense
witnesses, brought out the fact that this occasion stirred
memories of other similar occasions which also provide
meaningful context for the Old Union rally. The events
approximately a year earlier at the time of the military
action in Cambodia came up repeatedly. Indeed, one of
Professor Franklin's main contentions is that he was
attempting to foster a "Cambodia-type strike". A
number of defense witnesses, including especially
Braumstein and Professor Franklin, discussed the events
of the Cambodian period and compared them with the
events during the Laotian invasion. It became clear that
the protest events of the Cambodian period, viewed with
approbation, included a spectrum of activities, some of
which were nonviolent, some of which were patently
coercive, and some of which were overtly violent. The
coercive and violent activities included: forcible blocking
of entries into buildings for sustained periods, large-scale
breaking of windows, bombings, and lire bombings.
The Old Union rally also brought back recollections
of other night rallies held in similar circumstances,
especially when police were on campus, not only during
the Cambodian protest but at other times in the past few

years as well. There lias been a clear tendency for such
occasions to be followed by violent behavior. This fact
was knwon to Professor Franklin, since several of the
defense witnesses commented on his participation in
these protests.
Two of the major themes permeating the three rallies
of February 9th and February 10, advanced by Professor
Franklin and many of his close associates, are especially
pertinent to his closing speech at the Old Union rally:
(1) all-one-war; (2) multiple-levels-of-action.
(1) All-one-war is the theme linking the struggle at
Stanford with the struggle in Southeast Asia. It is the
heart of the problem, emphasized by Professor Franklin
in his speeches, affidavit, testimony and argument.
The speeches attack Stanford's war complicity, draw
parallels between racial oppression in America and Asia,
and emphasize the necessity to learn from the peoples of
Southeast Asia how to resist oppression at home. By the
end of the Old Union rally, the cumulative weight of
these linkages suggests that one way to fight the war
now is to fight the police and administration here.
In his testimony Professor Franklin says:
. . .what I say there basically is that we can't separate
the war in Southeast Asia from the war at home. Now
on all these points, all four of these speeches that
were given in this 24-hour period -that is from the
night belore in Dink through this—all four of those
speeches are essentially saying-are saying the same
thing. They're expressing a set of ideas which 1
consider the most important ideas. . . . And then this
seems to me the most essential thing, both in this
speech and in the second speech, to try to show
people just as clearly as possible that in fact that
occupation army of police that was on the campus
was part of the same war that was being waged in
Southeast Asia and that was being waged in the Black
ghettos and in the barrios of the United States.
This point is further clarified in Braunstein's defense
testimony, under cross-examination:
And the people fighting the United States in South
east Asia are fighting the same battles that people
fighting the police.. .who were on campus in the Old
Union Courtyard one and two of the year before and
are fighting the same battle as the people trying to get
rotten research off this campus and are fighting all
these battles, and they're all the same battles.
Then if it's all one battle, the word 'opposing forces'
relates to all the people on the other side in this big
global battle.
I've later learned that that is what's known as
'People's War'; is part of what is known as 'People's
War'.
Q. I take it in the context in which you were speaking
you at least included the police in that reference?
A. Oh, certainly. Especially that night, yes. I also
included the University administrators.
(2) The war is to be waged with the
multiple-levels-of-action formula. Each person is to do
his own thing, whatever he can, whatever he thinks best,
using his imagination to find ways of resisting the
occupying forces. This theme has a familiar ring from its
recurrence during the preceding few days. We have
earlier quoted Braunstein's remarks on this subject at the
Dinkelspiel rally on February 9th. It is clear from a
variety of references in several rallies that this
formulation is meant to advocate a spectrum of activities
which might include contacting Congressmen,
persuading students in dormitories, being active on
campus at night, refusing to be intimidated by the
police, blocking doorways, occupying buildings,
breaking windows, putting the computer out of service
for a long time, destroying the computer, or doing other
things for which one might not wish to "take credit."
In his testimony Professor Franklin said he felt
impelled at the end of the rally to speak about:
. . .that action that was going to be taken, which
was essentially gpomg back to the dorms to talk
about the war in Southeast Asia and about the
police occupation of the campus and—for people
to be there and exercise their right. That it was
important for somebody to explain to people that
that action itself was, you know, just as legitimate
a part of this war as, say, the armed self defense of
the Vietnamese people or the people of Laos. . ..
And in that speech I mentioned using the methods
of people's war. And at that point I was speaking
very directly to the people there, I think, who
considered themselves revolutionaries. Because I
knew that they would have a basic understanding
of what that meant, and that that phrase summed
up a whole lot of experience.
Braunstein testified for Professor Franklin, 'There are
all sorts of actions on various levels, including people
breaking windows with rocks and people burning down
buildings, as yet unidentified people burning down
buildings, and so on, that sometimes have the same goals
in mind and sometimes don't."
Significant in this context was the term "people's
war." It was interpreted by various witnesses in different
ways. It seems to include a wide range of suggested
actions, some of which are nonviolent, and some of
which are violent. It can clearly include guerilla warfare.
Some witnesses interpreted this as its primary meaning,
others gave this meaning less prominence. Maoist
writings use the term "People's war" for all action, in
particular guerilla warfare, in which the warriors merge
with the masses. Professor Franklin acknowledge in his
testimony that guerilla warfare, including assassination
and bombings, is one important component of people's
war, but denied it was the one he had in mind when he
used the term in his spcech. Defense testimony indicated
that the concept of people's war extends beyond
military action, but did not deny that it prominently
includes military action. Given the repeated explicit
linkages of the struggle against the police occupation
army here and the war in Southeast Asia, in the context
of recent night violence on campus and an afternoon of
police confrontation, it is difficult to believe that most
listeners would be insensitive to the violent connotations
of this term. Why repeatedly use warlike terms and
images—such as Professor Franklin's "war on this
campus" if peaceful actions are intended?
Similar considerations apply to Professor Franklin's
advocacy of action to be taken against the occupation
army in small groups. It is clear that small groups can
conduct dormitory discussions and other peacefully
persuasive activities, and that this did in fact occur,
though we learned very little about the focus of such
discussions e.g., whether they were intended to foster
particular nonviolent or violent tactics of protest. In any
event, such dormitory discussions may well have been
one of the meanings of his alleged recommendation for
reliance upon affinity groups. He advised against mass
militant action, meaning essentially violent
confrontation with the police, on tactical grounds. Such
action was not feasible because the police were too
strong. It is alos clear that the smaller groups could
engage in violent activities as has often happened in
similar circumstances at Stanford during the past few
years-i.e., following night rallies permeated by angry
speech. Two days earlier, February 8, after a night of
"trashing", a sheet was distributed at a "movement"
rally under the title "Do It!" It endorsed the previous
night's activity and called for more of the same,
indicating that tight affinity groups can be helpful in
doing whatever people want to do.
Whatever the activities that Professor Franklin was
urging upon individuals and small groups, it appears that
lateness of the hour was positively desirable-"as late
into the night as possible". In view of the behavior ot
some individuals and affinity groups at Stanford in
similar circumstances during the past few years, it is
reasonable to suppose that lateness might be useful as a
cover for violent activities—though it could of course be
used for peaceful activities as well.
Professor Franklin's two Old Union speeches were
given in a hostile tone. This is apparent in the content of
the first speech, and the effect is heightened when one
listens to the tape and hears his tone of voice. Even
when the speech is briefly interrupted by a KZSU
interview, the angry tone and the emotional crowd
response can be clearly detected. Although thesecond
speech is covered over by a KZSU interview, similar
indications are available from the tape and from
testimony.
In the course of the hearing, both Professor Franklin
and Braunstein indicated that ambiguity about tactics
was desirable to these rally speeches because KZSU was
broadcasting them and the police would presumably
have tape recordings. To advocate violent tactics openly
in this context would have exposed the speaker to later
sanctions. We were informed in the hearing by Professor
Franklin of his "political decision" to keep his position
at Stanford, hence caution about open calls for
"revolutionary violence".
Thus, we are faced with a difficult problem: how to
interpret speech deliberately given in ambiguous terms.
But we have seen already that considerable clarification
emerges from a close examination of the text, from the
full context provided by preceding events, and from the
way in which the speech was delivered. In essence,
Professor Franklin came into a combustible situation,
focused hostility on certain targets, intensified existing
hostility toward those targets, and urged a spectrum of
actions against them: some peaceful, some coercive,
some violent. We must now turn our attention to his
audience in order to inquire whether they were likely to
understand him and whether Professor Franklin must
have expected the risk of prohibited conduct to be
increased by his behavior.
The tone and content of Professor Franklin's
speeches must have been particularly significant for two
groups: 1) people in the movement; 2) people who are
violence-prone for whatever reason. In respect to the
first, these are people who are responsive to Professor
Franklin by virtue of past association, respect,
dedication, and sharing of common goals. They tend to
understand the nuances of his speech, as was evident at
the hearing itself. As for the second grou, it is well
known that public meetings characterized by intense
anger and hints of violence tend to attract, both at the
meeting and via media coverage, individuals who are
drawn to violence for a variety of reasons, not
necessarily political. Whatever the reason for their
susceptibility to violence, they tend to find such
occasions exciting. They may be induced by angry
rhetoric to commit acts of gravity, particularly in the
context of recent examples of violent behavior.
Professor Franklin testified that he was aware of the
long-term, bitter antagonism between Venceremos and
FCM; and he was aware of the immediate, clearly
expressed hostility toward the small FCM group at the
rally. The presence of these mutually hostile groups at
the rally certainly added to the risk. The use of violent
rhetoric in such circumstances increased the probability
of attack and counter-attack.
We think that "movement" people were capable of
understanding the messages. We refer here to familiar
connotations understood by a group sharing common
intersts and values. For example, reference to "militant
action on campus" in 1971 is understood by many
people to mean "trashing " which in turn is understood
to mean "window-breaking." These are not the only
connotations of the terms, nor are they understood by
everyone who comes on campus. A few years ago, the
terms did not have these connotations. But common
usage in concrete situations has led to a widely shared
understanding.
Those devoted to the "movement" had a rich
refresher course in such terms during the rallies of the
preceding few days which we have already summarized.
Professor Franklin is explicit in his testimony that he
was aiming his remarks specifically at them, wanting
primarily to be un derstood by them. Braunstein
testified that there is special communication within the
"movement" and pointed out that Professor Franklin
referred to "us" at the rally. But the defense, in effect,
asks us to believe that, on the night of February 10,
individuals in the "movement" failed to understand the
coercive and violent connotations of phrases like "war
on this campus", taking action on multiple levels to
resist oppression here, and "we must learn from the
peoples of Southeast Asia that when confronted with an
occupation army, we must respond with the methods of
people's war". The defense puts forwards its bland
interpretation of such phrases even though they were
expressed in a very angry tone and in a context of
profound hostility toward the university by a respected
leader who generally approves coercive and violent
tactics in campus disputes (though he denies he
advocated them on this occasion). We must therefore
examine possible reasons why the audience might not
have detected the menacing connotations of his remarks
on the evening of February 10.
From the testimony in the hearing, we do not believe
members of the "movement" were obtuse; nor is there
anything credible in the record to suggest that they were
in such a conciliatory mood that his angry rhetoric failed
to rcach them. Were the "movement" members of
Professor Franklin's audience so concerned with trying
to win over the Roble group that they rejected all

coercive and violent connotations of his remarks? This
possibility deserves further consideration.
During the rally, "movement" people in control of
the meeting showed little consideration for the feelings
ol the Roble students. Indeed, Professor Franklin seems
to have been concerned about this situation, since he
devoted a good deal of his first speech to persuading the
Roble group to accept the "movement's" view of the
situation. As a Roble speaker made clear in the KZSU
interview, the difference between the Roble contingent
and the "movement" was not only one of demands
(narrow vs. broad) but of tactics (non-violent vs.
violent). In this episode, Professor Franklin
demonstrated his authority as a leader of the
"movement" when he easily stopped the flow of the
meeting, re-opened the question, made a major speech,
and got a re-vote.
In his way, Professor Franklin was trying to persuade
the Roble contingent to link up with the "movement" in
a united front, at least for the moment. His way of
undertaking this persuasion was itself inflamatory. He
made assertions of such hostile content in such an angry
manner regarding the University and the police that,
whatever their effect on the Roble group, they must
surely have intensified the resentment of many persons
favorable to the "movement" and thereby raised the
probability of violent actions later. We have earlier
quoted a portion of his first Old Union speech pertinent
to this point. Finally, his do-your-own-thing formula
permitted some encouragement for Roble students to
take peaceful actions and still leave room for
encouragement of "militant" actions by the
"movement".
This brings us again to one of the central themes in
the entire case. At Old Union as at White Plaza, the
actions urged by Professor Franklin were not exclusively
coercive or violent. He advocated a wide range of protest
actions: some peaceful, some coercive, some violent. If a
person removes valuable merchandise from a store,
paying for half, but not paying for the other half, is he
culpable for the part he stole? We believe that the
presence of peaceful recommendations cannot immunize
a person from sanctions if he has urged imminent
coercion and violence as well.
Once again, as at White Plaza, Professor Franklin was
the final speaker, and once again his speech was
promptly followed by events of a disruptive, coercive or
violent nature. The probability of this occurring by
chance is very small. At the least, it reflects his
leadership position in the "movement" and the riskiness
of those situations in which he spoke. He cannot avoid
the conclusion that his pseeches, the last on each
occasion, increased the probability that illegal acts
would follow the two rallies.
In an earlier section on "Fundamental Issues and
Standards", we have indicated that the University must
have the right to put some constraints on speech in
dangerous circumstances, but only with great caution.
This applies to acts of incitement to imminent lawless
action that arc likely to produce such action. "Lawless"
in the university context includes state or local laws, the
Policy on Campus Disruptions or other university
regulations, or common-law understandings of
professorial responsibility.
In judging the applicability of this standard to the
present charge, we have been guided by these questions:
(1) What is the entire context surrounding the alleged
incitement? (2) What was conmunicated to the
audience? (3) What would the speiker judge to be the
effect of his communication on the audience?
Since we wish to sustain the university's vital
tradition of fostering free expression in its widest
diversity, we are exceedingly cautious in considering
possible constraints on speech. If such constraints are
ever to be invoked, they must be reserved for extreme
situations. We are asking whether the context here was
that of a highly combustible situation, whether the
speaker gave an inflammatory message in that context,
and whether the speaker had good reason to anticipate
lhat his message would increase the risk of imminent
lawless action. If indeed we find that the speaker issued
a call to violence, he is not protected by having issued it
in euphemistic jargon. Such a call may be quite as
effective as one issued in more stark terms. In any event,
the language used here was hardly occult.
Although Professor Franklin's witnesses were inclined
to protect him by minimizing their understanding of
coercive and violent connotations in his speeches, they
did not exclude such connotations—nor did he. The
difference between them and administration witnesses
was mainly one of emphasis. In the spectrum of
activities advocated by Professof Franklin, the defense
emphasized the legal end, whereas the administration
emphasized the illegal end.
In our detailed analysis of the context for his Old
Union speeches, we have determined that persons active
in the "movement" must have been quite familiar with
the coercive and violent connotations of Professor
Franklin's phrases, that they were responsive to such
connotations, and that Professor Franklin must have
been aware of these facts.
Finally, we must consider the line of defense that,
even if Professor Franklin were considered to have
carried out such an incitement, he would nevertheless be
justified by his perception of Stanford as a fascist
institution playing an important role in an imperialist
war.
We recognize that Professor Franklin is pressing for
reform in important areas of social concern. Can this
justify coercive behavior in campus disputes, or the
fostering of a climate of violence on campus? Once any
person is granted this privilege in the name of a good
cause, we must grant it also to others who feel they have
worthy aims. When these rights conflict, as they
inevitably must, are we to condone low-grade guerilla
warfare on campus? If we deny to others what we grant
to Professor Franklin, we have adopted a double
standard: coercion and violence in the university may be
condoned if we approve its aims, but restricted if we
disapprove its aims. Then it becomes a simple question
of whose ox is gored. But every cause is fervently
supported by some, eloquently justified by some,
pursued with passion by some. In a way, every war is a
holy war. If we accept Professor Franklin's holiness, how
arc we to reject the holiness of other true believers? In
our view, this course is not morally defensible. We must
do our best to apply one standard across all political
preferences and that standard must not condone
violence on campus.

K. CONCLUSION
Taking into accoutn content, context, delivery, and
audience, did Professor Franklin's two Old Union
speeches include urging and inciting to disruption of
university activities, or threat to persons or property?
Must he have known that this exhortation would be
widely interpreted as immediate advocacy of disruptive
or violent behavior?
1. The situation was risky. Illegal acts had occurred
earlier that day. There was intense resentment toward
the war, the police, and the university; there had been
serious frustration for the "movement" earlier in the
day; bitter political adversaries were present at the rally
and identified by the chairman; protest actions including
coercive and violent possibilities were under discussion;
the police were present on campus; there was a well
known history of violence in similar circumstances at
Stanford. In general, the higher the risk, the less it takes
to trigger coercive and violent behavior.
2. The targets of Professor Franklin's animosity were
quite explicit-the police and the university. He made an
intensive effort in the two speeches to generate further
hostility toward these targets. He provided justification
for coercive and violent behavior toward them, without
specifying precisely what the nature of such acts might
be, leaving that to the judgment and imagination of each
individual or small group.
3. The urging of immediate retaliatory action towards
the police and the university was clear. A great sense of
urgency was conveyed by both the tone and the content
of his remarks. While no detailed blueprint for action
was provided, the necessity for prompt action wis a
strong message. The overall effect was to increase the
likelihood of imminent lawless action.
Taking into account the full context surround his
speeches at the Old Union rally, hte messages he
communicated to his audience, and what he should be
able to judge about the effect of these messages under
the circumstances, we reach the conclusion that
Professor Franklin intentionally urged and incited his
audience to engage in conduct which would disrupt
activities of the University and of members of the
University Community and threaten injury to individuals
an; property.
The Advisory Board thus finds that the charge in No.
10 is sustained.
DISSENTING OPINIONS
Professors Brown and Kennedy, while agreeing with
substantial portions of the majority's account, dissent as
follows:
The majority sustains the charge of incitement
against Professor Franklin citing (1) an extensive
background of material from speeches at this and
other rallies that supply context for his last speech;
(2) Professor Franklin's first speech at this rally,
which also supplies context and reveals relevant
attitudes of his own; and (3) words in the second
speech that constitute, in the majority's view,
sufficiently explicit invitations to do violence against
persons and property.
We dissent regarding some matters of context, as
well as on the finding with respect to Professor
Franklin's own speeches.
In describing the context of the rally, we would
give more weight than does the majority to the
presence of the Roble students and to their impact
upon events in the Old Union Courtyard. The
interaction between the group of Roble moderates
(concerned about the invasion of Laos but not part of
the "movement") and the "movement" group itself
provides a central theme for the rally. Professor
Franklin's own first speech is directed predominantly
to an attenuation of those tensions and to a
reconciliation that would accommodate the new
recruits to "movement" objectives. It is, in essence, a
long argument that political prisoners must not be
forgotten, and that there is a fundamental identity
between the struggle of Asian peoples against U.S.
imperialism and the struggle of oppressed people and
anti-war students against repressive forces at home.
As the majority states, the speech contains a heavy
tone of anger against the police and other forces that,
to Professor Franklin, sumbolize this oppression. We
nevertheless believe it plausible that the speech was
intended to make a group of Stanford students
identify, perhaps for the first time, with oppressed
people; we do not see evidence that Professor
Franklin's intention was to turn them explicitly to
violent actions. In no sense can this first Old Union
speech be regarded as actionable; indeed, the
University administration does not attempt to
persuade us to find against Professor Franklin on the
basis of its content. To the extent that it contains
intensity and anger, and to the extent that these are
directed against the police and the University, the
speech might be said to have added-along with other
speeches at the rally-to the risk that prohibited
conduct might follow. But all agree that nothing in
the content of this speech approaches incitement.
Indeed, we feel that the speech presented, in however
objectionable a style, some legitimate concerns about
the plight of prisoners, the existence of police
brutality, and other significant issues.
Clearly Professor Franklin and other speakers
believed that a major mission of the "movement"
people at the rally was to undertake the "education"
of the rest of the Stanford community. Professor
Franklin's own first speech concludes with a plea that
those present go out to the people "and teach them
what we have learned in the movement," and that
any who are not persuaded should "get up here [ile.
to the microphone] and we should discuss it." At the
conclusion of his speech he testifies that he went over
to discuss the matter further with the Roble group.
The speaker who followed Professor Franklin to the
podium commented that the important thing was to
"go to the dorms, go to the people we want to talk
t0...." A later speaker extends the suggestion by
hoping that those at the rally will go to the dorms
and "rap all night." Recruitment, broadening the base
of the "movement," educating the community: all
these were significant themes in the development o'
the meeting's context. By its relatively stronger
emphasis on the more violent rhetoric, in particular
Professor Franklin's, the majority has decided against
what seems to us a plausible, even persuasive, second
view of the matter.

The content of the second speech, of course, is not
available to us except through the testimony of
witnesses. According to Beyers, Professor Franklin
called for a "people's war against the occupation
army of the police," and he "suggested that people
should go back tot their dormitories, form meetings,
meet in small groups, decide whatever they wanted to
do, to do it as late at night as possible, and to do
things which would bring more of the occupation
here."' Professor Franklin's version in his affidavit is
only slightly different. He, too, calims to have said
that "when confronted with an occupation army we
must respond with the methods of people's war." Me
adds, "I ended by telling people that people's war
meant that they should go back into their
dormitories, organize people into small groups, talk
with them, play football, or whatever, as late into the
night as possible." These differences are not very
substantial; they can easily be accounted for by
differences in recollection.
The majority analyzes these collections of phrases
in such a way that they are strongly persuaded as to
their meaning and that the meaning sustains an
incitement charge, given such other factors as risk.
The logic consists essentially in the elimination of
various attenuative constructions that are more
benign. In our view this interpretation is not
"strongly persuasive." The phrases upon which
attention has been focused are isolated from a
substantial matrix of interstitial speech, the precise
construction of which we do not know, and about
which we must be careful not to draw too confident
appraisals. Two examples will illustrate the point.
First, Professor Franklin says that in the context in
which he used it, "People's war" was clearly indicated
to mean "thoroughly merging with the masses;" he
states that he used the football game as an example of
that kind of tactic. It is significant that virtually all of
the witnesses link the words "people's war" to the
example of the football game. Professor Franklin
states in his affidavit that this was the only exmaple
he used, and the cumulative testimony seems to bear
him out. Second, the phrase "as late into the night as
possible," interpreted by the majority as a call to
militant action by small groups, could equally have
appeared in a context in which it applied primarily to
late dormitory discussions and to legal (though
perhaps risky) methods of taking up the time of the
police. Such an interpretation gain in plausibility
from Professor Franklin's testimony that although he
does not in principle disapprove of trashing, he would
not have urged it on that occasion, both because of
the heavy presence of police on campus that night
and because it would have alienated those new to the
"movement."
The point is that none of these interpretations has
a great deal of certainty about it. The ones we have
just mentioned may be a little less plausible than
those favored by the majority, but only a little less.
The "hard" data on words are so fragmentary, and
depend so much on the kind of context-construction
that is very sensitive to whatever bias the witnesses
may have had, that we find them inadequate to meet
a "strongly persuasive" criterion that Professor
Franklin is guilty as charged by the University
administration.
We are not strongly persuaded by the impressions
of the speech given by various witnesses-as opposed
to actual reconstructions of wording. Such
impressions are especially subject to the bias of
expectations. The differing treatments of Professor
Franklin's account of the football game provide one
example among many. Some witnesses regarded it as
a euphemism for more violent activity, others
regarded it merely as an opportunity for a bad pun,
while still others interpreted it as we would, as an
invitation to occupy the time of the police.
In effect, the majority report argues that Professor
Franklin was employing words well understood to his
audience but not to others. But there is no convincing
evidence that any substantial number of the audience
would have translated his speech into an invitation to
commit violent acts. Each phrase, like "people's
war," has been subject to a number of conflicting
interpretations in the testimony. Furthermore, the
reconstruction of a code depends on one's ability to
capture a reasonably large portion of the message,
and in this instance we have only scattered elements.
Although we think it is quite possible that Professor
Franklin advocated a range of actions some of which
may have been illegal, we do no find the evidence
strongly persuasive that his speech constituted the
advocacy of imminent lawless action.
The majority emphasizes the extremity of the risk
in the situation; we do not disagree with their
evaluation, but we stress more heavily the doubts we
have about the context and the meaning of the words
actually spoken.
to find against Professor Franklin on this charge
might, we believe, force a faculty member addressing
a political rally in the future to guard against possible
cryptic meanings that his speech might convey to a
segment of his audience whenever a situation of high
risk obtains. The social cost of such a prohibition
must be balanced against the benefits to be derived
from being able to prosecute somewhat ambiguous
speech in dangerous situations. We find the costs too
great.
Accordingly, we do not sustain the charge against
Professor Franklin as stated in Paragraph 10.
A. CHARGES
The University Administration's charge concerning
Professor Franklin's conduct during the Old Union
Courtyard rally on February 10th reads as follows:
10. On the eveing of February 10, 1971, beginning at
approximately 8:00 p.m., a rally was held in the Old
Union Courtyard to, among other things, discuss
methods of protesting developments in the war in
Indochina. Over two hundred students and other
persons attended the rally. During the course of the
rally Professor Franklin intentionally urged and
incited students and other persons present to engage
in conduct calculated to disrupt activities of the
University and of members of the University
community and which threatened injury to
individuals and property. Shortly thereafter students
and other persons were assaulted by persons present
at the rally, and later that evening other acts of
violence occurred.
B. NATURE OF THE CHARGE IN PARAGRAPH 10
The charge centers on intentional incitement that
threatened: (1) disruption of University activities, both
individual and institutional; and (2) injury to persons
and property. It implies that a rish of coercive or violent
behavior existed at the time of the rally and that
Professor Franklin further increased the risk by the
content and manner of his participation. In determining
whether the facts fit the charges, the Board must inquite
(1) What is the entire context surrounding the alleged
incitement? (2) What is being communicated to the
audience? (3) What would the speaker judge to be the
effect of his communication on the audience?
C. FINDINGS OF FACT 1. Prominent Themes in the
1. Prominent Themes in the Old Union Rally,
February 10
On Wednesday, February 10 at 8:00 p.m. about 350
people attended a rally in the Old Union Courtyard.
Speakers debated tactics and demands. Professor
Franklin spoke twice. The themes that emerged
prominently in the course of the rally may he
summarized as follows:
a. There was general agreement on opposition to the
war in Southeast Asia and a wish to protest against
American involvement.
b. There was a major difference of opinion on the
scope of demands and of tactics. A contingent of
students from Roble Hall favored a single demand, an
effort to reach out for the broadest possible support
and strict adherence to non-violent tactics. Another
and larger faction favored a broader set of demands,
even at the risk of losing community support; and
they favored a broader range of tactics, including
coercive and violent ones, depending on
circumstances. This distinction between the two
groups was not only apparent in the speeches, but
was emphasized by a KZSU broadcast interview with
representatives of the Roble contingent near the end
of the rally.

c. Five speakers emphasized Stanford's major war
complicity and severe political repression. This
viewpoint may be illustrated with the following
quotation from one of the speakers.
I work at the phone company and I realize that
everyday one out of every two calls that I place
goes from Stanford University or SRI directly to
the Pentagon, to SRI all over the country and all
over the world, and people realize that Stanford
University is integrally linked with Pacific
Telephone Company, that all the business, you
know, that the whole service which Pacific
Telephone puts out is for the benefit of the
financial interest in this area and people who are
against the war, people that I work with who are
against the war, who are very, very angry and
outraged by the expansion of the war into Laos
realize that, because they have brothers, brothers
and uncles and fathers who are over there fighting,
who have been forced to go over there, they don't
have any choice, they can't afford to go to school,
they are forced to be over there. They have
brothers and sisters who are locked up in the
prisons all over America and they realize that
Stanford University, that the kind of research
Stanford does, the kind of money Stanford has,
which controls the black and brown communities
in the mid-peninsula, is a very dangerous thing and
they:re willing to fight against that for their very
survival and I think that the people here should
respect that, should respect the fact that telephone
workers are getting organized, that we're thinking
now about what kind of support demonstration
we can have when Stanford gets itself together and
the issues become clear to the people that
Stanford University is key in the war, key in the
oppression of political prisoners and it's just got to
go. (applause)
d. Eight speakers were very hostile to the police
especially to their presence on campus. Police had
been called to the campus to terminate the
occupation of the Computation Center and had
remained in view of the likelihood of further illegal
acts. It will be recalled that arson and "trashing" had
occurred on the nights of February 6 and 7. Early in
the Old Union rally of February 10, the presence of
police on campus was announced. No witness
testified that a single uniformed policeman entered
the Old Union courtyard, despite the fact that
Professor Franklin, in his affidavit shortly after the
event, said there were many police there. In the
hearing, he corrected this error. Thus, the police were
not visible to the people at the rally, but their
presence on campus was a focus of deep resentment.
They were often referred to as "pigs" and as an
occupation army or occupying forces. In conjunction
with the previous criticism of Stanford's complicity
in the war. the struggle on campus and the struggle in
Southeast Asia were portrayed as different facets of a
single struggle. Parallels were drawn between the

police on campus and imperialist armies in Asia. The
all-one-war theme was emphasized by urging
resistance to the police as analogous to resistance to
occupying forces in Vietnam.
e. On two occasions, members of the Free Campus
Movement were pointed out in a context of hostility,
and were linked to the police on campus.
112. In response to these various instigations, there was
a desire for action — not merely verbal demands, but
concrete, tangible steps to implement them. There
was a clear preference for strong, vivid action, though
some speakers, including those from the Roble
contingent, put their main emphasis on education.
Little reference was made to "strike" in this rally.
The actions mainly preferred by the speakers may be
illustrated by (he following remarks by the chairman:
Okay, I think it's still pretty clear that we want to
keep the demands as they are. Okay, at this point I
think we should go on to specific proposals for
how we act now. We've had a few proposals; one
guy suggested that after the Comp Center thing
today that in order to escalate rather than
de-escalate we should zero in on SRI, Another
person, other people have proposed that we deal
now with the police state that's on this campus
because if we're going to move against the war,
one of the things we have to do to be able to move
against the war in atmosphere where we're not
intimidated by pigs coming through to surround
our meetings and that kind of thing and that one
of the ways to do that is to begin any kind of
action people want to take to get the pigs off this
campus. I think that people should speak to these
proposals and add more proposals that they have.
g. Five speakers explicitly expressed and several
others implicitly expressed anger, using words and
imagery of fighting. Three speakers suggested actions
to embarrass, humiliate, or confront the police,
particularly late at night, while others made more
general comments advocating resistance to
intimidation.
h. Two speakers favored off-campus protests.
2. Professor Franklin's First Speech at Old Union
(Second speech of February 10)
Professor Franklin's first Old Union speech
(Appendix III) began with an effort to persuade the
Roble contingent of the correctness of the majority
position favoring a broad set of demands, including the
freeing of all "political prisoners" and the end of
Stanford's complicity in the war — not merely
immediate withdrawal of US forces from Southeast Asia.
He spoke with concern about people who must spend
time in jail, emphasized solidarity within the
"movement", and opposed betrayal of political
prisoners. Then, in an intense delivery, he said:
And we get very upset when we find our beautiful
campus crawling with pigs who stop and harass
people and rip off and beat half of the people. Well
this is just a very, very mild taste of what life is like in
the black and brown communities of this country
where the pigs come by every night and if you're
young and you're black and brown they stop you and
ask your I.D. and rip you off for suspicion of
burglary and where there are dogs there and where
there's a helicopter overhead and that's part of the
same struggle, and where they shoot you and the pigs
who are here tonight, that's those San Jose pigs have
just mundered a black brother in San Jose, the same
San Jose pig just murdered a black brother down in
San Jose and that's normal life down there. People
murdered in the streets and that's why we call them
pigs. Although it's a little unfair to the four-footed
variety, because they don't do that kind of thing.
[Applause]
Continuing to speak in the same delivery, he next
alluded to the Black Panther party's leadership and made
the following remarks:
And the Black Panther Party teaches us that the
people of Laos and the people of South Vietnam are
not another separate nation state. That they are our
brothers and sisters because they are just other
oppressed communities of the same empire. The
Black Panther Party teaches us that today while this
meeting was going on brothers and sisters, blood
brothers and sisters of us, were killed in Laos, in
Vietnam and Cambodia, in the black and brown
communities of the United States of America. They
teach us this is all one struggle and the
interconnections are every place. Even if you thing
about what Laos is all about; what is the chief cash
export of Laos, who knows?
[crowd | Opium, heroin?
Opium, all the heroin on this coast comes from Laos.
And it's all brought in by the CIA. It is grown and
harvested by Meo tribesmen and flown out on Air
America, the CIA airline. And it is brought in to this
state as part of the oppression, particularly of black
and brown people here, but also of white youth. . . .
(brief KZSU interruption). . . . and is just as much a
part of the counter-insurgency system as the pigs are
war on this campus.
He urged that others be taught about such evils as
Stanford's complicity in the war and the necessity to
free all political prisoners. He expressed the view that
the student strike a year earlier had been a success. He
closed by restating the necessity to continue the struggle
to win others to his viewpoint.
3. Professor Franklin 's Second Speech at the Old Union
(Third speech of February 10)
This speech lasted about two minutes, but because
KZSU was conducting an interview at the time, it can
only be heard in the background on the tape recording.
The pitch of his voice is high, with only a few of his
words and intermittent responses from the crowd being
clearly discernible on the tape. The crowd responses
increase toward the end. The content of the speech can
only be reconstructed from testimony, but this poses
little difficulty. There is substantial agreement as to
what Professor Franklin said amont his witnesses, the
University Administration's witnesses, and Professor
Franklin's own affidavit and testimony. The differences,
as might be expected, are in the interpretation of his
speech.
a. Professor Franklin's interpretation of his second
Old Union speech.
In his affidavit he describes the speech as follows:
A number of speakers at the meeting rose to describe
specific instances of police harassment and brutality.
Several proposed that we go to the dormitories to
discuss die police state on campus and what to do
about it, as well as what to do about the situation in
Southeast Asia. One speaker said that many squads of
six to eight police were roaming the campus, and that
if we marched to the dorms some of these squads
would follow us, and that it would be a good
education for people in the dorms to see them. Two
speakers said that the police were attempting to keep
people from knowing what was happening, and that
they had temporarily confiscated a walkie-talkie from
a KZSU reporter and threatened to arrest him for
listening to police frequencies. Another speaker said
that if we march in one group it will be too easy for
the police and we should confuse them by dividing
into many groups. Another speaker siad "there are
pigs all over this campus and we have to show people
who the pigs are and who the people are, and we
cannot tolerate a police state here or any place else."
It was generally agreed that we would go back to the
dormitories to build support for the strike and to
raise consciousness about the police occupation of
the campus. I rose to speak again. 1 said that it was
unfortunate that the people from Roble had not felt
that they were really part of the movement and that
it was necessary to go into the dorms and discuss all
their questions further. I said that it was very
important for people to understand that this is a
united front, and that people will respond on
different levels of action and with different degrees of
consciousness to the war. I said that it was important
for people to accept these different levels, and that if
people are sincere it is correct for them to do their
own thing, to do whatever they think best, and that
that is how all of us learn. I pointed out that with the
police saturation on campus, however, it would be
suicide for people to engage in any militant action in
a large group. I said that we must learn from the
peoples of Southeast Asia that when confronted with
an occupation army, we must respond with the
methods of people's war. Then 1 explained that this
means thoroughly merging with the people. I gave
one and only one example of what I meant by this. I
said that I had been told that a few nights before,
during a similar police occupation, several people had
begun a game of touch football. They moved from
place to place on the campus, forcing the police to
follow them. Several police complained to them that
they were supposed to be in fixed positions, and that
this was preventing them from maintaining those
positions. Finally, when the football game
appraoched the area of the computation center, the
police had asked to examine the football. I said that I
wasn't sure whether this was because they thought it
was a bomb or because they just wanted to examine a
real pigskin. I ended by teliing people that people's

war meant that they should go back to the
dormitories, organize people into small groups, and
talk with them, or play football, or whatever, as late
into the night as possible.
b. Hearing witnesses' interpretation of Professor
Franklin's second Old Union Speech
(i) Administration witnesses-There is considerable
agreement among administration and defense
witnesses on the content (though not on the
interpretation) of this speech. This can be
illustrated by comparing Professor Franklin's
version of his speech after the event given above
with testimony of Robert Beyers, of the Stanford
News Service. He testified that he had attended
many rallies at Stanford over a period of years,
and had often heard Professor Franklin speak. He
described Professor Franklin's speech on this
occasion as very critical of the police. He testified
that Professor Franklin called specifically for
people's war against the occupation army-i.e., the
police. Professor Franklin suggested that people go
back to their dormitories, meet in small groups,
decide to do whatever they wanted to do as late at
night as possible so as to bring more police onto
the campus to help out their brethren in other
communities. At this point, in Beyer's view, the
nature of the meeting changed dramatically,
leading him to expect that illegal or disruptive
incidents would follow. Immediately after the
speech, the rally ended and Beyers said three FCM
students were badly beaten by some of the Old
Union crowd. Under cross-examination, he
indicated that Professor Franklin did not specify
the exact nature of the violent acts to be carried
out.
Brimelow felt there was much tension and
restlessness in the meeting, and that the crowd got
very excited as a result of the speech. After the
speech he saw the crowd stream off in all
directions and he heard "war cries" (something of
this sort is audible on the tape recording). Almas
heard the speech from the balcony of the Women's
Clubhouse, thought it was impassioned and was
startled by it. Almas had heard Professor Franklin
speak about a dozen times but had never heard
him encourage this level of action. Almas felt
Professor Franklin had not been as careful as
usual, and the witness had the expectation that
there was going to be violence.
R. Jacobs, also on the balcony, thought
Professor Franklin had made inflammatory
statements. Grav felt Professor Franklin was
playing the role of a leader giving instructions to
the group in a serious vein.
(ii) Professor Franklin's witnesses
Witnesses for Professor Franklin heard phrases
similar to those reported by Administration
witnesses but to some extent interpreted them
differently. This is well illustrated by an affidavit
of Bennion, who also testified at the hearing.
. . .It became clear that there was some opposition
forming, basically between going back into the
dorms for further discussion and staying in the
area the police were patrolling in order to show
them that the occupation of the campus would
not be tolerated. At this point Professor Franklin
spoke and tried to explain that these two
tendencies were not really opposed, but could be
carried out at the same time and could mutually
serve each other. He discussed at length the tenets
of "people's war" which is based on the concept
of a united front. In essence this means that
everyone can contribute what they can to a
movement, with one person's greater contribution
or risk should not be seen as invalidating another's.
This leads to many levels of action which mutually
reinforce other levels, rather than detracting from
each other. He pointed out that in advanced stages
of "people's war" such as in Vietnam, many
different levels of action are still employed, not
merely the military level of the National
Liberation Front. He also stated that in the
present case it would be suicidal to engage in any
large-scale militant action. He gave one example of
what "people's war" would mean that evening.
Some people could go back to the dorms and
persuade others to join the movement, while
others could play touch football in the area being
patrolled by the police to show that they were not
intimidated by the occupation of the campus. At
no time did say or even remotely imply or suggest
that he advocated a militant action that evening,
nor did his in-depth analysis of "people's war"
make such an interpretation possible for any
person who had ears to hear and a mind to think.
These witnesses were much preoccupied with the
presence of police. They expressed fear and anger,
and were inclined to expect trouble with the
police that night. They were determined not to be
intimidated by the police, and to harass them
where possible, by and large, Professor Franklin
was seen as speaking to these issues in a way that
fostered resistance but not violence. His task was
seen as uniting the people against the common
foe: putting together the university's complicity in
the war, the linkage of the struggle here iwth the
struggle in Asia, the necessity to respond
vigorously on many levels of action. For example
Pat Faulkner testified that he understood
Professor Franklin to mean that all levels of
actions are all right, even writing letters, and that
it is necessary to wage war on many levels to win.
He felt that Professor Franklin gave a speech in
which he approved a wide range of actions,
including trashing, but did not emphasize violent
responses.
Professor Franklin's witnesses gave the term
"people's war" a variety of emphases, but the
words were generally udnerstood to have a range
of connotations. These included (1) harassment of
police; (2) taking control of our own lives; (3)
brining the war home; (4) strike; (5) learning from
the peoples of Southeast Asia; (6) attention to our
war here, not only the one in Indochina; (7) doing
whatever conscience dictates, which might include
trashing; (8) determinationnot to be intimidated
by police, not to shrink from threats.
4. Post-Rally Events
In the course of the hearing, on October 28, the
Advisory Board made the following statement on
post-rally events:
With respect to the Old Union courtyard speech, the
Board is now in a position to give its view of the value
of testimony about events following the rally. We
admitted testimony on these matters because the

University Administration, in order to demonstrate
that there was a risk that prohibited conduct would
follow the speech, introduced evidence for the
limited purpose of showing that such conduct did in
fact occur. We now feel that this
evidence concerning the light on White Plaza, the
alleged false alarms, the shootings, and other
incidents-need not be rebutted. We have reached this
decision because, in our view, the existence of risk is
adequately shown by pre-and co-existing conditions,
and does not require demonstration by referring to
subsequent events.
It is a matter ol record that untoward events of the
sort mentioned above did in fact occur that night,
beginning immediately after the rally. We limited
testimony on these matters for two reasons: (1) the
charges did not contain any references to Professor
Franklin's post-rally conduct; (2) we had good reason to
believe that significant risk existed without reference to
post-rally events.
D. DEFENSES AND THEIR ANALYSES
1. Principal Points made in Defense Against Charges in
Paragraph 10.
Professor Franklin, in testimony and argument, made
several points in defending against these charges:
a. The speeches were brief, especially the second one
at the very end of the evening's program. Such brief
speeches could hardly have had the impact ascribed
to them by the University Administration.
b. It was difficult to hear the speeches. Except for
those near the speakers, consisting to a considerable
extent of Professor Franklin's close associates,
audibility was a problem. The testimony of several
witnesses who were not close to the speaker was
challenged by Professor Franklin.
c. What could be heard was innocuous. It was meant
to inform, educate, and persuade to a political
viewpoint. It was not intended to incite, inflame, or
cause violence.
d. Most of the people at the rally had already decided
what they were going to do by the time Professor
Franklin gave his second and closing spcech. In this
speech, he essentially gave them a political rationale
for what they had already decided to do.
e. Even if his speeches were taken as inflamatory by
some members of his audience, they were well
justified by Stanford's condition as a fascist and
imperialist institution, and by the presence on the
campus of an occupation army consisting of police
who frequently kill black and brown people, and
indeed had just killed a black brother.
112. In any event. Professor Franklin should be able to
give such speeches with impunity, since all speech
should be considered to be constitutionally
protected, even where appreciable risks are posed.
g. If speech is to be restricted at all, it must be done
within a very narrow band. Such a band could not
include general prescritpions for hostile actiona or
even for violence. Specific prescriptions for violent
acts would be required, and tchse must be confirmed
by specific evidence that individuals had been moved
to carry out those same specific acts by the speech in
question.
2. Analysis of the Defenses
The length of the speeches is much less important
than other characteristics: content, delivery, context,
audience. In any event, the first speech was not
particularly brief, and the second was in a crucial
position: at the very end of the rally.
In regard to audibility, we conclude that those who
wanted to hear the speeches could do so. This is
admitted by some defense witnesses, and to a certain
extent by Professor Franklin himself who testified that
at the time he felt he could reach those who really
wanted to hear him. The main variable seems to have
been attention; some members of the audience paid
close attention to his speeches, others little. Among
those who did pay attention, there is considerable
agreement as to content, though witnesses differe as to
interpretation.
There is no meaningful way to consider Professor
Franklin's behavior in the Old Union rally without a
firm grasp of the context in which the rally occurred.
The mood that evening was tense and angry. After the
passage of so many months it is difficult to recapture the
sense of anxious expectation that characterized the
campus that evening. The Old Union rally followed
several days of continually escalating events: threats of
coercion, actual coercion, arson, police action, and
hostile confrontations on campus. We have already
summarized recurrent themes of the immediately
preceding rallies at Dinkelspiel on February 9th and
White Plaza on February 10th. As the Board concluded
in its statement of October 28th, cited above, substantial
risk existed on the Stanford campus before and during
the Old Union rally.
There are additional aspects of the context for the
Old Union rally that deserve consideration. Professor
Franklin rose to speak as a well-known and respected
leader of the "movement". Defense witnesses testified
that he was viewed with admiration and his ideas were
taken seriously. Professor Franklin testified that the
time of these events in February was a crucial one for
the "movement", a time when the "movement" might
transcend itself.
Testimony in the hearing, mainly from defense
witnesses, brought out the fact that this occasion stirred
memories of other similar occasions which also provide
meaningful context for the Old Union rally. The events
approximately a year earlier at the time of the military
action in Cambodia came up repeatedly. Indeed, one of
Professor Franklin's main contentions is that he was
attempting to foster a "Cambodia-type strike". A
number of defense witnesses, including especially
Braumstein and Professor Franklin, discussed the events
of the Cambodian period and compared them with the
events during the Laotian invasion. It became clear that
the protest events of the Cambodian period, viewed with
approbation, included a spectrum of activities, some of
which were nonviolent, some of which were patently
coercive, and some of which were overtly violent. The
coercive and violent activities included: forcible blocking
of entries into buildings for sustained periods, large-scale
breaking of windows, bombings, and lire bombings.
The Old Union rally also brought back recollections
of other night rallies held in similar circumstances,
especially when police were on campus, not only during
the Cambodian protest but at other times in the past few

years as well. There lias been a clear tendency for such
occasions to be followed by violent behavior. This fact
was knwon to Professor Franklin, since several of the
defense witnesses commented on his participation in
these protests.
Two of the major themes permeating the three rallies
of February 9th and February 10, advanced by Professor
Franklin and many of his close associates, are especially
pertinent to his closing speech at the Old Union rally:
(1) all-one-war; (2) multiple-levels-of-action.
(1) All-one-war is the theme linking the struggle at
Stanford with the struggle in Southeast Asia. It is the
heart of the problem, emphasized by Professor Franklin
in his speeches, affidavit, testimony and argument.
The speeches attack Stanford's war complicity, draw
parallels between racial oppression in America and Asia,
and emphasize the necessity to learn from the peoples of
Southeast Asia how to resist oppression at home. By the
end of the Old Union rally, the cumulative weight of
these linkages suggests that one way to fight the war
now is to fight the police and administration here.
In his testimony Professor Franklin says:
. . .what I say there basically is that we can't separate
the war in Southeast Asia from the war at home. Now
on all these points, all four of these speeches that
were given in this 24-hour period -that is from the
night belore in Dink through this—all four of those
speeches are essentially saying-are saying the same
thing. They're expressing a set of ideas which 1
consider the most important ideas. . . . And then this
seems to me the most essential thing, both in this
speech and in the second speech, to try to show
people just as clearly as possible that in fact that
occupation army of police that was on the campus
was part of the same war that was being waged in
Southeast Asia and that was being waged in the Black
ghettos and in the barrios of the United States.
This point is further clarified in Braunstein's defense
testimony, under cross-examination:
And the people fighting the United States in South
east Asia are fighting the same battles that people
fighting the police.. .who were on campus in the Old
Union Courtyard one and two of the year before and
are fighting the same battle as the people trying to get
rotten research off this campus and are fighting all
these battles, and they're all the same battles.
Then if it's all one battle, the word 'opposing forces'
relates to all the people on the other side in this big
global battle.
I've later learned that that is what's known as
'People's War'; is part of what is known as 'People's
War'.
Q. I take it in the context in which you were speaking
you at least included the police in that reference?
A. Oh, certainly. Especially that night, yes. I also
included the University administrators.
(2) The war is to be waged with the
multiple-levels-of-action formula. Each person is to do
his own thing, whatever he can, whatever he thinks best,
using his imagination to find ways of resisting the
occupying forces. This theme has a familiar ring from its
recurrence during the preceding few days. We have
earlier quoted Braunstein's remarks on this subject at the
Dinkelspiel rally on February 9th. It is clear from a
variety of references in several rallies that this
formulation is meant to advocate a spectrum of activities
which might include contacting Congressmen,
persuading students in dormitories, being active on
campus at night, refusing to be intimidated by the
police, blocking doorways, occupying buildings,
breaking windows, putting the computer out of service
for a long time, destroying the computer, or doing other
things for which one might not wish to "take credit."
In his testimony Professor Franklin said he felt
impelled at the end of the rally to speak about:
. . .that action that was going to be taken, which
was essentially gpomg back to the dorms to talk
about the war in Southeast Asia and about the
police occupation of the campus and—for people
to be there and exercise their right. That it was
important for somebody to explain to people that
that action itself was, you know, just as legitimate
a part of this war as, say, the armed self defense of
the Vietnamese people or the people of Laos. . ..
And in that speech I mentioned using the methods
of people's war. And at that point I was speaking
very directly to the people there, I think, who
considered themselves revolutionaries. Because I
knew that they would have a basic understanding
of what that meant, and that that phrase summed
up a whole lot of experience.
Braunstein testified for Professor Franklin, 'There are
all sorts of actions on various levels, including people
breaking windows with rocks and people burning down
buildings, as yet unidentified people burning down
buildings, and so on, that sometimes have the same goals
in mind and sometimes don't."
Significant in this context was the term "people's
war." It was interpreted by various witnesses in different
ways. It seems to include a wide range of suggested
actions, some of which are nonviolent, and some of
which are violent. It can clearly include guerilla warfare.
Some witnesses interpreted this as its primary meaning,
others gave this meaning less prominence. Maoist
writings use the term "People's war" for all action, in
particular guerilla warfare, in which the warriors merge
with the masses. Professor Franklin acknowledge in his
testimony that guerilla warfare, including assassination
and bombings, is one important component of people's
war, but denied it was the one he had in mind when he
used the term in his spcech. Defense testimony indicated
that the concept of people's war extends beyond
military action, but did not deny that it prominently
includes military action. Given the repeated explicit
linkages of the struggle against the police occupation
army here and the war in Southeast Asia, in the context
of recent night violence on campus and an afternoon of
police confrontation, it is difficult to believe that most
listeners would be insensitive to the violent connotations
of this term. Why repeatedly use warlike terms and
images—such as Professor Franklin's "war on this
campus" if peaceful actions are intended?
Similar considerations apply to Professor Franklin's
advocacy of action to be taken against the occupation
army in small groups. It is clear that small groups can
conduct dormitory discussions and other peacefully
persuasive activities, and that this did in fact occur,
though we learned very little about the focus of such
discussions e.g., whether they were intended to foster
particular nonviolent or violent tactics of protest. In any
event, such dormitory discussions may well have been
one of the meanings of his alleged recommendation for
reliance upon affinity groups. He advised against mass
militant action, meaning essentially violent
confrontation with the police, on tactical grounds. Such
action was not feasible because the police were too
strong. It is alos clear that the smaller groups could
engage in violent activities as has often happened in
similar circumstances at Stanford during the past few
years-i.e., following night rallies permeated by angry
speech. Two days earlier, February 8, after a night of
"trashing", a sheet was distributed at a "movement"
rally under the title "Do It!" It endorsed the previous
night's activity and called for more of the same,
indicating that tight affinity groups can be helpful in
doing whatever people want to do.
Whatever the activities that Professor Franklin was
urging upon individuals and small groups, it appears that
lateness of the hour was positively desirable-"as late
into the night as possible". In view of the behavior ot
some individuals and affinity groups at Stanford in
similar circumstances during the past few years, it is
reasonable to suppose that lateness might be useful as a
cover for violent activities—though it could of course be
used for peaceful activities as well.
Professor Franklin's two Old Union speeches were
given in a hostile tone. This is apparent in the content of
the first speech, and the effect is heightened when one
listens to the tape and hears his tone of voice. Even
when the speech is briefly interrupted by a KZSU
interview, the angry tone and the emotional crowd
response can be clearly detected. Although thesecond
speech is covered over by a KZSU interview, similar
indications are available from the tape and from
testimony.
In the course of the hearing, both Professor Franklin
and Braunstein indicated that ambiguity about tactics
was desirable to these rally speeches because KZSU was
broadcasting them and the police would presumably
have tape recordings. To advocate violent tactics openly
in this context would have exposed the speaker to later
sanctions. We were informed in the hearing by Professor
Franklin of his "political decision" to keep his position
at Stanford, hence caution about open calls for
"revolutionary violence".
Thus, we are faced with a difficult problem: how to
interpret speech deliberately given in ambiguous terms.
But we have seen already that considerable clarification
emerges from a close examination of the text, from the
full context provided by preceding events, and from the
way in which the speech was delivered. In essence,
Professor Franklin came into a combustible situation,
focused hostility on certain targets, intensified existing
hostility toward those targets, and urged a spectrum of
actions against them: some peaceful, some coercive,
some violent. We must now turn our attention to his
audience in order to inquire whether they were likely to
understand him and whether Professor Franklin must
have expected the risk of prohibited conduct to be
increased by his behavior.
The tone and content of Professor Franklin's
speeches must have been particularly significant for two
groups: 1) people in the movement; 2) people who are
violence-prone for whatever reason. In respect to the
first, these are people who are responsive to Professor
Franklin by virtue of past association, respect,
dedication, and sharing of common goals. They tend to
understand the nuances of his speech, as was evident at
the hearing itself. As for the second grou, it is well
known that public meetings characterized by intense
anger and hints of violence tend to attract, both at the
meeting and via media coverage, individuals who are
drawn to violence for a variety of reasons, not
necessarily political. Whatever the reason for their
susceptibility to violence, they tend to find such
occasions exciting. They may be induced by angry
rhetoric to commit acts of gravity, particularly in the
context of recent examples of violent behavior.
Professor Franklin testified that he was aware of the
long-term, bitter antagonism between Venceremos and
FCM; and he was aware of the immediate, clearly
expressed hostility toward the small FCM group at the
rally. The presence of these mutually hostile groups at
the rally certainly added to the risk. The use of violent
rhetoric in such circumstances increased the probability
of attack and counter-attack.
We think that "movement" people were capable of
understanding the messages. We refer here to familiar
connotations understood by a group sharing common
intersts and values. For example, reference to "militant
action on campus" in 1971 is understood by many
people to mean "trashing " which in turn is understood
to mean "window-breaking." These are not the only
connotations of the terms, nor are they understood by
everyone who comes on campus. A few years ago, the
terms did not have these connotations. But common
usage in concrete situations has led to a widely shared
understanding.
Those devoted to the "movement" had a rich
refresher course in such terms during the rallies of the
preceding few days which we have already summarized.
Professor Franklin is explicit in his testimony that he
was aiming his remarks specifically at them, wanting
primarily to be un derstood by them. Braunstein
testified that there is special communication within the
"movement" and pointed out that Professor Franklin
referred to "us" at the rally. But the defense, in effect,
asks us to believe that, on the night of February 10,
individuals in the "movement" failed to understand the
coercive and violent connotations of phrases like "war
on this campus", taking action on multiple levels to
resist oppression here, and "we must learn from the
peoples of Southeast Asia that when confronted with an
occupation army, we must respond with the methods of
people's war". The defense puts forwards its bland
interpretation of such phrases even though they were
expressed in a very angry tone and in a context of
profound hostility toward the university by a respected
leader who generally approves coercive and violent
tactics in campus disputes (though he denies he
advocated them on this occasion). We must therefore
examine possible reasons why the audience might not
have detected the menacing connotations of his remarks
on the evening of February 10.
From the testimony in the hearing, we do not believe
members of the "movement" were obtuse; nor is there
anything credible in the record to suggest that they were
in such a conciliatory mood that his angry rhetoric failed
to rcach them. Were the "movement" members of
Professor Franklin's audience so concerned with trying
to win over the Roble group that they rejected all

coercive and violent connotations of his remarks? This
possibility deserves further consideration.
During the rally, "movement" people in control of
the meeting showed little consideration for the feelings
ol the Roble students. Indeed, Professor Franklin seems
to have been concerned about this situation, since he
devoted a good deal of his first speech to persuading the
Roble group to accept the "movement's" view of the
situation. As a Roble speaker made clear in the KZSU
interview, the difference between the Roble contingent
and the "movement" was not only one of demands
(narrow vs. broad) but of tactics (non-violent vs.
violent). In this episode, Professor Franklin
demonstrated his authority as a leader of the
"movement" when he easily stopped the flow of the
meeting, re-opened the question, made a major speech,
and got a re-vote.
In his way, Professor Franklin was trying to persuade
the Roble contingent to link up with the "movement" in
a united front, at least for the moment. His way of
undertaking this persuasion was itself inflamatory. He
made assertions of such hostile content in such an angry
manner regarding the University and the police that,
whatever their effect on the Roble group, they must
surely have intensified the resentment of many persons
favorable to the "movement" and thereby raised the
probability of violent actions later. We have earlier
quoted a portion of his first Old Union speech pertinent
to this point. Finally, his do-your-own-thing formula
permitted some encouragement for Roble students to
take peaceful actions and still leave room for
encouragement of "militant" actions by the
"movement".
This brings us again to one of the central themes in
the entire case. At Old Union as at White Plaza, the
actions urged by Professor Franklin were not exclusively
coercive or violent. He advocated a wide range of protest
actions: some peaceful, some coercive, some violent. If a
person removes valuable merchandise from a store,
paying for half, but not paying for the other half, is he
culpable for the part he stole? We believe that the
presence of peaceful recommendations cannot immunize
a person from sanctions if he has urged imminent
coercion and violence as well.
Once again, as at White Plaza, Professor Franklin was
the final speaker, and once again his speech was
promptly followed by events of a disruptive, coercive or
violent nature. The probability of this occurring by
chance is very small. At the least, it reflects his
leadership position in the "movement" and the riskiness
of those situations in which he spoke. He cannot avoid
the conclusion that his pseeches, the last on each
occasion, increased the probability that illegal acts
would follow the two rallies.
In an earlier section on "Fundamental Issues and
Standards", we have indicated that the University must
have the right to put some constraints on speech in
dangerous circumstances, but only with great caution.
This applies to acts of incitement to imminent lawless
action that arc likely to produce such action. "Lawless"
in the university context includes state or local laws, the
Policy on Campus Disruptions or other university
regulations, or common-law understandings of
professorial responsibility.
In judging the applicability of this standard to the
present charge, we have been guided by these questions:
(1) What is the entire context surrounding the alleged
incitement? (2) What was conmunicated to the
audience? (3) What would the speiker judge to be the
effect of his communication on the audience?
Since we wish to sustain the university's vital
tradition of fostering free expression in its widest
diversity, we are exceedingly cautious in considering
possible constraints on speech. If such constraints are
ever to be invoked, they must be reserved for extreme
situations. We are asking whether the context here was
that of a highly combustible situation, whether the
speaker gave an inflammatory message in that context,
and whether the speaker had good reason to anticipate
lhat his message would increase the risk of imminent
lawless action. If indeed we find that the speaker issued
a call to violence, he is not protected by having issued it
in euphemistic jargon. Such a call may be quite as
effective as one issued in more stark terms. In any event,
the language used here was hardly occult.
Although Professor Franklin's witnesses were inclined
to protect him by minimizing their understanding of
coercive and violent connotations in his speeches, they
did not exclude such connotations—nor did he. The
difference between them and administration witnesses
was mainly one of emphasis. In the spectrum of
activities advocated by Professof Franklin, the defense
emphasized the legal end, whereas the administration
emphasized the illegal end.
In our detailed analysis of the context for his Old
Union speeches, we have determined that persons active
in the "movement" must have been quite familiar with
the coercive and violent connotations of Professor
Franklin's phrases, that they were responsive to such
connotations, and that Professor Franklin must have
been aware of these facts.
Finally, we must consider the line of defense that,
even if Professor Franklin were considered to have
carried out such an incitement, he would nevertheless be
justified by his perception of Stanford as a fascist
institution playing an important role in an imperialist
war.
We recognize that Professor Franklin is pressing for
reform in important areas of social concern. Can this
justify coercive behavior in campus disputes, or the
fostering of a climate of violence on campus? Once any
person is granted this privilege in the name of a good
cause, we must grant it also to others who feel they have
worthy aims. When these rights conflict, as they
inevitably must, are we to condone low-grade guerilla
warfare on campus? If we deny to others what we grant
to Professor Franklin, we have adopted a double
standard: coercion and violence in the university may be
condoned if we approve its aims, but restricted if we
disapprove its aims. Then it becomes a simple question
of whose ox is gored. But every cause is fervently
supported by some, eloquently justified by some,
pursued with passion by some. In a way, every war is a
holy war. If we accept Professor Franklin's holiness, how
arc we to reject the holiness of other true believers? In
our view, this course is not morally defensible. We must
do our best to apply one standard across all political
preferences and that standard must not condone
violence on campus.

K. CONCLUSION
Taking into accoutn content, context, delivery, and
audience, did Professor Franklin's two Old Union
speeches include urging and inciting to disruption of
university activities, or threat to persons or property?
Must he have known that this exhortation would be
widely interpreted as immediate advocacy of disruptive
or violent behavior?
1. The situation was risky. Illegal acts had occurred
earlier that day. There was intense resentment toward
the war, the police, and the university; there had been
serious frustration for the "movement" earlier in the
day; bitter political adversaries were present at the rally
and identified by the chairman; protest actions including
coercive and violent possibilities were under discussion;
the police were present on campus; there was a well
known history of violence in similar circumstances at
Stanford. In general, the higher the risk, the less it takes
to trigger coercive and violent behavior.
2. The targets of Professor Franklin's animosity were
quite explicit-the police and the university. He made an
intensive effort in the two speeches to generate further
hostility toward these targets. He provided justification
for coercive and violent behavior toward them, without
specifying precisely what the nature of such acts might
be, leaving that to the judgment and imagination of each
individual or small group.
3. The urging of immediate retaliatory action towards
the police and the university was clear. A great sense of
urgency was conveyed by both the tone and the content
of his remarks. While no detailed blueprint for action
was provided, the necessity for prompt action wis a
strong message. The overall effect was to increase the
likelihood of imminent lawless action.
Taking into account the full context surround his
speeches at the Old Union rally, hte messages he
communicated to his audience, and what he should be
able to judge about the effect of these messages under
the circumstances, we reach the conclusion that
Professor Franklin intentionally urged and incited his
audience to engage in conduct which would disrupt
activities of the University and of members of the
University Community and threaten injury to individuals
an; property.
The Advisory Board thus finds that the charge in No.
10 is sustained.
DISSENTING OPINIONS
Professors Brown and Kennedy, while agreeing with
substantial portions of the majority's account, dissent as
follows:
The majority sustains the charge of incitement
against Professor Franklin citing (1) an extensive
background of material from speeches at this and
other rallies that supply context for his last speech;
(2) Professor Franklin's first speech at this rally,
which also supplies context and reveals relevant
attitudes of his own; and (3) words in the second
speech that constitute, in the majority's view,
sufficiently explicit invitations to do violence against
persons and property.
We dissent regarding some matters of context, as
well as on the finding with respect to Professor
Franklin's own speeches.
In describing the context of the rally, we would
give more weight than does the majority to the
presence of the Roble students and to their impact
upon events in the Old Union Courtyard. The
interaction between the group of Roble moderates
(concerned about the invasion of Laos but not part of
the "movement") and the "movement" group itself
provides a central theme for the rally. Professor
Franklin's own first speech is directed predominantly
to an attenuation of those tensions and to a
reconciliation that would accommodate the new
recruits to "movement" objectives. It is, in essence, a
long argument that political prisoners must not be
forgotten, and that there is a fundamental identity
between the struggle of Asian peoples against U.S.
imperialism and the struggle of oppressed people and
anti-war students against repressive forces at home.
As the majority states, the speech contains a heavy
tone of anger against the police and other forces that,
to Professor Franklin, sumbolize this oppression. We
nevertheless believe it plausible that the speech was
intended to make a group of Stanford students
identify, perhaps for the first time, with oppressed
people; we do not see evidence that Professor
Franklin's intention was to turn them explicitly to
violent actions. In no sense can this first Old Union
speech be regarded as actionable; indeed, the
University administration does not attempt to
persuade us to find against Professor Franklin on the
basis of its content. To the extent that it contains
intensity and anger, and to the extent that these are
directed against the police and the University, the
speech might be said to have added-along with other
speeches at the rally-to the risk that prohibited
conduct might follow. But all agree that nothing in
the content of this speech approaches incitement.
Indeed, we feel that the speech presented, in however
objectionable a style, some legitimate concerns about
the plight of prisoners, the existence of police
brutality, and other significant issues.
Clearly Professor Franklin and other speakers
believed that a major mission of the "movement"
people at the rally was to undertake the "education"
of the rest of the Stanford community. Professor
Franklin's own first speech concludes with a plea that
those present go out to the people "and teach them
what we have learned in the movement," and that
any who are not persuaded should "get up here [ile.
to the microphone] and we should discuss it." At the
conclusion of his speech he testifies that he went over
to discuss the matter further with the Roble group.
The speaker who followed Professor Franklin to the
podium commented that the important thing was to
"go to the dorms, go to the people we want to talk
t0...." A later speaker extends the suggestion by
hoping that those at the rally will go to the dorms
and "rap all night." Recruitment, broadening the base
of the "movement," educating the community: all
these were significant themes in the development o'
the meeting's context. By its relatively stronger
emphasis on the more violent rhetoric, in particular
Professor Franklin's, the majority has decided against
what seems to us a plausible, even persuasive, second
view of the matter.

The content of the second speech, of course, is not
available to us except through the testimony of
witnesses. According to Beyers, Professor Franklin
called for a "people's war against the occupation
army of the police," and he "suggested that people
should go back tot their dormitories, form meetings,
meet in small groups, decide whatever they wanted to
do, to do it as late at night as possible, and to do
things which would bring more of the occupation
here."' Professor Franklin's version in his affidavit is
only slightly different. He, too, calims to have said
that "when confronted with an occupation army we
must respond with the methods of people's war." Me
adds, "I ended by telling people that people's war
meant that they should go back into their
dormitories, organize people into small groups, talk
with them, play football, or whatever, as late into the
night as possible." These differences are not very
substantial; they can easily be accounted for by
differences in recollection.
The majority analyzes these collections of phrases
in such a way that they are strongly persuaded as to
their meaning and that the meaning sustains an
incitement charge, given such other factors as risk.
The logic consists essentially in the elimination of
various attenuative constructions that are more
benign. In our view this interpretation is not
"strongly persuasive." The phrases upon which
attention has been focused are isolated from a
substantial matrix of interstitial speech, the precise
construction of which we do not know, and about
which we must be careful not to draw too confident
appraisals. Two examples will illustrate the point.
First, Professor Franklin says that in the context in
which he used it, "People's war" was clearly indicated
to mean "thoroughly merging with the masses;" he
states that he used the football game as an example of
that kind of tactic. It is significant that virtually all of
the witnesses link the words "people's war" to the
example of the football game. Professor Franklin
states in his affidavit that this was the only exmaple
he used, and the cumulative testimony seems to bear
him out. Second, the phrase "as late into the night as
possible," interpreted by the majority as a call to
militant action by small groups, could equally have
appeared in a context in which it applied primarily to
late dormitory discussions and to legal (though
perhaps risky) methods of taking up the time of the
police. Such an interpretation gain in plausibility
from Professor Franklin's testimony that although he
does not in principle disapprove of trashing, he would
not have urged it on that occasion, both because of
the heavy presence of police on campus that night
and because it would have alienated those new to the
"movement."
The point is that none of these interpretations has
a great deal of certainty about it. The ones we have
just mentioned may be a little less plausible than
those favored by the majority, but only a little less.
The "hard" data on words are so fragmentary, and
depend so much on the kind of context-construction
that is very sensitive to whatever bias the witnesses
may have had, that we find them inadequate to meet
a "strongly persuasive" criterion that Professor
Franklin is guilty as charged by the University
administration.
We are not strongly persuaded by the impressions
of the speech given by various witnesses-as opposed
to actual reconstructions of wording. Such
impressions are especially subject to the bias of
expectations. The differing treatments of Professor
Franklin's account of the football game provide one
example among many. Some witnesses regarded it as
a euphemism for more violent activity, others
regarded it merely as an opportunity for a bad pun,
while still others interpreted it as we would, as an
invitation to occupy the time of the police.
In effect, the majority report argues that Professor
Franklin was employing words well understood to his
audience but not to others. But there is no convincing
evidence that any substantial number of the audience
would have translated his speech into an invitation to
commit violent acts. Each phrase, like "people's
war," has been subject to a number of conflicting
interpretations in the testimony. Furthermore, the
reconstruction of a code depends on one's ability to
capture a reasonably large portion of the message,
and in this instance we have only scattered elements.
Although we think it is quite possible that Professor
Franklin advocated a range of actions some of which
may have been illegal, we do no find the evidence
strongly persuasive that his speech constituted the
advocacy of imminent lawless action.
The majority emphasizes the extremity of the risk
in the situation; we do not disagree with their
evaluation, but we stress more heavily the doubts we
have about the context and the meaning of the words
actually spoken.
to find against Professor Franklin on this charge
might, we believe, force a faculty member addressing
a political rally in the future to guard against possible
cryptic meanings that his speech might convey to a
segment of his audience whenever a situation of high
risk obtains. The social cost of such a prohibition
must be balanced against the benefits to be derived
from being able to prosecute somewhat ambiguous
speech in dangerous situations. We find the costs too
great.
Accordingly, we do not sustain the charge against
Professor Franklin as stated in Paragraph 10.
A. CHARGES
The University Administration's charge concerning
Professor Franklin's conduct during the Old Union
Courtyard rally on February 10th reads as follows:
10. On the eveing of February 10, 1971, beginning at
approximately 8:00 p.m., a rally was held in the Old
Union Courtyard to, among other things, discuss
methods of protesting developments in the war in
Indochina. Over two hundred students and other
persons attended the rally. During the course of the
rally Professor Franklin intentionally urged and
incited students and other persons present to engage
in conduct calculated to disrupt activities of the
University and of members of the University
community and which threatened injury to
individuals and property. Shortly thereafter students
and other persons were assaulted by persons present
at the rally, and later that evening other acts of
violence occurred.
B. NATURE OF THE CHARGE IN PARAGRAPH 10
The charge centers on intentional incitement that
threatened: (1) disruption of University activities, both
individual and institutional; and (2) injury to persons
and property. It implies that a rish of coercive or violent
behavior existed at the time of the rally and that
Professor Franklin further increased the risk by the
content and manner of his participation. In determining
whether the facts fit the charges, the Board must inquite
(1) What is the entire context surrounding the alleged
incitement? (2) What is being communicated to the
audience? (3) What would the speaker judge to be the
effect of his communication on the audience?
C. FINDINGS OF FACT 1. Prominent Themes in the
1. Prominent Themes in the Old Union Rally,
February 10
On Wednesday, February 10 at 8:00 p.m. about 350
people attended a rally in the Old Union Courtyard.
Speakers debated tactics and demands. Professor
Franklin spoke twice. The themes that emerged
prominently in the course of the rally may he
summarized as follows:
a. There was general agreement on opposition to the
war in Southeast Asia and a wish to protest against
American involvement.
b. There was a major difference of opinion on the
scope of demands and of tactics. A contingent of
students from Roble Hall favored a single demand, an
effort to reach out for the broadest possible support
and strict adherence to non-violent tactics. Another
and larger faction favored a broader set of demands,
even at the risk of losing community support; and
they favored a broader range of tactics, including
coercive and violent ones, depending on
circumstances. This distinction between the two
groups was not only apparent in the speeches, but
was emphasized by a KZSU broadcast interview with
representatives of the Roble contingent near the end
of the rally.

c. Five speakers emphasized Stanford's major war
complicity and severe political repression. This
viewpoint may be illustrated with the following
quotation from one of the speakers.
I work at the phone company and I realize that
everyday one out of every two calls that I place
goes from Stanford University or SRI directly to
the Pentagon, to SRI all over the country and all
over the world, and people realize that Stanford
University is integrally linked with Pacific
Telephone Company, that all the business, you
know, that the whole service which Pacific
Telephone puts out is for the benefit of the
financial interest in this area and people who are
against the war, people that I work with who are
against the war, who are very, very angry and
outraged by the expansion of the war into Laos
realize that, because they have brothers, brothers
and uncles and fathers who are over there fighting,
who have been forced to go over there, they don't
have any choice, they can't afford to go to school,
they are forced to be over there. They have
brothers and sisters who are locked up in the
prisons all over America and they realize that
Stanford University, that the kind of research
Stanford does, the kind of money Stanford has,
which controls the black and brown communities
in the mid-peninsula, is a very dangerous thing and
they:re willing to fight against that for their very
survival and I think that the people here should
respect that, should respect the fact that telephone
workers are getting organized, that we're thinking
now about what kind of support demonstration
we can have when Stanford gets itself together and
the issues become clear to the people that
Stanford University is key in the war, key in the
oppression of political prisoners and it's just got to
go. (applause)
d. Eight speakers were very hostile to the police
especially to their presence on campus. Police had
been called to the campus to terminate the
occupation of the Computation Center and had
remained in view of the likelihood of further illegal
acts. It will be recalled that arson and "trashing" had
occurred on the nights of February 6 and 7. Early in
the Old Union rally of February 10, the presence of
police on campus was announced. No witness
testified that a single uniformed policeman entered
the Old Union courtyard, despite the fact that
Professor Franklin, in his affidavit shortly after the
event, said there were many police there. In the
hearing, he corrected this error. Thus, the police were
not visible to the people at the rally, but their
presence on campus was a focus of deep resentment.
They were often referred to as "pigs" and as an
occupation army or occupying forces. In conjunction
with the previous criticism of Stanford's complicity
in the war. the struggle on campus and the struggle in
Southeast Asia were portrayed as different facets of a
single struggle. Parallels were drawn between the

police on campus and imperialist armies in Asia. The
all-one-war theme was emphasized by urging
resistance to the police as analogous to resistance to
occupying forces in Vietnam.
e. On two occasions, members of the Free Campus
Movement were pointed out in a context of hostility,
and were linked to the police on campus.
112. In response to these various instigations, there was
a desire for action — not merely verbal demands, but
concrete, tangible steps to implement them. There
was a clear preference for strong, vivid action, though
some speakers, including those from the Roble
contingent, put their main emphasis on education.
Little reference was made to "strike" in this rally.
The actions mainly preferred by the speakers may be
illustrated by (he following remarks by the chairman:
Okay, I think it's still pretty clear that we want to
keep the demands as they are. Okay, at this point I
think we should go on to specific proposals for
how we act now. We've had a few proposals; one
guy suggested that after the Comp Center thing
today that in order to escalate rather than
de-escalate we should zero in on SRI, Another
person, other people have proposed that we deal
now with the police state that's on this campus
because if we're going to move against the war,
one of the things we have to do to be able to move
against the war in atmosphere where we're not
intimidated by pigs coming through to surround
our meetings and that kind of thing and that one
of the ways to do that is to begin any kind of
action people want to take to get the pigs off this
campus. I think that people should speak to these
proposals and add more proposals that they have.
g. Five speakers explicitly expressed and several
others implicitly expressed anger, using words and
imagery of fighting. Three speakers suggested actions
to embarrass, humiliate, or confront the police,
particularly late at night, while others made more
general comments advocating resistance to
intimidation.
h. Two speakers favored off-campus protests.
2. Professor Franklin's First Speech at Old Union
(Second speech of February 10)
Professor Franklin's first Old Union speech
(Appendix III) began with an effort to persuade the
Roble contingent of the correctness of the majority
position favoring a broad set of demands, including the
freeing of all "political prisoners" and the end of
Stanford's complicity in the war — not merely
immediate withdrawal of US forces from Southeast Asia.
He spoke with concern about people who must spend
time in jail, emphasized solidarity within the
"movement", and opposed betrayal of political
prisoners. Then, in an intense delivery, he said:
And we get very upset when we find our beautiful
campus crawling with pigs who stop and harass
people and rip off and beat half of the people. Well
this is just a very, very mild taste of what life is like in
the black and brown communities of this country
where the pigs come by every night and if you're
young and you're black and brown they stop you and
ask your I.D. and rip you off for suspicion of
burglary and where there are dogs there and where
there's a helicopter overhead and that's part of the
same struggle, and where they shoot you and the pigs
who are here tonight, that's those San Jose pigs have
just mundered a black brother in San Jose, the same
San Jose pig just murdered a black brother down in
San Jose and that's normal life down there. People
murdered in the streets and that's why we call them
pigs. Although it's a little unfair to the four-footed
variety, because they don't do that kind of thing.
[Applause]
Continuing to speak in the same delivery, he next
alluded to the Black Panther party's leadership and made
the following remarks:
And the Black Panther Party teaches us that the
people of Laos and the people of South Vietnam are
not another separate nation state. That they are our
brothers and sisters because they are just other
oppressed communities of the same empire. The
Black Panther Party teaches us that today while this
meeting was going on brothers and sisters, blood
brothers and sisters of us, were killed in Laos, in
Vietnam and Cambodia, in the black and brown
communities of the United States of America. They
teach us this is all one struggle and the
interconnections are every place. Even if you thing
about what Laos is all about; what is the chief cash
export of Laos, who knows?
[crowd | Opium, heroin?
Opium, all the heroin on this coast comes from Laos.
And it's all brought in by the CIA. It is grown and
harvested by Meo tribesmen and flown out on Air
America, the CIA airline. And it is brought in to this
state as part of the oppression, particularly of black
and brown people here, but also of white youth. . . .
(brief KZSU interruption). . . . and is just as much a
part of the counter-insurgency system as the pigs are
war on this campus.
He urged that others be taught about such evils as
Stanford's complicity in the war and the necessity to
free all political prisoners. He expressed the view that
the student strike a year earlier had been a success. He
closed by restating the necessity to continue the struggle
to win others to his viewpoint.
3. Professor Franklin 's Second Speech at the Old Union
(Third speech of February 10)
This speech lasted about two minutes, but because
KZSU was conducting an interview at the time, it can
only be heard in the background on the tape recording.
The pitch of his voice is high, with only a few of his
words and intermittent responses from the crowd being
clearly discernible on the tape. The crowd responses
increase toward the end. The content of the speech can
only be reconstructed from testimony, but this poses
little difficulty. There is substantial agreement as to
what Professor Franklin said amont his witnesses, the
University Administration's witnesses, and Professor
Franklin's own affidavit and testimony. The differences,
as might be expected, are in the interpretation of his
speech.
a. Professor Franklin's interpretation of his second
Old Union speech.
In his affidavit he describes the speech as follows:
A number of speakers at the meeting rose to describe
specific instances of police harassment and brutality.
Several proposed that we go to the dormitories to
discuss die police state on campus and what to do
about it, as well as what to do about the situation in
Southeast Asia. One speaker said that many squads of
six to eight police were roaming the campus, and that
if we marched to the dorms some of these squads
would follow us, and that it would be a good
education for people in the dorms to see them. Two
speakers said that the police were attempting to keep
people from knowing what was happening, and that
they had temporarily confiscated a walkie-talkie from
a KZSU reporter and threatened to arrest him for
listening to police frequencies. Another speaker said
that if we march in one group it will be too easy for
the police and we should confuse them by dividing
into many groups. Another speaker siad "there are
pigs all over this campus and we have to show people
who the pigs are and who the people are, and we
cannot tolerate a police state here or any place else."
It was generally agreed that we would go back to the
dormitories to build support for the strike and to
raise consciousness about the police occupation of
the campus. I rose to speak again. 1 said that it was
unfortunate that the people from Roble had not felt
that they were really part of the movement and that
it was necessary to go into the dorms and discuss all
their questions further. I said that it was very
important for people to understand that this is a
united front, and that people will respond on
different levels of action and with different degrees of
consciousness to the war. I said that it was important
for people to accept these different levels, and that if
people are sincere it is correct for them to do their
own thing, to do whatever they think best, and that
that is how all of us learn. I pointed out that with the
police saturation on campus, however, it would be
suicide for people to engage in any militant action in
a large group. I said that we must learn from the
peoples of Southeast Asia that when confronted with
an occupation army, we must respond with the
methods of people's war. Then 1 explained that this
means thoroughly merging with the people. I gave
one and only one example of what I meant by this. I
said that I had been told that a few nights before,
during a similar police occupation, several people had
begun a game of touch football. They moved from
place to place on the campus, forcing the police to
follow them. Several police complained to them that
they were supposed to be in fixed positions, and that
this was preventing them from maintaining those
positions. Finally, when the football game
appraoched the area of the computation center, the
police had asked to examine the football. I said that I
wasn't sure whether this was because they thought it
was a bomb or because they just wanted to examine a
real pigskin. I ended by teliing people that people's

war meant that they should go back to the
dormitories, organize people into small groups, and
talk with them, or play football, or whatever, as late
into the night as possible.
b. Hearing witnesses' interpretation of Professor
Franklin's second Old Union Speech
(i) Administration witnesses-There is considerable
agreement among administration and defense
witnesses on the content (though not on the
interpretation) of this speech. This can be
illustrated by comparing Professor Franklin's
version of his speech after the event given above
with testimony of Robert Beyers, of the Stanford
News Service. He testified that he had attended
many rallies at Stanford over a period of years,
and had often heard Professor Franklin speak. He
described Professor Franklin's speech on this
occasion as very critical of the police. He testified
that Professor Franklin called specifically for
people's war against the occupation army-i.e., the
police. Professor Franklin suggested that people go
back to their dormitories, meet in small groups,
decide to do whatever they wanted to do as late at
night as possible so as to bring more police onto
the campus to help out their brethren in other
communities. At this point, in Beyer's view, the
nature of the meeting changed dramatically,
leading him to expect that illegal or disruptive
incidents would follow. Immediately after the
speech, the rally ended and Beyers said three FCM
students were badly beaten by some of the Old
Union crowd. Under cross-examination, he
indicated that Professor Franklin did not specify
the exact nature of the violent acts to be carried
out.
Brimelow felt there was much tension and
restlessness in the meeting, and that the crowd got
very excited as a result of the speech. After the
speech he saw the crowd stream off in all
directions and he heard "war cries" (something of
this sort is audible on the tape recording). Almas
heard the speech from the balcony of the Women's
Clubhouse, thought it was impassioned and was
startled by it. Almas had heard Professor Franklin
speak about a dozen times but had never heard
him encourage this level of action. Almas felt
Professor Franklin had not been as careful as
usual, and the witness had the expectation that
there was going to be violence.
R. Jacobs, also on the balcony, thought
Professor Franklin had made inflammatory
statements. Grav felt Professor Franklin was
playing the role of a leader giving instructions to
the group in a serious vein.
(ii) Professor Franklin's witnesses
Witnesses for Professor Franklin heard phrases
similar to those reported by Administration
witnesses but to some extent interpreted them
differently. This is well illustrated by an affidavit
of Bennion, who also testified at the hearing.
. . .It became clear that there was some opposition
forming, basically between going back into the
dorms for further discussion and staying in the
area the police were patrolling in order to show
them that the occupation of the campus would
not be tolerated. At this point Professor Franklin
spoke and tried to explain that these two
tendencies were not really opposed, but could be
carried out at the same time and could mutually
serve each other. He discussed at length the tenets
of "people's war" which is based on the concept
of a united front. In essence this means that
everyone can contribute what they can to a
movement, with one person's greater contribution
or risk should not be seen as invalidating another's.
This leads to many levels of action which mutually
reinforce other levels, rather than detracting from
each other. He pointed out that in advanced stages
of "people's war" such as in Vietnam, many
different levels of action are still employed, not
merely the military level of the National
Liberation Front. He also stated that in the
present case it would be suicidal to engage in any
large-scale militant action. He gave one example of
what "people's war" would mean that evening.
Some people could go back to the dorms and
persuade others to join the movement, while
others could play touch football in the area being
patrolled by the police to show that they were not
intimidated by the occupation of the campus. At
no time did say or even remotely imply or suggest
that he advocated a militant action that evening,
nor did his in-depth analysis of "people's war"
make such an interpretation possible for any
person who had ears to hear and a mind to think.
These witnesses were much preoccupied with the
presence of police. They expressed fear and anger,
and were inclined to expect trouble with the
police that night. They were determined not to be
intimidated by the police, and to harass them
where possible, by and large, Professor Franklin
was seen as speaking to these issues in a way that
fostered resistance but not violence. His task was
seen as uniting the people against the common
foe: putting together the university's complicity in
the war, the linkage of the struggle here iwth the
struggle in Asia, the necessity to respond
vigorously on many levels of action. For example
Pat Faulkner testified that he understood
Professor Franklin to mean that all levels of
actions are all right, even writing letters, and that
it is necessary to wage war on many levels to win.
He felt that Professor Franklin gave a speech in
which he approved a wide range of actions,
including trashing, but did not emphasize violent
responses.
Professor Franklin's witnesses gave the term
"people's war" a variety of emphases, but the
words were generally udnerstood to have a range
of connotations. These included (1) harassment of
police; (2) taking control of our own lives; (3)
brining the war home; (4) strike; (5) learning from
the peoples of Southeast Asia; (6) attention to our
war here, not only the one in Indochina; (7) doing
whatever conscience dictates, which might include
trashing; (8) determinationnot to be intimidated
by police, not to shrink from threats.
4. Post-Rally Events
In the course of the hearing, on October 28, the
Advisory Board made the following statement on
post-rally events:
With respect to the Old Union courtyard speech, the
Board is now in a position to give its view of the value
of testimony about events following the rally. We
admitted testimony on these matters because the

University Administration, in order to demonstrate
that there was a risk that prohibited conduct would
follow the speech, introduced evidence for the
limited purpose of showing that such conduct did in
fact occur. We now feel that this
evidence concerning the light on White Plaza, the
alleged false alarms, the shootings, and other
incidents-need not be rebutted. We have reached this
decision because, in our view, the existence of risk is
adequately shown by pre-and co-existing conditions,
and does not require demonstration by referring to
subsequent events.
It is a matter ol record that untoward events of the
sort mentioned above did in fact occur that night,
beginning immediately after the rally. We limited
testimony on these matters for two reasons: (1) the
charges did not contain any references to Professor
Franklin's post-rally conduct; (2) we had good reason to
believe that significant risk existed without reference to
post-rally events.
D. DEFENSES AND THEIR ANALYSES
1. Principal Points made in Defense Against Charges in
Paragraph 10.
Professor Franklin, in testimony and argument, made
several points in defending against these charges:
a. The speeches were brief, especially the second one
at the very end of the evening's program. Such brief
speeches could hardly have had the impact ascribed
to them by the University Administration.
b. It was difficult to hear the speeches. Except for
those near the speakers, consisting to a considerable
extent of Professor Franklin's close associates,
audibility was a problem. The testimony of several
witnesses who were not close to the speaker was
challenged by Professor Franklin.
c. What could be heard was innocuous. It was meant
to inform, educate, and persuade to a political
viewpoint. It was not intended to incite, inflame, or
cause violence.
d. Most of the people at the rally had already decided
what they were going to do by the time Professor
Franklin gave his second and closing spcech. In this
speech, he essentially gave them a political rationale
for what they had already decided to do.
e. Even if his speeches were taken as inflamatory by
some members of his audience, they were well
justified by Stanford's condition as a fascist and
imperialist institution, and by the presence on the
campus of an occupation army consisting of police
who frequently kill black and brown people, and
indeed had just killed a black brother.
112. In any event. Professor Franklin should be able to
give such speeches with impunity, since all speech
should be considered to be constitutionally
protected, even where appreciable risks are posed.
g. If speech is to be restricted at all, it must be done
within a very narrow band. Such a band could not
include general prescritpions for hostile actiona or
even for violence. Specific prescriptions for violent
acts would be required, and tchse must be confirmed
by specific evidence that individuals had been moved
to carry out those same specific acts by the speech in
question.
2. Analysis of the Defenses
The length of the speeches is much less important
than other characteristics: content, delivery, context,
audience. In any event, the first speech was not
particularly brief, and the second was in a crucial
position: at the very end of the rally.
In regard to audibility, we conclude that those who
wanted to hear the speeches could do so. This is
admitted by some defense witnesses, and to a certain
extent by Professor Franklin himself who testified that
at the time he felt he could reach those who really
wanted to hear him. The main variable seems to have
been attention; some members of the audience paid
close attention to his speeches, others little. Among
those who did pay attention, there is considerable
agreement as to content, though witnesses differe as to
interpretation.
There is no meaningful way to consider Professor
Franklin's behavior in the Old Union rally without a
firm grasp of the context in which the rally occurred.
The mood that evening was tense and angry. After the
passage of so many months it is difficult to recapture the
sense of anxious expectation that characterized the
campus that evening. The Old Union rally followed
several days of continually escalating events: threats of
coercion, actual coercion, arson, police action, and
hostile confrontations on campus. We have already
summarized recurrent themes of the immediately
preceding rallies at Dinkelspiel on February 9th and
White Plaza on February 10th. As the Board concluded
in its statement of October 28th, cited above, substantial
risk existed on the Stanford campus before and during
the Old Union rally.
There are additional aspects of the context for the
Old Union rally that deserve consideration. Professor
Franklin rose to speak as a well-known and respected
leader of the "movement". Defense witnesses testified
that he was viewed with admiration and his ideas were
taken seriously. Professor Franklin testified that the
time of these events in February was a crucial one for
the "movement", a time when the "movement" might
transcend itself.
Testimony in the hearing, mainly from defense
witnesses, brought out the fact that this occasion stirred
memories of other similar occasions which also provide
meaningful context for the Old Union rally. The events
approximately a year earlier at the time of the military
action in Cambodia came up repeatedly. Indeed, one of
Professor Franklin's main contentions is that he was
attempting to foster a "Cambodia-type strike". A
number of defense witnesses, including especially
Braumstein and Professor Franklin, discussed the events
of the Cambodian period and compared them with the
events during the Laotian invasion. It became clear that
the protest events of the Cambodian period, viewed with
approbation, included a spectrum of activities, some of
which were nonviolent, some of which were patently
coercive, and some of which were overtly violent. The
coercive and violent activities included: forcible blocking
of entries into buildings for sustained periods, large-scale
breaking of windows, bombings, and lire bombings.
The Old Union rally also brought back recollections
of other night rallies held in similar circumstances,
especially when police were on campus, not only during
the Cambodian protest but at other times in the past few

years as well. There lias been a clear tendency for such
occasions to be followed by violent behavior. This fact
was knwon to Professor Franklin, since several of the
defense witnesses commented on his participation in
these protests.
Two of the major themes permeating the three rallies
of February 9th and February 10, advanced by Professor
Franklin and many of his close associates, are especially
pertinent to his closing speech at the Old Union rally:
(1) all-one-war; (2) multiple-levels-of-action.
(1) All-one-war is the theme linking the struggle at
Stanford with the struggle in Southeast Asia. It is the
heart of the problem, emphasized by Professor Franklin
in his speeches, affidavit, testimony and argument.
The speeches attack Stanford's war complicity, draw
parallels between racial oppression in America and Asia,
and emphasize the necessity to learn from the peoples of
Southeast Asia how to resist oppression at home. By the
end of the Old Union rally, the cumulative weight of
these linkages suggests that one way to fight the war
now is to fight the police and administration here.
In his testimony Professor Franklin says:
. . .what I say there basically is that we can't separate
the war in Southeast Asia from the war at home. Now
on all these points, all four of these speeches that
were given in this 24-hour period -that is from the
night belore in Dink through this—all four of those
speeches are essentially saying-are saying the same
thing. They're expressing a set of ideas which 1
consider the most important ideas. . . . And then this
seems to me the most essential thing, both in this
speech and in the second speech, to try to show
people just as clearly as possible that in fact that
occupation army of police that was on the campus
was part of the same war that was being waged in
Southeast Asia and that was being waged in the Black
ghettos and in the barrios of the United States.
This point is further clarified in Braunstein's defense
testimony, under cross-examination:
And the people fighting the United States in South
east Asia are fighting the same battles that people
fighting the police.. .who were on campus in the Old
Union Courtyard one and two of the year before and
are fighting the same battle as the people trying to get
rotten research off this campus and are fighting all
these battles, and they're all the same battles.
Then if it's all one battle, the word 'opposing forces'
relates to all the people on the other side in this big
global battle.
I've later learned that that is what's known as
'People's War'; is part of what is known as 'People's
War'.
Q. I take it in the context in which you were speaking
you at least included the police in that reference?
A. Oh, certainly. Especially that night, yes. I also
included the University administrators.
(2) The war is to be waged with the
multiple-levels-of-action formula. Each person is to do
his own thing, whatever he can, whatever he thinks best,
using his imagination to find ways of resisting the
occupying forces. This theme has a familiar ring from its
recurrence during the preceding few days. We have
earlier quoted Braunstein's remarks on this subject at the
Dinkelspiel rally on February 9th. It is clear from a
variety of references in several rallies that this
formulation is meant to advocate a spectrum of activities
which might include contacting Congressmen,
persuading students in dormitories, being active on
campus at night, refusing to be intimidated by the
police, blocking doorways, occupying buildings,
breaking windows, putting the computer out of service
for a long time, destroying the computer, or doing other
things for which one might not wish to "take credit."
In his testimony Professor Franklin said he felt
impelled at the end of the rally to speak about:
. . .that action that was going to be taken, which
was essentially gpomg back to the dorms to talk
about the war in Southeast Asia and about the
police occupation of the campus and—for people
to be there and exercise their right. That it was
important for somebody to explain to people that
that action itself was, you know, just as legitimate
a part of this war as, say, the armed self defense of
the Vietnamese people or the people of Laos. . ..
And in that speech I mentioned using the methods
of people's war. And at that point I was speaking
very directly to the people there, I think, who
considered themselves revolutionaries. Because I
knew that they would have a basic understanding
of what that meant, and that that phrase summed
up a whole lot of experience.
Braunstein testified for Professor Franklin, 'There are
all sorts of actions on various levels, including people
breaking windows with rocks and people burning down
buildings, as yet unidentified people burning down
buildings, and so on, that sometimes have the same goals
in mind and sometimes don't."
Significant in this context was the term "people's
war." It was interpreted by various witnesses in different
ways. It seems to include a wide range of suggested
actions, some of which are nonviolent, and some of
which are violent. It can clearly include guerilla warfare.
Some witnesses interpreted this as its primary meaning,
others gave this meaning less prominence. Maoist
writings use the term "People's war" for all action, in
particular guerilla warfare, in which the warriors merge
with the masses. Professor Franklin acknowledge in his
testimony that guerilla warfare, including assassination
and bombings, is one important component of people's
war, but denied it was the one he had in mind when he
used the term in his spcech. Defense testimony indicated
that the concept of people's war extends beyond
military action, but did not deny that it prominently
includes military action. Given the repeated explicit
linkages of the struggle against the police occupation
army here and the war in Southeast Asia, in the context
of recent night violence on campus and an afternoon of
police confrontation, it is difficult to believe that most
listeners would be insensitive to the violent connotations
of this term. Why repeatedly use warlike terms and
images—such as Professor Franklin's "war on this
campus" if peaceful actions are intended?
Similar considerations apply to Professor Franklin's
advocacy of action to be taken against the occupation
army in small groups. It is clear that small groups can
conduct dormitory discussions and other peacefully
persuasive activities, and that this did in fact occur,
though we learned very little about the focus of such
discussions e.g., whether they were intended to foster
particular nonviolent or violent tactics of protest. In any
event, such dormitory discussions may well have been
one of the meanings of his alleged recommendation for
reliance upon affinity groups. He advised against mass
militant action, meaning essentially violent
confrontation with the police, on tactical grounds. Such
action was not feasible because the police were too
strong. It is alos clear that the smaller groups could
engage in violent activities as has often happened in
similar circumstances at Stanford during the past few
years-i.e., following night rallies permeated by angry
speech. Two days earlier, February 8, after a night of
"trashing", a sheet was distributed at a "movement"
rally under the title "Do It!" It endorsed the previous
night's activity and called for more of the same,
indicating that tight affinity groups can be helpful in
doing whatever people want to do.
Whatever the activities that Professor Franklin was
urging upon individuals and small groups, it appears that
lateness of the hour was positively desirable-"as late
into the night as possible". In view of the behavior ot
some individuals and affinity groups at Stanford in
similar circumstances during the past few years, it is
reasonable to suppose that lateness might be useful as a
cover for violent activities—though it could of course be
used for peaceful activities as well.
Professor Franklin's two Old Union speeches were
given in a hostile tone. This is apparent in the content of
the first speech, and the effect is heightened when one
listens to the tape and hears his tone of voice. Even
when the speech is briefly interrupted by a KZSU
interview, the angry tone and the emotional crowd
response can be clearly detected. Although thesecond
speech is covered over by a KZSU interview, similar
indications are available from the tape and from
testimony.
In the course of the hearing, both Professor Franklin
and Braunstein indicated that ambiguity about tactics
was desirable to these rally speeches because KZSU was
broadcasting them and the police would presumably
have tape recordings. To advocate violent tactics openly
in this context would have exposed the speaker to later
sanctions. We were informed in the hearing by Professor
Franklin of his "political decision" to keep his position
at Stanford, hence caution about open calls for
"revolutionary violence".
Thus, we are faced with a difficult problem: how to
interpret speech deliberately given in ambiguous terms.
But we have seen already that considerable clarification
emerges from a close examination of the text, from the
full context provided by preceding events, and from the
way in which the speech was delivered. In essence,
Professor Franklin came into a combustible situation,
focused hostility on certain targets, intensified existing
hostility toward those targets, and urged a spectrum of
actions against them: some peaceful, some coercive,
some violent. We must now turn our attention to his
audience in order to inquire whether they were likely to
understand him and whether Professor Franklin must
have expected the risk of prohibited conduct to be
increased by his behavior.
The tone and content of Professor Franklin's
speeches must have been particularly significant for two
groups: 1) people in the movement; 2) people who are
violence-prone for whatever reason. In respect to the
first, these are people who are responsive to Professor
Franklin by virtue of past association, respect,
dedication, and sharing of common goals. They tend to
understand the nuances of his speech, as was evident at
the hearing itself. As for the second grou, it is well
known that public meetings characterized by intense
anger and hints of violence tend to attract, both at the
meeting and via media coverage, individuals who are
drawn to violence for a variety of reasons, not
necessarily political. Whatever the reason for their
susceptibility to violence, they tend to find such
occasions exciting. They may be induced by angry
rhetoric to commit acts of gravity, particularly in the
context of recent examples of violent behavior.
Professor Franklin testified that he was aware of the
long-term, bitter antagonism between Venceremos and
FCM; and he was aware of the immediate, clearly
expressed hostility toward the small FCM group at the
rally. The presence of these mutually hostile groups at
the rally certainly added to the risk. The use of violent
rhetoric in such circumstances increased the probability
of attack and counter-attack.
We think that "movement" people were capable of
understanding the messages. We refer here to familiar
connotations understood by a group sharing common
intersts and values. For example, reference to "militant
action on campus" in 1971 is understood by many
people to mean "trashing " which in turn is understood
to mean "window-breaking." These are not the only
connotations of the terms, nor are they understood by
everyone who comes on campus. A few years ago, the
terms did not have these connotations. But common
usage in concrete situations has led to a widely shared
understanding.
Those devoted to the "movement" had a rich
refresher course in such terms during the rallies of the
preceding few days which we have already summarized.
Professor Franklin is explicit in his testimony that he
was aiming his remarks specifically at them, wanting
primarily to be un derstood by them. Braunstein
testified that there is special communication within the
"movement" and pointed out that Professor Franklin
referred to "us" at the rally. But the defense, in effect,
asks us to believe that, on the night of February 10,
individuals in the "movement" failed to understand the
coercive and violent connotations of phrases like "war
on this campus", taking action on multiple levels to
resist oppression here, and "we must learn from the
peoples of Southeast Asia that when confronted with an
occupation army, we must respond with the methods of
people's war". The defense puts forwards its bland
interpretation of such phrases even though they were
expressed in a very angry tone and in a context of
profound hostility toward the university by a respected
leader who generally approves coercive and violent
tactics in campus disputes (though he denies he
advocated them on this occasion). We must therefore
examine possible reasons why the audience might not
have detected the menacing connotations of his remarks
on the evening of February 10.
From the testimony in the hearing, we do not believe
members of the "movement" were obtuse; nor is there
anything credible in the record to suggest that they were
in such a conciliatory mood that his angry rhetoric failed
to rcach them. Were the "movement" members of
Professor Franklin's audience so concerned with trying
to win over the Roble group that they rejected all

coercive and violent connotations of his remarks? This
possibility deserves further consideration.
During the rally, "movement" people in control of
the meeting showed little consideration for the feelings
ol the Roble students. Indeed, Professor Franklin seems
to have been concerned about this situation, since he
devoted a good deal of his first speech to persuading the
Roble group to accept the "movement's" view of the
situation. As a Roble speaker made clear in the KZSU
interview, the difference between the Roble contingent
and the "movement" was not only one of demands
(narrow vs. broad) but of tactics (non-violent vs.
violent). In this episode, Professor Franklin
demonstrated his authority as a leader of the
"movement" when he easily stopped the flow of the
meeting, re-opened the question, made a major speech,
and got a re-vote.
In his way, Professor Franklin was trying to persuade
the Roble contingent to link up with the "movement" in
a united front, at least for the moment. His way of
undertaking this persuasion was itself inflamatory. He
made assertions of such hostile content in such an angry
manner regarding the University and the police that,
whatever their effect on the Roble group, they must
surely have intensified the resentment of many persons
favorable to the "movement" and thereby raised the
probability of violent actions later. We have earlier
quoted a portion of his first Old Union speech pertinent
to this point. Finally, his do-your-own-thing formula
permitted some encouragement for Roble students to
take peaceful actions and still leave room for
encouragement of "militant" actions by the
"movement".
This brings us again to one of the central themes in
the entire case. At Old Union as at White Plaza, the
actions urged by Professor Franklin were not exclusively
coercive or violent. He advocated a wide range of protest
actions: some peaceful, some coercive, some violent. If a
person removes valuable merchandise from a store,
paying for half, but not paying for the other half, is he
culpable for the part he stole? We believe that the
presence of peaceful recommendations cannot immunize
a person from sanctions if he has urged imminent
coercion and violence as well.
Once again, as at White Plaza, Professor Franklin was
the final speaker, and once again his speech was
promptly followed by events of a disruptive, coercive or
violent nature. The probability of this occurring by
chance is very small. At the least, it reflects his
leadership position in the "movement" and the riskiness
of those situations in which he spoke. He cannot avoid
the conclusion that his pseeches, the last on each
occasion, increased the probability that illegal acts
would follow the two rallies.
In an earlier section on "Fundamental Issues and
Standards", we have indicated that the University must
have the right to put some constraints on speech in
dangerous circumstances, but only with great caution.
This applies to acts of incitement to imminent lawless
action that arc likely to produce such action. "Lawless"
in the university context includes state or local laws, the
Policy on Campus Disruptions or other university
regulations, or common-law understandings of
professorial responsibility.
In judging the applicability of this standard to the
present charge, we have been guided by these questions:
(1) What is the entire context surrounding the alleged
incitement? (2) What was conmunicated to the
audience? (3) What would the speiker judge to be the
effect of his communication on the audience?
Since we wish to sustain the university's vital
tradition of fostering free expression in its widest
diversity, we are exceedingly cautious in considering
possible constraints on speech. If such constraints are
ever to be invoked, they must be reserved for extreme
situations. We are asking whether the context here was
that of a highly combustible situation, whether the
speaker gave an inflammatory message in that context,
and whether the speaker had good reason to anticipate
lhat his message would increase the risk of imminent
lawless action. If indeed we find that the speaker issued
a call to violence, he is not protected by having issued it
in euphemistic jargon. Such a call may be quite as
effective as one issued in more stark terms. In any event,
the language used here was hardly occult.
Although Professor Franklin's witnesses were inclined
to protect him by minimizing their understanding of
coercive and violent connotations in his speeches, they
did not exclude such connotations—nor did he. The
difference between them and administration witnesses
was mainly one of emphasis. In the spectrum of
activities advocated by Professof Franklin, the defense
emphasized the legal end, whereas the administration
emphasized the illegal end.
In our detailed analysis of the context for his Old
Union speeches, we have determined that persons active
in the "movement" must have been quite familiar with
the coercive and violent connotations of Professor
Franklin's phrases, that they were responsive to such
connotations, and that Professor Franklin must have
been aware of these facts.
Finally, we must consider the line of defense that,
even if Professor Franklin were considered to have
carried out such an incitement, he would nevertheless be
justified by his perception of Stanford as a fascist
institution playing an important role in an imperialist
war.
We recognize that Professor Franklin is pressing for
reform in important areas of social concern. Can this
justify coercive behavior in campus disputes, or the
fostering of a climate of violence on campus? Once any
person is granted this privilege in the name of a good
cause, we must grant it also to others who feel they have
worthy aims. When these rights conflict, as they
inevitably must, are we to condone low-grade guerilla
warfare on campus? If we deny to others what we grant
to Professor Franklin, we have adopted a double
standard: coercion and violence in the university may be
condoned if we approve its aims, but restricted if we
disapprove its aims. Then it becomes a simple question
of whose ox is gored. But every cause is fervently
supported by some, eloquently justified by some,
pursued with passion by some. In a way, every war is a
holy war. If we accept Professor Franklin's holiness, how
arc we to reject the holiness of other true believers? In
our view, this course is not morally defensible. We must
do our best to apply one standard across all political
preferences and that standard must not condone
violence on campus.

K. CONCLUSION
Taking into accoutn content, context, delivery, and
audience, did Professor Franklin's two Old Union
speeches include urging and inciting to disruption of
university activities, or threat to persons or property?
Must he have known that this exhortation would be
widely interpreted as immediate advocacy of disruptive
or violent behavior?
1. The situation was risky. Illegal acts had occurred
earlier that day. There was intense resentment toward
the war, the police, and the university; there had been
serious frustration for the "movement" earlier in the
day; bitter political adversaries were present at the rally
and identified by the chairman; protest actions including
coercive and violent possibilities were under discussion;
the police were present on campus; there was a well
known history of violence in similar circumstances at
Stanford. In general, the higher the risk, the less it takes
to trigger coercive and violent behavior.
2. The targets of Professor Franklin's animosity were
quite explicit-the police and the university. He made an
intensive effort in the two speeches to generate further
hostility toward these targets. He provided justification
for coercive and violent behavior toward them, without
specifying precisely what the nature of such acts might
be, leaving that to the judgment and imagination of each
individual or small group.
3. The urging of immediate retaliatory action towards
the police and the university was clear. A great sense of
urgency was conveyed by both the tone and the content
of his remarks. While no detailed blueprint for action
was provided, the necessity for prompt action wis a
strong message. The overall effect was to increase the
likelihood of imminent lawless action.
Taking into account the full context surround his
speeches at the Old Union rally, hte messages he
communicated to his audience, and what he should be
able to judge about the effect of these messages under
the circumstances, we reach the conclusion that
Professor Franklin intentionally urged and incited his
audience to engage in conduct which would disrupt
activities of the University and of members of the
University Community and threaten injury to individuals
an; property.
The Advisory Board thus finds that the charge in No.
10 is sustained.
DISSENTING OPINIONS
Professors Brown and Kennedy, while agreeing with
substantial portions of the majority's account, dissent as
follows:
The majority sustains the charge of incitement
against Professor Franklin citing (1) an extensive
background of material from speeches at this and
other rallies that supply context for his last speech;
(2) Professor Franklin's first speech at this rally,
which also supplies context and reveals relevant
attitudes of his own; and (3) words in the second
speech that constitute, in the majority's view,
sufficiently explicit invitations to do violence against
persons and property.
We dissent regarding some matters of context, as
well as on the finding with respect to Professor
Franklin's own speeches.
In describing the context of the rally, we would
give more weight than does the majority to the
presence of the Roble students and to their impact
upon events in the Old Union Courtyard. The
interaction between the group of Roble moderates
(concerned about the invasion of Laos but not part of
the "movement") and the "movement" group itself
provides a central theme for the rally. Professor
Franklin's own first speech is directed predominantly
to an attenuation of those tensions and to a
reconciliation that would accommodate the new
recruits to "movement" objectives. It is, in essence, a
long argument that political prisoners must not be
forgotten, and that there is a fundamental identity
between the struggle of Asian peoples against U.S.
imperialism and the struggle of oppressed people and
anti-war students against repressive forces at home.
As the majority states, the speech contains a heavy
tone of anger against the police and other forces that,
to Professor Franklin, sumbolize this oppression. We
nevertheless believe it plausible that the speech was
intended to make a group of Stanford students
identify, perhaps for the first time, with oppressed
people; we do not see evidence that Professor
Franklin's intention was to turn them explicitly to
violent actions. In no sense can this first Old Union
speech be regarded as actionable; indeed, the
University administration does not attempt to
persuade us to find against Professor Franklin on the
basis of its content. To the extent that it contains
intensity and anger, and to the extent that these are
directed against the police and the University, the
speech might be said to have added-along with other
speeches at the rally-to the risk that prohibited
conduct might follow. But all agree that nothing in
the content of this speech approaches incitement.
Indeed, we feel that the speech presented, in however
objectionable a style, some legitimate concerns about
the plight of prisoners, the existence of police
brutality, and other significant issues.
Clearly Professor Franklin and other speakers
believed that a major mission of the "movement"
people at the rally was to undertake the "education"
of the rest of the Stanford community. Professor
Franklin's own first speech concludes with a plea that
those present go out to the people "and teach them
what we have learned in the movement," and that
any who are not persuaded should "get up here [ile.
to the microphone] and we should discuss it." At the
conclusion of his speech he testifies that he went over
to discuss the matter further with the Roble group.
The speaker who followed Professor Franklin to the
podium commented that the important thing was to
"go to the dorms, go to the people we want to talk
t0...." A later speaker extends the suggestion by
hoping that those at the rally will go to the dorms
and "rap all night." Recruitment, broadening the base
of the "movement," educating the community: all
these were significant themes in the development o'
the meeting's context. By its relatively stronger
emphasis on the more violent rhetoric, in particular
Professor Franklin's, the majority has decided against
what seems to us a plausible, even persuasive, second
view of the matter.

The content of the second speech, of course, is not
available to us except through the testimony of
witnesses. According to Beyers, Professor Franklin
called for a "people's war against the occupation
army of the police," and he "suggested that people
should go back tot their dormitories, form meetings,
meet in small groups, decide whatever they wanted to
do, to do it as late at night as possible, and to do
things which would bring more of the occupation
here."' Professor Franklin's version in his affidavit is
only slightly different. He, too, calims to have said
that "when confronted with an occupation army we
must respond with the methods of people's war." Me
adds, "I ended by telling people that people's war
meant that they should go back into their
dormitories, organize people into small groups, talk
with them, play football, or whatever, as late into the
night as possible." These differences are not very
substantial; they can easily be accounted for by
differences in recollection.
The majority analyzes these collections of phrases
in such a way that they are strongly persuaded as to
their meaning and that the meaning sustains an
incitement charge, given such other factors as risk.
The logic consists essentially in the elimination of
various attenuative constructions that are more
benign. In our view this interpretation is not
"strongly persuasive." The phrases upon which
attention has been focused are isolated from a
substantial matrix of interstitial speech, the precise
construction of which we do not know, and about
which we must be careful not to draw too confident
appraisals. Two examples will illustrate the point.
First, Professor Franklin says that in the context in
which he used it, "People's war" was clearly indicated
to mean "thoroughly merging with the masses;" he
states that he used the football game as an example of
that kind of tactic. It is significant that virtually all of
the witnesses link the words "people's war" to the
example of the football game. Professor Franklin
states in his affidavit that this was the only exmaple
he used, and the cumulative testimony seems to bear
him out. Second, the phrase "as late into the night as
possible," interpreted by the majority as a call to
militant action by small groups, could equally have
appeared in a context in which it applied primarily to
late dormitory discussions and to legal (though
perhaps risky) methods of taking up the time of the
police. Such an interpretation gain in plausibility
from Professor Franklin's testimony that although he
does not in principle disapprove of trashing, he would
not have urged it on that occasion, both because of
the heavy presence of police on campus that night
and because it would have alienated those new to the
"movement."
The point is that none of these interpretations has
a great deal of certainty about it. The ones we have
just mentioned may be a little less plausible than
those favored by the majority, but only a little less.
The "hard" data on words are so fragmentary, and
depend so much on the kind of context-construction
that is very sensitive to whatever bias the witnesses
may have had, that we find them inadequate to meet
a "strongly persuasive" criterion that Professor
Franklin is guilty as charged by the University
administration.
We are not strongly persuaded by the impressions
of the speech given by various witnesses-as opposed
to actual reconstructions of wording. Such
impressions are especially subject to the bias of
expectations. The differing treatments of Professor
Franklin's account of the football game provide one
example among many. Some witnesses regarded it as
a euphemism for more violent activity, others
regarded it merely as an opportunity for a bad pun,
while still others interpreted it as we would, as an
invitation to occupy the time of the police.
In effect, the majority report argues that Professor
Franklin was employing words well understood to his
audience but not to others. But there is no convincing
evidence that any substantial number of the audience
would have translated his speech into an invitation to
commit violent acts. Each phrase, like "people's
war," has been subject to a number of conflicting
interpretations in the testimony. Furthermore, the
reconstruction of a code depends on one's ability to
capture a reasonably large portion of the message,
and in this instance we have only scattered elements.
Although we think it is quite possible that Professor
Franklin advocated a range of actions some of which
may have been illegal, we do no find the evidence
strongly persuasive that his speech constituted the
advocacy of imminent lawless action.
The majority emphasizes the extremity of the risk
in the situation; we do not disagree with their
evaluation, but we stress more heavily the doubts we
have about the context and the meaning of the words
actually spoken.
to find against Professor Franklin on this charge
might, we believe, force a faculty member addressing
a political rally in the future to guard against possible
cryptic meanings that his speech might convey to a
segment of his audience whenever a situation of high
risk obtains. The social cost of such a prohibition
must be balanced against the benefits to be derived
from being able to prosecute somewhat ambiguous
speech in dangerous situations. We find the costs too
great.
Accordingly, we do not sustain the charge against
Professor Franklin as stated in Paragraph 10.
A. CHARGES
The University Administration's charge concerning
Professor Franklin's conduct during the Old Union
Courtyard rally on February 10th reads as follows:
10. On the eveing of February 10, 1971, beginning at
approximately 8:00 p.m., a rally was held in the Old
Union Courtyard to, among other things, discuss
methods of protesting developments in the war in
Indochina. Over two hundred students and other
persons attended the rally. During the course of the
rally Professor Franklin intentionally urged and
incited students and other persons present to engage
in conduct calculated to disrupt activities of the
University and of members of the University
community and which threatened injury to
individuals and property. Shortly thereafter students
and other persons were assaulted by persons present
at the rally, and later that evening other acts of
violence occurred.
B. NATURE OF THE CHARGE IN PARAGRAPH 10
The charge centers on intentional incitement that
threatened: (1) disruption of University activities, both
individual and institutional; and (2) injury to persons
and property. It implies that a rish of coercive or violent
behavior existed at the time of the rally and that
Professor Franklin further increased the risk by the
content and manner of his participation. In determining
whether the facts fit the charges, the Board must inquite
(1) What is the entire context surrounding the alleged
incitement? (2) What is being communicated to the
audience? (3) What would the speaker judge to be the
effect of his communication on the audience?
C. FINDINGS OF FACT 1. Prominent Themes in the
1. Prominent Themes in the Old Union Rally,
February 10
On Wednesday, February 10 at 8:00 p.m. about 350
people attended a rally in the Old Union Courtyard.
Speakers debated tactics and demands. Professor
Franklin spoke twice. The themes that emerged
prominently in the course of the rally may he
summarized as follows:
a. There was general agreement on opposition to the
war in Southeast Asia and a wish to protest against
American involvement.
b. There was a major difference of opinion on the
scope of demands and of tactics. A contingent of
students from Roble Hall favored a single demand, an
effort to reach out for the broadest possible support
and strict adherence to non-violent tactics. Another
and larger faction favored a broader set of demands,
even at the risk of losing community support; and
they favored a broader range of tactics, including
coercive and violent ones, depending on
circumstances. This distinction between the two
groups was not only apparent in the speeches, but
was emphasized by a KZSU broadcast interview with
representatives of the Roble contingent near the end
of the rally.

c. Five speakers emphasized Stanford's major war
complicity and severe political repression. This
viewpoint may be illustrated with the following
quotation from one of the speakers.
I work at the phone company and I realize that
everyday one out of every two calls that I place
goes from Stanford University or SRI directly to
the Pentagon, to SRI all over the country and all
over the world, and people realize that Stanford
University is integrally linked with Pacific
Telephone Company, that all the business, you
know, that the whole service which Pacific
Telephone puts out is for the benefit of the
financial interest in this area and people who are
against the war, people that I work with who are
against the war, who are very, very angry and
outraged by the expansion of the war into Laos
realize that, because they have brothers, brothers
and uncles and fathers who are over there fighting,
who have been forced to go over there, they don't
have any choice, they can't afford to go to school,
they are forced to be over there. They have
brothers and sisters who are locked up in the
prisons all over America and they realize that
Stanford University, that the kind of research
Stanford does, the kind of money Stanford has,
which controls the black and brown communities
in the mid-peninsula, is a very dangerous thing and
they:re willing to fight against that for their very
survival and I think that the people here should
respect that, should respect the fact that telephone
workers are getting organized, that we're thinking
now about what kind of support demonstration
we can have when Stanford gets itself together and
the issues become clear to the people that
Stanford University is key in the war, key in the
oppression of political prisoners and it's just got to
go. (applause)
d. Eight speakers were very hostile to the police
especially to their presence on campus. Police had
been called to the campus to terminate the
occupation of the Computation Center and had
remained in view of the likelihood of further illegal
acts. It will be recalled that arson and "trashing" had
occurred on the nights of February 6 and 7. Early in
the Old Union rally of February 10, the presence of
police on campus was announced. No witness
testified that a single uniformed policeman entered
the Old Union courtyard, despite the fact that
Professor Franklin, in his affidavit shortly after the
event, said there were many police there. In the
hearing, he corrected this error. Thus, the police were
not visible to the people at the rally, but their
presence on campus was a focus of deep resentment.
They were often referred to as "pigs" and as an
occupation army or occupying forces. In conjunction
with the previous criticism of Stanford's complicity
in the war. the struggle on campus and the struggle in
Southeast Asia were portrayed as different facets of a
single struggle. Parallels were drawn between the

police on campus and imperialist armies in Asia. The
all-one-war theme was emphasized by urging
resistance to the police as analogous to resistance to
occupying forces in Vietnam.
e. On two occasions, members of the Free Campus
Movement were pointed out in a context of hostility,
and were linked to the police on campus.
112. In response to these various instigations, there was
a desire for action — not merely verbal demands, but
concrete, tangible steps to implement them. There
was a clear preference for strong, vivid action, though
some speakers, including those from the Roble
contingent, put their main emphasis on education.
Little reference was made to "strike" in this rally.
The actions mainly preferred by the speakers may be
illustrated by (he following remarks by the chairman:
Okay, I think it's still pretty clear that we want to
keep the demands as they are. Okay, at this point I
think we should go on to specific proposals for
how we act now. We've had a few proposals; one
guy suggested that after the Comp Center thing
today that in order to escalate rather than
de-escalate we should zero in on SRI, Another
person, other people have proposed that we deal
now with the police state that's on this campus
because if we're going to move against the war,
one of the things we have to do to be able to move
against the war in atmosphere where we're not
intimidated by pigs coming through to surround
our meetings and that kind of thing and that one
of the ways to do that is to begin any kind of
action people want to take to get the pigs off this
campus. I think that people should speak to these
proposals and add more proposals that they have.
g. Five speakers explicitly expressed and several
others implicitly expressed anger, using words and
imagery of fighting. Three speakers suggested actions
to embarrass, humiliate, or confront the police,
particularly late at night, while others made more
general comments advocating resistance to
intimidation.
h. Two speakers favored off-campus protests.
2. Professor Franklin's First Speech at Old Union
(Second speech of February 10)
Professor Franklin's first Old Union speech
(Appendix III) began with an effort to persuade the
Roble contingent of the correctness of the majority
position favoring a broad set of demands, including the
freeing of all "political prisoners" and the end of
Stanford's complicity in the war — not merely
immediate withdrawal of US forces from Southeast Asia.
He spoke with concern about people who must spend
time in jail, emphasized solidarity within the
"movement", and opposed betrayal of political
prisoners. Then, in an intense delivery, he said:
And we get very upset when we find our beautiful
campus crawling with pigs who stop and harass
people and rip off and beat half of the people. Well
this is just a very, very mild taste of what life is like in
the black and brown communities of this country
where the pigs come by every night and if you're
young and you're black and brown they stop you and
ask your I.D. and rip you off for suspicion of
burglary and where there are dogs there and where
there's a helicopter overhead and that's part of the
same struggle, and where they shoot you and the pigs
who are here tonight, that's those San Jose pigs have
just mundered a black brother in San Jose, the same
San Jose pig just murdered a black brother down in
San Jose and that's normal life down there. People
murdered in the streets and that's why we call them
pigs. Although it's a little unfair to the four-footed
variety, because they don't do that kind of thing.
[Applause]
Continuing to speak in the same delivery, he next
alluded to the Black Panther party's leadership and made
the following remarks:
And the Black Panther Party teaches us that the
people of Laos and the people of South Vietnam are
not another separate nation state. That they are our
brothers and sisters because they are just other
oppressed communities of the same empire. The
Black Panther Party teaches us that today while this
meeting was going on brothers and sisters, blood
brothers and sisters of us, were killed in Laos, in
Vietnam and Cambodia, in the black and brown
communities of the United States of America. They
teach us this is all one struggle and the
interconnections are every place. Even if you thing
about what Laos is all about; what is the chief cash
export of Laos, who knows?
[crowd | Opium, heroin?
Opium, all the heroin on this coast comes from Laos.
And it's all brought in by the CIA. It is grown and
harvested by Meo tribesmen and flown out on Air
America, the CIA airline. And it is brought in to this
state as part of the oppression, particularly of black
and brown people here, but also of white youth. . . .
(brief KZSU interruption). . . . and is just as much a
part of the counter-insurgency system as the pigs are
war on this campus.
He urged that others be taught about such evils as
Stanford's complicity in the war and the necessity to
free all political prisoners. He expressed the view that
the student strike a year earlier had been a success. He
closed by restating the necessity to continue the struggle
to win others to his viewpoint.
3. Professor Franklin 's Second Speech at the Old Union
(Third speech of February 10)
This speech lasted about two minutes, but because
KZSU was conducting an interview at the time, it can
only be heard in the background on the tape recording.
The pitch of his voice is high, with only a few of his
words and intermittent responses from the crowd being
clearly discernible on the tape. The crowd responses
increase toward the end. The content of the speech can
only be reconstructed from testimony, but this poses
little difficulty. There is substantial agreement as to
what Professor Franklin said amont his witnesses, the
University Administration's witnesses, and Professor
Franklin's own affidavit and testimony. The differences,
as might be expected, are in the interpretation of his
speech.
a. Professor Franklin's interpretation of his second
Old Union speech.
In his affidavit he describes the speech as follows:
A number of speakers at the meeting rose to describe
specific instances of police harassment and brutality.
Several proposed that we go to the dormitories to
discuss die police state on campus and what to do
about it, as well as what to do about the situation in
Southeast Asia. One speaker said that many squads of
six to eight police were roaming the campus, and that
if we marched to the dorms some of these squads
would follow us, and that it would be a good
education for people in the dorms to see them. Two
speakers said that the police were attempting to keep
people from knowing what was happening, and that
they had temporarily confiscated a walkie-talkie from
a KZSU reporter and threatened to arrest him for
listening to police frequencies. Another speaker said
that if we march in one group it will be too easy for
the police and we should confuse them by dividing
into many groups. Another speaker siad "there are
pigs all over this campus and we have to show people
who the pigs are and who the people are, and we
cannot tolerate a police state here or any place else."
It was generally agreed that we would go back to the
dormitories to build support for the strike and to
raise consciousness about the police occupation of
the campus. I rose to speak again. 1 said that it was
unfortunate that the people from Roble had not felt
that they were really part of the movement and that
it was necessary to go into the dorms and discuss all
their questions further. I said that it was very
important for people to understand that this is a
united front, and that people will respond on
different levels of action and with different degrees of
consciousness to the war. I said that it was important
for people to accept these different levels, and that if
people are sincere it is correct for them to do their
own thing, to do whatever they think best, and that
that is how all of us learn. I pointed out that with the
police saturation on campus, however, it would be
suicide for people to engage in any militant action in
a large group. I said that we must learn from the
peoples of Southeast Asia that when confronted with
an occupation army, we must respond with the
methods of people's war. Then 1 explained that this
means thoroughly merging with the people. I gave
one and only one example of what I meant by this. I
said that I had been told that a few nights before,
during a similar police occupation, several people had
begun a game of touch football. They moved from
place to place on the campus, forcing the police to
follow them. Several police complained to them that
they were supposed to be in fixed positions, and that
this was preventing them from maintaining those
positions. Finally, when the football game
appraoched the area of the computation center, the
police had asked to examine the football. I said that I
wasn't sure whether this was because they thought it
was a bomb or because they just wanted to examine a
real pigskin. I ended by teliing people that people's

war meant that they should go back to the
dormitories, organize people into small groups, and
talk with them, or play football, or whatever, as late
into the night as possible.
b. Hearing witnesses' interpretation of Professor
Franklin's second Old Union Speech
(i) Administration witnesses-There is considerable
agreement among administration and defense
witnesses on the content (though not on the
interpretation) of this speech. This can be
illustrated by comparing Professor Franklin's
version of his speech after the event given above
with testimony of Robert Beyers, of the Stanford
News Service. He testified that he had attended
many rallies at Stanford over a period of years,
and had often heard Professor Franklin speak. He
described Professor Franklin's speech on this
occasion as very critical of the police. He testified
that Professor Franklin called specifically for
people's war against the occupation army-i.e., the
police. Professor Franklin suggested that people go
back to their dormitories, meet in small groups,
decide to do whatever they wanted to do as late at
night as possible so as to bring more police onto
the campus to help out their brethren in other
communities. At this point, in Beyer's view, the
nature of the meeting changed dramatically,
leading him to expect that illegal or disruptive
incidents would follow. Immediately after the
speech, the rally ended and Beyers said three FCM
students were badly beaten by some of the Old
Union crowd. Under cross-examination, he
indicated that Professor Franklin did not specify
the exact nature of the violent acts to be carried
out.
Brimelow felt there was much tension and
restlessness in the meeting, and that the crowd got
very excited as a result of the speech. After the
speech he saw the crowd stream off in all
directions and he heard "war cries" (something of
this sort is audible on the tape recording). Almas
heard the speech from the balcony of the Women's
Clubhouse, thought it was impassioned and was
startled by it. Almas had heard Professor Franklin
speak about a dozen times but had never heard
him encourage this level of action. Almas felt
Professor Franklin had not been as careful as
usual, and the witness had the expectation that
there was going to be violence.
R. Jacobs, also on the balcony, thought
Professor Franklin had made inflammatory
statements. Grav felt Professor Franklin was
playing the role of a leader giving instructions to
the group in a serious vein.
(ii) Professor Franklin's witnesses
Witnesses for Professor Franklin heard phrases
similar to those reported by Administration
witnesses but to some extent interpreted them
differently. This is well illustrated by an affidavit
of Bennion, who also testified at the hearing.
. . .It became clear that there was some opposition
forming, basically between going back into the
dorms for further discussion and staying in the
area the police were patrolling in order to show
them that the occupation of the campus would
not be tolerated. At this point Professor Franklin
spoke and tried to explain that these two
tendencies were not really opposed, but could be
carried out at the same time and could mutually
serve each other. He discussed at length the tenets
of "people's war" which is based on the concept
of a united front. In essence this means that
everyone can contribute what they can to a
movement, with one person's greater contribution
or risk should not be seen as invalidating another's.
This leads to many levels of action which mutually
reinforce other levels, rather than detracting from
each other. He pointed out that in advanced stages
of "people's war" such as in Vietnam, many
different levels of action are still employed, not
merely the military level of the National
Liberation Front. He also stated that in the
present case it would be suicidal to engage in any
large-scale militant action. He gave one example of
what "people's war" would mean that evening.
Some people could go back to the dorms and
persuade others to join the movement, while
others could play touch football in the area being
patrolled by the police to show that they were not
intimidated by the occupation of the campus. At
no time did say or even remotely imply or suggest
that he advocated a militant action that evening,
nor did his in-depth analysis of "people's war"
make such an interpretation possible for any
person who had ears to hear and a mind to think.
These witnesses were much preoccupied with the
presence of police. They expressed fear and anger,
and were inclined to expect trouble with the
police that night. They were determined not to be
intimidated by the police, and to harass them
where possible, by and large, Professor Franklin
was seen as speaking to these issues in a way that
fostered resistance but not violence. His task was
seen as uniting the people against the common
foe: putting together the university's complicity in
the war, the linkage of the struggle here iwth the
struggle in Asia, the necessity to respond
vigorously on many levels of action. For example
Pat Faulkner testified that he understood
Professor Franklin to mean that all levels of
actions are all right, even writing letters, and that
it is necessary to wage war on many levels to win.
He felt that Professor Franklin gave a speech in
which he approved a wide range of actions,
including trashing, but did not emphasize violent
responses.
Professor Franklin's witnesses gave the term
"people's war" a variety of emphases, but the
words were generally udnerstood to have a range
of connotations. These included (1) harassment of
police; (2) taking control of our own lives; (3)
brining the war home; (4) strike; (5) learning from
the peoples of Southeast Asia; (6) attention to our
war here, not only the one in Indochina; (7) doing
whatever conscience dictates, which might include
trashing; (8) determinationnot to be intimidated
by police, not to shrink from threats.
4. Post-Rally Events
In the course of the hearing, on October 28, the
Advisory Board made the following statement on
post-rally events:
With respect to the Old Union courtyard speech, the
Board is now in a position to give its view of the value
of testimony about events following the rally. We
admitted testimony on these matters because the

University Administration, in order to demonstrate
that there was a risk that prohibited conduct would
follow the speech, introduced evidence for the
limited purpose of showing that such conduct did in
fact occur. We now feel that this
evidence concerning the light on White Plaza, the
alleged false alarms, the shootings, and other
incidents-need not be rebutted. We have reached this
decision because, in our view, the existence of risk is
adequately shown by pre-and co-existing conditions,
and does not require demonstration by referring to
subsequent events.
It is a matter ol record that untoward events of the
sort mentioned above did in fact occur that night,
beginning immediately after the rally. We limited
testimony on these matters for two reasons: (1) the
charges did not contain any references to Professor
Franklin's post-rally conduct; (2) we had good reason to
believe that significant risk existed without reference to
post-rally events.
D. DEFENSES AND THEIR ANALYSES
1. Principal Points made in Defense Against Charges in
Paragraph 10.
Professor Franklin, in testimony and argument, made
several points in defending against these charges:
a. The speeches were brief, especially the second one
at the very end of the evening's program. Such brief
speeches could hardly have had the impact ascribed
to them by the University Administration.
b. It was difficult to hear the speeches. Except for
those near the speakers, consisting to a considerable
extent of Professor Franklin's close associates,
audibility was a problem. The testimony of several
witnesses who were not close to the speaker was
challenged by Professor Franklin.
c. What could be heard was innocuous. It was meant
to inform, educate, and persuade to a political
viewpoint. It was not intended to incite, inflame, or
cause violence.
d. Most of the people at the rally had already decided
what they were going to do by the time Professor
Franklin gave his second and closing spcech. In this
speech, he essentially gave them a political rationale
for what they had already decided to do.
e. Even if his speeches were taken as inflamatory by
some members of his audience, they were well
justified by Stanford's condition as a fascist and
imperialist institution, and by the presence on the
campus of an occupation army consisting of police
who frequently kill black and brown people, and
indeed had just killed a black brother.
112. In any event. Professor Franklin should be able to
give such speeches with impunity, since all speech
should be considered to be constitutionally
protected, even where appreciable risks are posed.
g. If speech is to be restricted at all, it must be done
within a very narrow band. Such a band could not
include general prescritpions for hostile actiona or
even for violence. Specific prescriptions for violent
acts would be required, and tchse must be confirmed
by specific evidence that individuals had been moved
to carry out those same specific acts by the speech in
question.
2. Analysis of the Defenses
The length of the speeches is much less important
than other characteristics: content, delivery, context,
audience. In any event, the first speech was not
particularly brief, and the second was in a crucial
position: at the very end of the rally.
In regard to audibility, we conclude that those who
wanted to hear the speeches could do so. This is
admitted by some defense witnesses, and to a certain
extent by Professor Franklin himself who testified that
at the time he felt he could reach those who really
wanted to hear him. The main variable seems to have
been attention; some members of the audience paid
close attention to his speeches, others little. Among
those who did pay attention, there is considerable
agreement as to content, though witnesses differe as to
interpretation.
There is no meaningful way to consider Professor
Franklin's behavior in the Old Union rally without a
firm grasp of the context in which the rally occurred.
The mood that evening was tense and angry. After the
passage of so many months it is difficult to recapture the
sense of anxious expectation that characterized the
campus that evening. The Old Union rally followed
several days of continually escalating events: threats of
coercion, actual coercion, arson, police action, and
hostile confrontations on campus. We have already
summarized recurrent themes of the immediately
preceding rallies at Dinkelspiel on February 9th and
White Plaza on February 10th. As the Board concluded
in its statement of October 28th, cited above, substantial
risk existed on the Stanford campus before and during
the Old Union rally.
There are additional aspects of the context for the
Old Union rally that deserve consideration. Professor
Franklin rose to speak as a well-known and respected
leader of the "movement". Defense witnesses testified
that he was viewed with admiration and his ideas were
taken seriously. Professor Franklin testified that the
time of these events in February was a crucial one for
the "movement", a time when the "movement" might
transcend itself.
Testimony in the hearing, mainly from defense
witnesses, brought out the fact that this occasion stirred
memories of other similar occasions which also provide
meaningful context for the Old Union rally. The events
approximately a year earlier at the time of the military
action in Cambodia came up repeatedly. Indeed, one of
Professor Franklin's main contentions is that he was
attempting to foster a "Cambodia-type strike". A
number of defense witnesses, including especially
Braumstein and Professor Franklin, discussed the events
of the Cambodian period and compared them with the
events during the Laotian invasion. It became clear that
the protest events of the Cambodian period, viewed with
approbation, included a spectrum of activities, some of
which were nonviolent, some of which were patently
coercive, and some of which were overtly violent. The
coercive and violent activities included: forcible blocking
of entries into buildings for sustained periods, large-scale
breaking of windows, bombings, and lire bombings.
The Old Union rally also brought back recollections
of other night rallies held in similar circumstances,
especially when police were on campus, not only during
the Cambodian protest but at other times in the past few

years as well. There lias been a clear tendency for such
occasions to be followed by violent behavior. This fact
was knwon to Professor Franklin, since several of the
defense witnesses commented on his participation in
these protests.
Two of the major themes permeating the three rallies
of February 9th and February 10, advanced by Professor
Franklin and many of his close associates, are especially
pertinent to his closing speech at the Old Union rally:
(1) all-one-war; (2) multiple-levels-of-action.
(1) All-one-war is the theme linking the struggle at
Stanford with the struggle in Southeast Asia. It is the
heart of the problem, emphasized by Professor Franklin
in his speeches, affidavit, testimony and argument.
The speeches attack Stanford's war complicity, draw
parallels between racial oppression in America and Asia,
and emphasize the necessity to learn from the peoples of
Southeast Asia how to resist oppression at home. By the
end of the Old Union rally, the cumulative weight of
these linkages suggests that one way to fight the war
now is to fight the police and administration here.
In his testimony Professor Franklin says:
. . .what I say there basically is that we can't separate
the war in Southeast Asia from the war at home. Now
on all these points, all four of these speeches that
were given in this 24-hour period -that is from the
night belore in Dink through this—all four of those
speeches are essentially saying-are saying the same
thing. They're expressing a set of ideas which 1
consider the most important ideas. . . . And then this
seems to me the most essential thing, both in this
speech and in the second speech, to try to show
people just as clearly as possible that in fact that
occupation army of police that was on the campus
was part of the same war that was being waged in
Southeast Asia and that was being waged in the Black
ghettos and in the barrios of the United States.
This point is further clarified in Braunstein's defense
testimony, under cross-examination:
And the people fighting the United States in South
east Asia are fighting the same battles that people
fighting the police.. .who were on campus in the Old
Union Courtyard one and two of the year before and
are fighting the same battle as the people trying to get
rotten research off this campus and are fighting all
these battles, and they're all the same battles.
Then if it's all one battle, the word 'opposing forces'
relates to all the people on the other side in this big
global battle.
I've later learned that that is what's known as
'People's War'; is part of what is known as 'People's
War'.
Q. I take it in the context in which you were speaking
you at least included the police in that reference?
A. Oh, certainly. Especially that night, yes. I also
included the University administrators.
(2) The war is to be waged with the
multiple-levels-of-action formula. Each person is to do
his own thing, whatever he can, whatever he thinks best,
using his imagination to find ways of resisting the
occupying forces. This theme has a familiar ring from its
recurrence during the preceding few days. We have
earlier quoted Braunstein's remarks on this subject at the
Dinkelspiel rally on February 9th. It is clear from a
variety of references in several rallies that this
formulation is meant to advocate a spectrum of activities
which might include contacting Congressmen,
persuading students in dormitories, being active on
campus at night, refusing to be intimidated by the
police, blocking doorways, occupying buildings,
breaking windows, putting the computer out of service
for a long time, destroying the computer, or doing other
things for which one might not wish to "take credit."
In his testimony Professor Franklin said he felt
impelled at the end of the rally to speak about:
. . .that action that was going to be taken, which
was essentially gpomg back to the dorms to talk
about the war in Southeast Asia and about the
police occupation of the campus and—for people
to be there and exercise their right. That it was
important for somebody to explain to people that
that action itself was, you know, just as legitimate
a part of this war as, say, the armed self defense of
the Vietnamese people or the people of Laos. . ..
And in that speech I mentioned using the methods
of people's war. And at that point I was speaking
very directly to the people there, I think, who
considered themselves revolutionaries. Because I
knew that they would have a basic understanding
of what that meant, and that that phrase summed
up a whole lot of experience.
Braunstein testified for Professor Franklin, 'There are
all sorts of actions on various levels, including people
breaking windows with rocks and people burning down
buildings, as yet unidentified people burning down
buildings, and so on, that sometimes have the same goals
in mind and sometimes don't."
Significant in this context was the term "people's
war." It was interpreted by various witnesses in different
ways. It seems to include a wide range of suggested
actions, some of which are nonviolent, and some of
which are violent. It can clearly include guerilla warfare.
Some witnesses interpreted this as its primary meaning,
others gave this meaning less prominence. Maoist
writings use the term "People's war" for all action, in
particular guerilla warfare, in which the warriors merge
with the masses. Professor Franklin acknowledge in his
testimony that guerilla warfare, including assassination
and bombings, is one important component of people's
war, but denied it was the one he had in mind when he
used the term in his spcech. Defense testimony indicated
that the concept of people's war extends beyond
military action, but did not deny that it prominently
includes military action. Given the repeated explicit
linkages of the struggle against the police occupation
army here and the war in Southeast Asia, in the context
of recent night violence on campus and an afternoon of
police confrontation, it is difficult to believe that most
listeners would be insensitive to the violent connotations
of this term. Why repeatedly use warlike terms and
images—such as Professor Franklin's "war on this
campus" if peaceful actions are intended?
Similar considerations apply to Professor Franklin's
advocacy of action to be taken against the occupation
army in small groups. It is clear that small groups can
conduct dormitory discussions and other peacefully
persuasive activities, and that this did in fact occur,
though we learned very little about the focus of such
discussions e.g., whether they were intended to foster
particular nonviolent or violent tactics of protest. In any
event, such dormitory discussions may well have been
one of the meanings of his alleged recommendation for
reliance upon affinity groups. He advised against mass
militant action, meaning essentially violent
confrontation with the police, on tactical grounds. Such
action was not feasible because the police were too
strong. It is alos clear that the smaller groups could
engage in violent activities as has often happened in
similar circumstances at Stanford during the past few
years-i.e., following night rallies permeated by angry
speech. Two days earlier, February 8, after a night of
"trashing", a sheet was distributed at a "movement"
rally under the title "Do It!" It endorsed the previous
night's activity and called for more of the same,
indicating that tight affinity groups can be helpful in
doing whatever people want to do.
Whatever the activities that Professor Franklin was
urging upon individuals and small groups, it appears that
lateness of the hour was positively desirable-"as late
into the night as possible". In view of the behavior ot
some individuals and affinity groups at Stanford in
similar circumstances during the past few years, it is
reasonable to suppose that lateness might be useful as a
cover for violent activities—though it could of course be
used for peaceful activities as well.
Professor Franklin's two Old Union speeches were
given in a hostile tone. This is apparent in the content of
the first speech, and the effect is heightened when one
listens to the tape and hears his tone of voice. Even
when the speech is briefly interrupted by a KZSU
interview, the angry tone and the emotional crowd
response can be clearly detected. Although thesecond
speech is covered over by a KZSU interview, similar
indications are available from the tape and from
testimony.
In the course of the hearing, both Professor Franklin
and Braunstein indicated that ambiguity about tactics
was desirable to these rally speeches because KZSU was
broadcasting them and the police would presumably
have tape recordings. To advocate violent tactics openly
in this context would have exposed the speaker to later
sanctions. We were informed in the hearing by Professor
Franklin of his "political decision" to keep his position
at Stanford, hence caution about open calls for
"revolutionary violence".
Thus, we are faced with a difficult problem: how to
interpret speech deliberately given in ambiguous terms.
But we have seen already that considerable clarification
emerges from a close examination of the text, from the
full context provided by preceding events, and from the
way in which the speech was delivered. In essence,
Professor Franklin came into a combustible situation,
focused hostility on certain targets, intensified existing
hostility toward those targets, and urged a spectrum of
actions against them: some peaceful, some coercive,
some violent. We must now turn our attention to his
audience in order to inquire whether they were likely to
understand him and whether Professor Franklin must
have expected the risk of prohibited conduct to be
increased by his behavior.
The tone and content of Professor Franklin's
speeches must have been particularly significant for two
groups: 1) people in the movement; 2) people who are
violence-prone for whatever reason. In respect to the
first, these are people who are responsive to Professor
Franklin by virtue of past association, respect,
dedication, and sharing of common goals. They tend to
understand the nuances of his speech, as was evident at
the hearing itself. As for the second grou, it is well
known that public meetings characterized by intense
anger and hints of violence tend to attract, both at the
meeting and via media coverage, individuals who are
drawn to violence for a variety of reasons, not
necessarily political. Whatever the reason for their
susceptibility to violence, they tend to find such
occasions exciting. They may be induced by angry
rhetoric to commit acts of gravity, particularly in the
context of recent examples of violent behavior.
Professor Franklin testified that he was aware of the
long-term, bitter antagonism between Venceremos and
FCM; and he was aware of the immediate, clearly
expressed hostility toward the small FCM group at the
rally. The presence of these mutually hostile groups at
the rally certainly added to the risk. The use of violent
rhetoric in such circumstances increased the probability
of attack and counter-attack.
We think that "movement" people were capable of
understanding the messages. We refer here to familiar
connotations understood by a group sharing common
intersts and values. For example, reference to "militant
action on campus" in 1971 is understood by many
people to mean "trashing " which in turn is understood
to mean "window-breaking." These are not the only
connotations of the terms, nor are they understood by
everyone who comes on campus. A few years ago, the
terms did not have these connotations. But common
usage in concrete situations has led to a widely shared
understanding.
Those devoted to the "movement" had a rich
refresher course in such terms during the rallies of the
preceding few days which we have already summarized.
Professor Franklin is explicit in his testimony that he
was aiming his remarks specifically at them, wanting
primarily to be un derstood by them. Braunstein
testified that there is special communication within the
"movement" and pointed out that Professor Franklin
referred to "us" at the rally. But the defense, in effect,
asks us to believe that, on the night of February 10,
individuals in the "movement" failed to understand the
coercive and violent connotations of phrases like "war
on this campus", taking action on multiple levels to
resist oppression here, and "we must learn from the
peoples of Southeast Asia that when confronted with an
occupation army, we must respond with the methods of
people's war". The defense puts forwards its bland
interpretation of such phrases even though they were
expressed in a very angry tone and in a context of
profound hostility toward the university by a respected
leader who generally approves coercive and violent
tactics in campus disputes (though he denies he
advocated them on this occasion). We must therefore
examine possible reasons why the audience might not
have detected the menacing connotations of his remarks
on the evening of February 10.
From the testimony in the hearing, we do not believe
members of the "movement" were obtuse; nor is there
anything credible in the record to suggest that they were
in such a conciliatory mood that his angry rhetoric failed
to rcach them. Were the "movement" members of
Professor Franklin's audience so concerned with trying
to win over the Roble group that they rejected all

coercive and violent connotations of his remarks? This
possibility deserves further consideration.
During the rally, "movement" people in control of
the meeting showed little consideration for the feelings
ol the Roble students. Indeed, Professor Franklin seems
to have been concerned about this situation, since he
devoted a good deal of his first speech to persuading the
Roble group to accept the "movement's" view of the
situation. As a Roble speaker made clear in the KZSU
interview, the difference between the Roble contingent
and the "movement" was not only one of demands
(narrow vs. broad) but of tactics (non-violent vs.
violent). In this episode, Professor Franklin
demonstrated his authority as a leader of the
"movement" when he easily stopped the flow of the
meeting, re-opened the question, made a major speech,
and got a re-vote.
In his way, Professor Franklin was trying to persuade
the Roble contingent to link up with the "movement" in
a united front, at least for the moment. His way of
undertaking this persuasion was itself inflamatory. He
made assertions of such hostile content in such an angry
manner regarding the University and the police that,
whatever their effect on the Roble group, they must
surely have intensified the resentment of many persons
favorable to the "movement" and thereby raised the
probability of violent actions later. We have earlier
quoted a portion of his first Old Union speech pertinent
to this point. Finally, his do-your-own-thing formula
permitted some encouragement for Roble students to
take peaceful actions and still leave room for
encouragement of "militant" actions by the
"movement".
This brings us again to one of the central themes in
the entire case. At Old Union as at White Plaza, the
actions urged by Professor Franklin were not exclusively
coercive or violent. He advocated a wide range of protest
actions: some peaceful, some coercive, some violent. If a
person removes valuable merchandise from a store,
paying for half, but not paying for the other half, is he
culpable for the part he stole? We believe that the
presence of peaceful recommendations cannot immunize
a person from sanctions if he has urged imminent
coercion and violence as well.
Once again, as at White Plaza, Professor Franklin was
the final speaker, and once again his speech was
promptly followed by events of a disruptive, coercive or
violent nature. The probability of this occurring by
chance is very small. At the least, it reflects his
leadership position in the "movement" and the riskiness
of those situations in which he spoke. He cannot avoid
the conclusion that his pseeches, the last on each
occasion, increased the probability that illegal acts
would follow the two rallies.
In an earlier section on "Fundamental Issues and
Standards", we have indicated that the University must
have the right to put some constraints on speech in
dangerous circumstances, but only with great caution.
This applies to acts of incitement to imminent lawless
action that arc likely to produce such action. "Lawless"
in the university context includes state or local laws, the
Policy on Campus Disruptions or other university
regulations, or common-law understandings of
professorial responsibility.
In judging the applicability of this standard to the
present charge, we have been guided by these questions:
(1) What is the entire context surrounding the alleged
incitement? (2) What was conmunicated to the
audience? (3) What would the speiker judge to be the
effect of his communication on the audience?
Since we wish to sustain the university's vital
tradition of fostering free expression in its widest
diversity, we are exceedingly cautious in considering
possible constraints on speech. If such constraints are
ever to be invoked, they must be reserved for extreme
situations. We are asking whether the context here was
that of a highly combustible situation, whether the
speaker gave an inflammatory message in that context,
and whether the speaker had good reason to anticipate
lhat his message would increase the risk of imminent
lawless action. If indeed we find that the speaker issued
a call to violence, he is not protected by having issued it
in euphemistic jargon. Such a call may be quite as
effective as one issued in more stark terms. In any event,
the language used here was hardly occult.
Although Professor Franklin's witnesses were inclined
to protect him by minimizing their understanding of
coercive and violent connotations in his speeches, they
did not exclude such connotations—nor did he. The
difference between them and administration witnesses
was mainly one of emphasis. In the spectrum of
activities advocated by Professof Franklin, the defense
emphasized the legal end, whereas the administration
emphasized the illegal end.
In our detailed analysis of the context for his Old
Union speeches, we have determined that persons active
in the "movement" must have been quite familiar with
the coercive and violent connotations of Professor
Franklin's phrases, that they were responsive to such
connotations, and that Professor Franklin must have
been aware of these facts.
Finally, we must consider the line of defense that,
even if Professor Franklin were considered to have
carried out such an incitement, he would nevertheless be
justified by his perception of Stanford as a fascist
institution playing an important role in an imperialist
war.
We recognize that Professor Franklin is pressing for
reform in important areas of social concern. Can this
justify coercive behavior in campus disputes, or the
fostering of a climate of violence on campus? Once any
person is granted this privilege in the name of a good
cause, we must grant it also to others who feel they have
worthy aims. When these rights conflict, as they
inevitably must, are we to condone low-grade guerilla
warfare on campus? If we deny to others what we grant
to Professor Franklin, we have adopted a double
standard: coercion and violence in the university may be
condoned if we approve its aims, but restricted if we
disapprove its aims. Then it becomes a simple question
of whose ox is gored. But every cause is fervently
supported by some, eloquently justified by some,
pursued with passion by some. In a way, every war is a
holy war. If we accept Professor Franklin's holiness, how
arc we to reject the holiness of other true believers? In
our view, this course is not morally defensible. We must
do our best to apply one standard across all political
preferences and that standard must not condone
violence on campus.

K. CONCLUSION
Taking into accoutn content, context, delivery, and
audience, did Professor Franklin's two Old Union
speeches include urging and inciting to disruption of
university activities, or threat to persons or property?
Must he have known that this exhortation would be
widely interpreted as immediate advocacy of disruptive
or violent behavior?
1. The situation was risky. Illegal acts had occurred
earlier that day. There was intense resentment toward
the war, the police, and the university; there had been
serious frustration for the "movement" earlier in the
day; bitter political adversaries were present at the rally
and identified by the chairman; protest actions including
coercive and violent possibilities were under discussion;
the police were present on campus; there was a well
known history of violence in similar circumstances at
Stanford. In general, the higher the risk, the less it takes
to trigger coercive and violent behavior.
2. The targets of Professor Franklin's animosity were
quite explicit-the police and the university. He made an
intensive effort in the two speeches to generate further
hostility toward these targets. He provided justification
for coercive and violent behavior toward them, without
specifying precisely what the nature of such acts might
be, leaving that to the judgment and imagination of each
individual or small group.
3. The urging of immediate retaliatory action towards
the police and the university was clear. A great sense of
urgency was conveyed by both the tone and the content
of his remarks. While no detailed blueprint for action
was provided, the necessity for prompt action wis a
strong message. The overall effect was to increase the
likelihood of imminent lawless action.
Taking into account the full context surround his
speeches at the Old Union rally, hte messages he
communicated to his audience, and what he should be
able to judge about the effect of these messages under
the circumstances, we reach the conclusion that
Professor Franklin intentionally urged and incited his
audience to engage in conduct which would disrupt
activities of the University and of members of the
University Community and threaten injury to individuals
an; property.
The Advisory Board thus finds that the charge in No.
10 is sustained.
DISSENTING OPINIONS
Professors Brown and Kennedy, while agreeing with
substantial portions of the majority's account, dissent as
follows:
The majority sustains the charge of incitement
against Professor Franklin citing (1) an extensive
background of material from speeches at this and
other rallies that supply context for his last speech;
(2) Professor Franklin's first speech at this rally,
which also supplies context and reveals relevant
attitudes of his own; and (3) words in the second
speech that constitute, in the majority's view,
sufficiently explicit invitations to do violence against
persons and property.
We dissent regarding some matters of context, as
well as on the finding with respect to Professor
Franklin's own speeches.
In describing the context of the rally, we would
give more weight than does the majority to the
presence of the Roble students and to their impact
upon events in the Old Union Courtyard. The
interaction between the group of Roble moderates
(concerned about the invasion of Laos but not part of
the "movement") and the "movement" group itself
provides a central theme for the rally. Professor
Franklin's own first speech is directed predominantly
to an attenuation of those tensions and to a
reconciliation that would accommodate the new
recruits to "movement" objectives. It is, in essence, a
long argument that political prisoners must not be
forgotten, and that there is a fundamental identity
between the struggle of Asian peoples against U.S.
imperialism and the struggle of oppressed people and
anti-war students against repressive forces at home.
As the majority states, the speech contains a heavy
tone of anger against the police and other forces that,
to Professor Franklin, sumbolize this oppression. We
nevertheless believe it plausible that the speech was
intended to make a group of Stanford students
identify, perhaps for the first time, with oppressed
people; we do not see evidence that Professor
Franklin's intention was to turn them explicitly to
violent actions. In no sense can this first Old Union
speech be regarded as actionable; indeed, the
University administration does not attempt to
persuade us to find against Professor Franklin on the
basis of its content. To the extent that it contains
intensity and anger, and to the extent that these are
directed against the police and the University, the
speech might be said to have added-along with other
speeches at the rally-to the risk that prohibited
conduct might follow. But all agree that nothing in
the content of this speech approaches incitement.
Indeed, we feel that the speech presented, in however
objectionable a style, some legitimate concerns about
the plight of prisoners, the existence of police
brutality, and other significant issues.
Clearly Professor Franklin and other speakers
believed that a major mission of the "movement"
people at the rally was to undertake the "education"
of the rest of the Stanford community. Professor
Franklin's own first speech concludes with a plea that
those present go out to the people "and teach them
what we have learned in the movement," and that
any who are not persuaded should "get up here [ile.
to the microphone] and we should discuss it." At the
conclusion of his speech he testifies that he went over
to discuss the matter further with the Roble group.
The speaker who followed Professor Franklin to the
podium commented that the important thing was to
"go to the dorms, go to the people we want to talk
t0...." A later speaker extends the suggestion by
hoping that those at the rally will go to the dorms
and "rap all night." Recruitment, broadening the base
of the "movement," educating the community: all
these were significant themes in the development o'
the meeting's context. By its relatively stronger
emphasis on the more violent rhetoric, in particular
Professor Franklin's, the majority has decided against
what seems to us a plausible, even persuasive, second
view of the matter.

The content of the second speech, of course, is not
available to us except through the testimony of
witnesses. According to Beyers, Professor Franklin
called for a "people's war against the occupation
army of the police," and he "suggested that people
should go back tot their dormitories, form meetings,
meet in small groups, decide whatever they wanted to
do, to do it as late at night as possible, and to do
things which would bring more of the occupation
here."' Professor Franklin's version in his affidavit is
only slightly different. He, too, calims to have said
that "when confronted with an occupation army we
must respond with the methods of people's war." Me
adds, "I ended by telling people that people's war
meant that they should go back into their
dormitories, organize people into small groups, talk
with them, play football, or whatever, as late into the
night as possible." These differences are not very
substantial; they can easily be accounted for by
differences in recollection.
The majority analyzes these collections of phrases
in such a way that they are strongly persuaded as to
their meaning and that the meaning sustains an
incitement charge, given such other factors as risk.
The logic consists essentially in the elimination of
various attenuative constructions that are more
benign. In our view this interpretation is not
"strongly persuasive." The phrases upon which
attention has been focused are isolated from a
substantial matrix of interstitial speech, the precise
construction of which we do not know, and about
which we must be careful not to draw too confident
appraisals. Two examples will illustrate the point.
First, Professor Franklin says that in the context in
which he used it, "People's war" was clearly indicated
to mean "thoroughly merging with the masses;" he
states that he used the football game as an example of
that kind of tactic. It is significant that virtually all of
the witnesses link the words "people's war" to the
example of the football game. Professor Franklin
states in his affidavit that this was the only exmaple
he used, and the cumulative testimony seems to bear
him out. Second, the phrase "as late into the night as
possible," interpreted by the majority as a call to
militant action by small groups, could equally have
appeared in a context in which it applied primarily to
late dormitory discussions and to legal (though
perhaps risky) methods of taking up the time of the
police. Such an interpretation gain in plausibility
from Professor Franklin's testimony that although he
does not in principle disapprove of trashing, he would
not have urged it on that occasion, both because of
the heavy presence of police on campus that night
and because it would have alienated those new to the
"movement."
The point is that none of these interpretations has
a great deal of certainty about it. The ones we have
just mentioned may be a little less plausible than
those favored by the majority, but only a little less.
The "hard" data on words are so fragmentary, and
depend so much on the kind of context-construction
that is very sensitive to whatever bias the witnesses
may have had, that we find them inadequate to meet
a "strongly persuasive" criterion that Professor
Franklin is guilty as charged by the University
administration.
We are not strongly persuaded by the impressions
of the speech given by various witnesses-as opposed
to actual reconstructions of wording. Such
impressions are especially subject to the bias of
expectations. The differing treatments of Professor
Franklin's account of the football game provide one
example among many. Some witnesses regarded it as
a euphemism for more violent activity, others
regarded it merely as an opportunity for a bad pun,
while still others interpreted it as we would, as an
invitation to occupy the time of the police.
In effect, the majority report argues that Professor
Franklin was employing words well understood to his
audience but not to others. But there is no convincing
evidence that any substantial number of the audience
would have translated his speech into an invitation to
commit violent acts. Each phrase, like "people's
war," has been subject to a number of conflicting
interpretations in the testimony. Furthermore, the
reconstruction of a code depends on one's ability to
capture a reasonably large portion of the message,
and in this instance we have only scattered elements.
Although we think it is quite possible that Professor
Franklin advocated a range of actions some of which
may have been illegal, we do no find the evidence
strongly persuasive that his speech constituted the
advocacy of imminent lawless action.
The majority emphasizes the extremity of the risk
in the situation; we do not disagree with their
evaluation, but we stress more heavily the doubts we
have about the context and the meaning of the words
actually spoken.
to find against Professor Franklin on this charge
might, we believe, force a faculty member addressing
a political rally in the future to guard against possible
cryptic meanings that his speech might convey to a
segment of his audience whenever a situation of high
risk obtains. The social cost of such a prohibition
must be balanced against the benefits to be derived
from being able to prosecute somewhat ambiguous
speech in dangerous situations. We find the costs too
great.
Accordingly, we do not sustain the charge against
Professor Franklin as stated in Paragraph 10.
