# Advisory Board Findings: The Computation Center Incident
## 
### 
A. CHARGES
The relevant University charge concerning the
Computation Center incident is contained in paragraph 9
of the "Statement of Charges."
9. Further, on February 10, 1971 and in connection
with the activity at the Computation Center
described in paragraph 8, students and other persons
were arrested for failure to disperse after orders had
been given to clear an area around the Computation
Center. Professor Franklin signilicantly interfered
with orderly dispersal by intentionally urging and
inciting students and other persons present at the
Computation Center to disregard or disobey such
orders to disperse.
B. FINDING OF FACTS
1. Occupation of the Computation Center. Shortly
before 1:00 p.m. on February 10, 1971, the
Computation Center building was closed on the basis of
a telephone order from Provost Miller, but the computer
was kept running. Handwritten notices were posted on
the doors of the Computation Center; doors, windows,
and gates were locked; and two campus policemen were
stationed at the front door. Provost Miller had been
informed that a group was proceeding from White Plaza
to the Computation Center. An estimated 100 to 200
demonstrators arrived at the Computation Center
shortly after 1:00 p.m. There were apparently no
previous collective decisions or explicit understandings
by the group as to what actions were to be taken or as to
whether to damage the computer. Some subgroups may
have had previous understandings; different individuals
testified as to different expectations. There were no
plans for formal picketing with picket signs as in many
"strikes," and there had been no attempt to
communicate with Computation Center workers about a
strike after the Dinkelspiel meeting of February 9.
At about 1:15 p.m., forcible entry was made into the
Computation Center; the gate was scaled and the back
door forced. About 50 demonstrators then entered
through the back door. As they moved through the
building, they opened other entrances and admitted
other demonstrators. Power to the building and to the
computer was shut off at 1:20 by pulling a master
switch located near the back door. Some 100-200 more
persons entered and milled about inside the
Computation Center. Some demonstrators, according to
officials of the Center, jimmied the door and entered the
machine room. They went to the 2301 drums, yanked
out wires, and flipped switches behind gates or doors on
two of the data storage drums. Other demonstrators in
that group went directly to the racks where tape reels
were stored and began looking through them. The
telephone lines were made inoperative. Once
demonstrators were inside the building and the doors
were thrown open, the Stanford police did not try to

stop movement in and out of the building. Some of the
demonstrators posted themselves at the doors, and to
some extent controlled entry and exit, for example,
denying entry to a photographer.
During this period, there was a continual movement
of demonstrators into and out of the Computation
Center. It is agreed that some time during the
occupation approximately $800 of physical damage was
done to the premises and contents of the Computation
Center, not counting any costs of shut-down time on the
computer. This damage was partly caused by the pulling
of the wires and damage to the 2301 unit, partly to the
premises. Two fire hoses were taken out of racks arid
valves opened, but the water had been turned off earlier
by the University. The printout of each of three printers
was removed. It is agreed that no substantial damage was
done to the computer itself. However, the shutdown,
lasting until about 8:00 p.m., made it impossible for the
Computation Center to process 700-800 student and
faculty jobs scheduled for that period. Montgomery
testified that these jobs would be run during the
succeeding two weeks.
Given the fact that the demonstrators illegally seized
the Computation Center and made impossible
continuation of its regular activities, the Board does not
consider further details on the conduct of the occupiers
important for Charge 9 against Professor Franklin. It
should be noted that the occupiers refused to obey the
requests to leave the building required by law-by Bruce
Wiggins on behalf of Stanford University and by Officers
Marron, Rosa and Tamm of the Santa Clara Sheriffs
office. However, as a context for other events, we note
briefly some undisputed facts concerning the
occupation.
Professor Franklin met his 1:15 class. Only seven of
the 150 registered students were present. He believed the
others were at the Computation Center and suggested
moving the class to the area outside the Center.
Professor Franklin did not hold his class because, he
testified, many of his students were inside the
Computation Center. It is uncontested that he remained
outside the Computation Center, talking with individuals
about a variety of topics prior to the arrival of the
police.
Bruce Wiggins, Stanford Director of Public Safety,
arrived at the Computation Center soon after its
occupation. He walked through and around the building
with Assistant Fire Chief Barr. Soon thereafter, around
2:00 p.m., he telephoned the Santa Clara Sheriffs office
and told them of the occupation.
Shortly after 2:00 p.m., C. D. Marron of the Santa
Clara Sheriffs office arrived at the Computation Center.
He too walked through the building, and then went to
Redwood Hall nearby to confer with Wiggins and others,
including Messrs. Rosenzweig and Schwartz from the

University administration, Sergeant Tamm and Captain
Rosa of the Santa Clara Sheriffs office, and an Assistant
District Attorney of Santa Clara County.
At about 3:00 p.m., it was decided that Wiggins
should return to the Computation Center and issue, in
the name of Stanford University, a declaration of
trespass, declaring the occupation a violation of Stanford
University regulations and ordering the occupants to
leave immediately. Wiggins used a bullhorn as he moved
through the building making this declaration. Wiggins
claims he was jostled, pushed and shoved; it is agreed
that his announcement was greeted by jeers and catcalls,
and that virtually no one left the building in response to
his order. He then returned to the group at Redwood
Hall.
At some point, probably after 3:00 p.m., an informal
meeting was held by the demonstrators. It was chaired
by Janet Weiss, near the door of the Computation
Center, partly inside and partly outside the building.
Although reports on this meeting are somewhat
confused, apparently there was an informal discussion as
to what to do, including whether to continue the
occupation of the Computation Center, what to do if
the police came, and whether to damage the computer.
The discussion, according to Harry Press, a University
witness, included talk about what would be the impact
on student support if the computer were wrecked. Janet
Weiss is reported to have stressed the political neutrality
of machines, urging that they not be damaged.
Apparently agreement was reached to stay in the
Computation Center until the police came, and then to
leave voluntarily without damaging the computer.
Station KZSU, misunderstanding this vote, reported that
the occupiers would damage the computer, but Janet
Weiss asked them to broadcast a retraction of that
report. There may have been other, smaller meetings of
the occupiers during the afternoon; testimony on this
question is confusing.
At about 4:00 p.m., the group in Redwood Hall
decided that Messrs. Marron, Rosa, and Tamm would go
back to the Computation Center and again try to
persuade the occupants to leave voluntarily. They did so,
asking what the occupants wanted, calling attention to
the vulnerability of the computer and the data it
contained, and to possible injury to persons in the
University and in the hospital. The responses of the
demonstrators were that the occupants wanted to get
the Gamut-H program, SRI research, and war-related
research out of the Computation Center; the precise
nature of all the demands is unclear. Marron testified
that there were scattered shouts of "Down with SRI"
and "Get SRI out." Few if any of the occupiers left. The
three officers returned to Redwood Hall.
After further discussion by the group in Redwood
Hall, the three officers again returned to the
Computation Center. The police announced to the
occupants that they had been informed that the SRI
work had been stopped at the Computation Center.
Some demonstrators replied that such word was not
good enough, and they wanted a written statement from
President Lyman. After a brief discussion, the police said
there was nothing more that could be done, and the
three officers returned again to Redwood Hall.
2. Order to Disperse and Police Arrival. Police
officers had been called and their arrival was imminent.
Just before they were expected to arrive, Marron went
out to the front steps of Redwood Hall, and, using a
bullhorn, he made a formal statement declaring the
occupation of the Center and its immediately adjacent
territory unlawful and ordering the demonstrators to
disperse, also stating that they were subject to arrest if
they did not do so. It is uncontested that he made this
announcement three times, pointing in three different
directions, with one aimed directly at the people inside
the Computation Center and the two others at the
people in the area outside the Computation Center to his
left and right. There was no response to these orders to
disperse, although Professor Franklin's witness
Litterman said he heard them.
Very soon thereafter, the police arrived and entered
the Computation Center. Lookouts for the occupiers
observed the police arrival and notified those inside, so
that the occupiers left the building rapidly just as the
police were entering from another direction. The police
made no arrests in the building, although they indicated
that they would have made arrests if the occupiers had
remained in the building. Marron entered the building
immediately after the police, continuing to declare the
assembly an unlawful one, ordering dispersal, and
threatening arrest for any who did not obey the order to
disperse. Since the Computation Center had been
cleared, he then went outside and walked clockwise
around the building continuing to give his order to
disperse. He continued his series of announcements and,
by his testimony, returned to the front of the
Computation Center about eight minutes after the
arrival of the police. A double line of police had been
formed in front of the Center. Marron repeated his
complete order at least three or four times in front of
the Computation Center, stating that the area from the
Computation Center to Jordan Way was to be cleared.
Some demonstrators did not hear or did not know the
extent of the prohibited area. Marron testified that
ordering dispersal from a wide area was common police
practice. He testified to his concern that the police
officers under his command would be vulnerable to
rock-throwing and possible injury if the demonstrators
were permitted to stay close to the police lines and the
building which had just been cleared. As long as a
confrontation between demonstrators and police
persisted, indefinite police presence would have been
necessary to protect the building and computer.
As police lines were formed in front of the
Computation Center and as Marron repeated his
announcement, some clusters of demonstrators remained
in front of the police line, perhaps six to ten feet away,
chanting "Pigs off campus" and other slogans, and
loudly questioning the legality of Marron's order to
disperse. These demonstrators formed several clusters;
they included a number of members of the
"movement." Other demonstrators, faculty observers,
students, and passersby were farther from the police line
in two grassy areas and in the park lot; they were less
active.
After leaving the Computation Center, the small
clusters of demonstrators near the police lines made no
movement to withdraw in response to Marron's repeated
order. At first the more distant persons also did not
withdraw. Professor Franklin, Marron, and other
witnesses who were near the grassy areas testified,
however, that the more distant crowd began to withdraw
as the order to disperse was repeated. Professor Franklin,
in his affidavit prepared shortly after the event, stated
that he believed "most" of the crowd was beginning to
move back; in his oral testimony at the hearing he stated
that he now believes that a smaller number was
beginning to move away-perhaps only more than half,
or fewer. Marron, Moses, and Waterman, testifying for
the University, and Professor Franklin's witness Owen
Blank in a direct report to KZSU from the scene, all
agreed that the portion of the crowd away from the
police lines was definitely moving back in response to
the repeated announcements to disperse. Most of
Professor Franklin's witnesses, primarily individuals
standing near the front portion of the grassy area nearest
the Computation Center, testified that they did not see
any significant part of the crowd moving back. This
apparent contradiction in testimony is explainable, in
part at least, by the fact that those witnesses who had
reason to be observing the rear part of the crowd saw the
movement away, while those who were focusing their
attention on the police lines and events nearby did not
see the movement of the rear portion of the crowd.
3. Professor Franklin's Role. At this stage, Professor
Franklin moved forward and stood in front of a cluster
of demonstrators who were loudly stating that the order
to disperse was illegal. Some of Professor Franklin's
close political associates were part of this cluster. They
were giving a clenched fist salute while vociferously
denouncing the police order. Professor Franklin,
according to testimony and photographs, stood quietly
in front of this active group and observed what was
occurring. He then moved closer to Tamm, who was near
the police line, and argued briefly and vigorously that
the dispersal order was illegal and he had a right to
remain as a faculty observer. Tamm disagreed on both
points, pointing out that Franklin was not on the official
list of faculty observers supplied by the President's
Office. Professor Franklin then wheeled and strode
toward Dean Lincoln Moses. Moses was some 30-50 feet
farther back, perhaps 40-60 feet from Tamm, and was
beginning to leave in response to the police order.
Professor Franklin called out, "Lincoln Moses!".
Professor Franklin shouted some words like "God damn
it, this happens every time the police charge. The faculty
observers are all gone!" He argued loudly that Moses
should not leave, that the order to disperse was
improper, and that faculty observers, like Moses, should
remain to observe possible police brutality. There is
substantial agreement on what Professor Franklin said to
Moses in this brief but loud set of statements. It is
further agreed that Professor Franklin was heard by a
nearby circle of 10 to 12 persons and by others farther
away; although he was close to Moses, Professor
Franklin was shouting his arguments. Professor Franklin
testified that he was being careful while shouting at
Moses not to use language in describing the police which
would reduce the likelihood of his persuading Moses to

stay. Professor Franklin's statements to Moses took
about a minute and a half. Franklin then headed back
toward the police line, some 40-60 feet away.
Witnesses for the University testified that Professor
Franklin was shouting loudly as soon as he took his first
steps back toward the police lines, angrily denouncing
the police order as illegal. He made his way back to
Tamm, some 50 feet distant, through the substantial
group remaining in the first grassy area. The items of
dispute are whether Professor Franklin was addressing
his shouts to the police or to others in the crowd when
he started shouting, and whether his shouts included
exhortations that people not leave.
4. Testimony that Professor Franklin Urged and
Incited the Crowd to Stay. Moses reports that at first he
was convinced by Franklin's statement that he should
stay as a laculty observer and started to follow Franklin
back toward the police line. However, he goes on,
He meanwhile continued talking. He turned his back
to me and went toward the line, talking loudly
and .. . waving his arms or gesticulating. . . . And as
he went, a group of people formed about him and
went with him. And whether he was addressing only
them or generally all who could hear I wouldn't say.
On cross-examination, Moses said,
Then as you [Franklin] went on, you appeared to me
to be encouraging as many people to come as would
come. And that is what turned me around. ... I felt
that I was just being recruited to be one more person
present. ... I took the whole crowd to be provocative
of the police.
Under further cross-examination by Professor Franklin,
Moses reiterated this testimony and his statement that
Professor Franklin was urging people around him to
disobey the police order and return. Although he
admitted it was "conceivable" that Professor Franklin's
words were solely addressed to the police, he said that
his understanding was clearly to the contrary.
Moses was asked by Professor Franklin on
cross-examination whether Professor Franklin could not
have been merely urging faculty observers to join him in
going towards the police lines. Moses responded that
Professor Franklin was not addressing his remarks to
faculty members but to the entire crowd or all within
the sound of his voice. Moses said, "You spoke to me
about faculty people. And then as you went on you
appeared to me to be encouraging as many people to
come as would come. And that is what turned me
around."
Waterman testified that before Franklin approached
Moses,
.... the crowd was definitely starting to drift back
this way ... in fact they were drifting back in
appreciable numbers. ... I definitely had the
impression that the crisis was past, that people were
leaving, and that the situation was about to calm
down.
He then testified that he observed Franklin at this point
crossing the grass in front of Redwood Hall toward the
police, although Waterman was not sure whether before
or after the Moses encounter,
. . . shouting to the crowd, telling them to come back,
challenging the right of the sheriffs men to declare it
an illegal assembly, and saying that they had a perfect
right to hold a peaceful meeting and that they should
return to do so. .. . He seemed to be shouting in
general to the bunch that were leaving and had gotten
about as far as the second grassy plot.
Broholm, reporting from the scene for KZSU,
reported (a tape recording is available) first that "the
crowd was definitely moving back"; and then that
Professor Franklin "was haranguing the crowd to stay"
and resist the order to disperse, and "was berating the
crowd for leaving." On cross-examination by Professor
Franklin, Broholm confirmed this on-the-scene report:
"After you turned away from Moses you turned back in
that direction and began yelling. And again, "You
turned around, faced back toward the police . . . and
you started yelling in that direction." It is important to
note that Broholm placed the Moses-Franklin encounter
and subsequent Franklin shouting near the edge of the
crosswalk in front of Redwood Hall, at least 60 feet
from Tamm and Marron. Under further
cross-examination, Broholm said that he now doubts the
accuracy of his on-the-scene report that Professor
Franklin was "haranguing the crowd to stay," and that
instead Professor Franklin was probably shouting at
Tamm. He did not, however, change his estimate that
Professor Franklin began shouting in an area some 60
feet from Tamm, who was separated from Professor
Franklin by a substantial number of individuals in the
first grassy area. We believe that Broholm's on-the-scene
account can be presumed more accurate than his
recollection eight months later.
Owen Blank, another KZSU announcer, also reported
from the scene (recorded on tape) that the crowd in the
grassy areas was moving away at first, and then turned
and moved back toward the police line as Professor
Franklin was shouting. As Professor Franklin's witness,
Blank attached the accuracy of the taped reports by
Broholm and Blank or, Professor Franklin's role in
reversing the crowd's dispersal, but Blank's testimony
when related to the times on the taped reports instead
confirms the on-the-scene reports by Broholm and
Blank. Although Broholm and Blank apologized to
Moses for errors in Broholm's reporting at the time,
these errors concerned Moses's alleged assent
to Professor Franklin's urgings, not Professor
Franklin's own behavior.
Professor Edward Begle testified that he saw
Professor Franklin apparently urging a group of young
people to stay at the gathering, but it is not clear
whether this was the group of people around Moses and
the details of his testimony are not confirmed by others.
The witnesses who heard Professor Franklin's words
testified that he, as he strode back towards Tamm, was
angry and shouting, repeating the same arguments as
before, that the order to disperse was illegal and the
crowd should not leave. Moses's, Waterman's and
Broholm's testimony was cited above. Professor
Franklin's witness Doering testified that "He [Professor
Franklin] walked away from Moses a couple of paces,
and I think he said some things on the way." Doering
places the Moses encounter at about the group of birth
trees furthest from the police lines, some 30-40 feet
away.
As Professor Franklin returned to confront Tamm, an
indefinite number of other persons moved along, beside,
or behind him. In moving back toward Tamm, Professor
Franklin moved through a substantial number of persons
between Moses and Tamm. These included some of
Professor Franklin's political associates (identified in
pictures) and others not identified. Thus, it seems
certain that Professor Franklin's shouts against dispersal
would be clearly heard by these persons, whether or not
they were primarily addressed to Tamm, and that
Professor Franklin must surely have known that they
would be received by at least these demonstrators

through whom he advanced, whether or not they were
heard by persons behind Moses and Fiofessor
Franklin in the second grassy area.
5. Testimony that Professor Franklin Did Not Urge
and Incite the Crowd to Stay. On the other hand,
Professor Franklin and many of his witnesses testified
that Professor Franklin spoke only to Moses when he
strode from Tamm to Moses, and that he spoke only to
Tamm when he turned from Moses back toward the
police line. They described his comments to both as not
intended to incite other people to disobey the police
order. One of his witnesses, photographer Harrison,
described both the scene and Professor Franklin's
following confrontation with Tamm as "tranquil."
Another witness, Professor Switzer, described the
atmosphere as a "picnic." But these evaluations are
specifically controverted by pictures, tapes and other
testimony. Nearly all, including Professor Charles Stein
who was near Moses, deny hearing Professor Franklin
directly address anyone other than Moses or Tamm.
Most of Professor Franklin's witnesses testified that they
did not hear, or did not remember, what Professor
Franklin was saying as he strode forward, until he was
close to Tamm (e.g., Pace, Lonsdale, Hunkeler). They
report that they heard him shout only as he neared
Tamm, and then only at Tamm. This, however, is not
inconsistent with Moses', Waterman's and Broholm's
testimony that Professor Franklin was shouting earlier
when much farther from the police. Most of Protessor
Franklin's witnesses were nearer the police line, mainly
facing the police, and hence did not observe Professor
Franklin's entire movement forward. But Doering did,
and testified that Professor Franklin spoke as soon as he
left Moses. Hunkeler did not have Professor Franklin
under constant scrutiny and could hear only a few
words.
Professor Franklin testified that he began to shout at
Tamm from a distance because he wanted to be sure that
Tamm understood why he was returning to the police
line and that his action was intended to be conciliatory
and to lessen the danger of a police charge and arrests of
the demonstrators there. But that he should have done
so at such a great distance seems highly implausible
under the circumstances, and conflicts with considerable
testimony from witnesses from both parties. Clearly,
Professor Franklin did, as he stated, address Tamm,
saying, "Don, this is ridiculous ..." as he approached
Tamm and Marron, apparently from a distance of five to
ten feet; this is confirmed by his witnesses who were
near the police line.
With one exception, Professor Franklin's own
witnesses did not support his version of events as he left
Moses. The only witness for Professor Franklin who gave
evidence contradictory to that of the University
witnesses was Downey, who testified that, although he
was not sure, Professor Franklin was not saying anything
as he left Moses and walked towards the police lines. It is
likely that Downey was confused about the timing of his
interaction with Professor Franklin. Downey testified
that he never was with Professor Franklin until after the
encounter with Moses, but pictures show Downey
standing with Professor Franklin and the group shouting
at the police at a time identified by Professor Franklin's
witnesses as prior to his words with Moses. With this
doubtful exception, Professor Franklin produced no
witness who contradicted the testimony of
Administration witnesses who observed his shouting as
he left Moses at a considerable distance from the police
lines.
Professor Franklin was apparently himself confused
as to the locus of his confrontation with Moses in
relation to the police lines, and, in his testimony, he
minimized the distance from the police lines. He
testified that he was only a few steps away from Tamm
when he turned away from Moses.
One witness for Professor Franklin, Stein, supported
this spatial image by testifying that Professor Franklin
was about 15 feet from the police lines. No other
witness for either party supported Professor Franklin on
this point; indeed, five witnesses for Professor Franklin
directly contradicted him in their testimony.
6. Franklin-Tamm Confrontation and Police Charge.
It is agreed, and supported by photographic evidence,
that after Professor Franklin approached Tamm, a
substantial number of people, approximately 30, closed
in around and behind Professor Franklin as he angrily
confronted Tamm. Professor Franklin testified that he
was aware of people moving in from both sides but he
didn't know how many newsmen were present. Some
witnesses, including Professor Franklin's witness,
Litterman, testified that the crowd threatened to engulf
the police officers and Professor Franklin. Professor
Franklin and Tamm stood face to face shouting angrily
at one another. Witnesses of both parties described the
situation as very tense. Professor Franklin was repeating
his basic arguments and Tamm was denying the validity
of both.
After a very short interval, two, perhaps more,
policemen moved rapidly from behind Tamm and
Marron to try to arrest Professor Franklin, but Professor
Franklin slipped away from them, perhaps with the help
of some of his friends. At almost exactly the same time
the police line moved forward on the demonstrators in
what is commonly called a "police charge."
We note, parenthetically, that we do not consider
Professor Franklin's acknowledged urging of Moses and
other faculty observers to stay to be objectionable under
the charge. Formally designated faculty observers were
asked by the University administration to be present,
even though some, not identified to the police, were
apparently struck during the charge. The presence of
faculty observers could have been expected to reduce
the risk of injury to persons.
7. Findings of Fact. The Board finds the evidence
strongly persuasive that: (a) the police order to disperse
was clearly reasonable, given the illegal seizure of the
Computation Center, possible serious damage to the
computer and data stored there, possible danger to
police and demonstrators outside after the building was
cleared, and the need to return the Center promptly to
normal action without police presence; (b) while some
demonstrators refused to disperse after the building was
cleared, a substantial portion of the crowd was moving
back in response to repeated police orders, prior to
Professor Franklin's intervention; (c) Professor Franklin
played a central role in reversing the movement of the
crowd to disperse and his shouts and behavior
significantly increased the likelihood that a substantial
number of those present would stay; (d) Professor
Franklin intended his shouts after leaving Moses to be
heard by, and to influence the crowd to remain at the
scene in defiance of the police order to disperse.
However, even if lie did not directly address his shouts
to the crowd, he must reasonably have expected that a
result of his shouts would be to incite members of the
crowd to disobey the dispersal order, increasing the risk
to themselves; Professor Franklin's conduct and shouts

cannot reasonably be interpreted as merely attempts to
persuade Moses and other faculty observers to stay, to
conciliate the police or the crowd, or to lessen the
danger of a police charge or arrests with their attendant
dangers to the demonstrators. We comment further on
these findings in the following section.
C. SUPPLEMENTA R Y EVIDENCE AND EINDINGS
A number of points in the testimony require special
attention in order to amplify and interpret the findings
of fact indicated above.
1. Charge of University Negligence. Professor
Franklin suggests that the University administration was
negligent in not announcing to the occupiers of the
Computation Center that work on the disputed SRI
contract had, in fact, been halted one or more days
before, because this information might have been
sufficient to induce the occupiers to leave the
Computation Center peacefully. Alternatively, he
implies that had some official of the University
explained that an investigation was under way, this
might have induced the occupiers to lave the building
voluntarily without the police having to be called.
In fact, SRI had apparently stopped using the
computer for the GAMUT-Hand its other programs
prior to February 10, but it had not informed Stanford
of any policy decision regarding GAMUT-H or other SRI
projects on the Stanford computer. The SRI accounts
had not been cancelled. Moreover, the Stanford
administration at that time believed, on the information
received from SRI, that there was no violation of
University policy; SRI had indicated to the University
administration that the research in question was not
classified and was available for publication. Thus Provost
Miller testified that he did not believe it would be proper
for the University to issue any statement pending receipt
of information on SRl's position on the whole matter.
Moreover, the Computer Facilities Committee of the
University was meeting on the afternoon of February
10, during the occupation, precisely to discuss the issues
raised by the GAMLTT-H program.
We do not agree with Professor Franklin's argument
that the University administration's refusal to negotiate
with, or report to, the Computation Center occupiers
justifies the refusal of the demonstrators to leave the
Computation Center which they were illegally
occupying. Some persons believe the University
administration would have been well advised to issue a
public statement that it was investigating the whole
situation, although we find the University
administration's position on the matter easy to
understand, given the uncertainty about SRl's position
and the fact that the relevant University committee was
in fact meeting at 2 p.m. on the afternoon of the
occupation. But even if the University officials involved
were guilty of faulty administrative judgment, this
would in no way justify the illegal occupation of the
Computation Center and its continuance in the face of
both University and police orders to disperse. Moreover,
it is important to remember that the protestors had
made no direct effort vis-a-vis the administration to halt
the GAMUT-H work beyond one unsigned leaflet,
although they had, according to their own testimony,
known of it for at least a week or two; the Computation
Center sit-in was in no sense a "last resort" step after all
legal avenues were exhausted. The demands of the
occupiers were vague, and we see no reason to believe
that they would have left the Center merely on
notification by the administration that the problem was
under active investigation.
2. Argument that Police Order to Disperse was
Unreasonable and Illegal. Professor Franklin argues that
the police order to disperse was unreasonable and
unlawful-that the crowd outside the Computation
Center was peaceful and within its rights of free
assembly as guaranteed by the First Amendment to the
Constitution. Thus, not only was he within his
constitutional rights in refusing to disperse and urging
others not to disperse, but indeed he was following his
duty as a citizen and a professor in so acting.
California law clearly gives to police the authority to
disperse illegal assemblies and sets out the legal
requirements for such orders. Only a court of law, which
we are not, could finally determine whether in fact the
police declaration of illegal assembly and the order to
disperse in this instance was legal. In our judgment, the
police order to disperse was clearly reasonable and, as we
understand the law, was probably legal as well. An illegal
seizure of the Computation Center had occurred, and
both University and police officials were understandably
concerned lest serious damage be done to the valuable
equipment housed there and to the even more valuable
data stored there. It was widely known that major
damage to computers, totalling millions of dollars, had
been done to other university computers.
The order declaring the occupation of the
Computation Center an illegal assembly and ordering
dispersal was a single order aimed at the occupiers of the
Computation Center when they were inside the building
and at those participating in the demonstration outside
the building, both before and following its evacuation.
Marron's testimony on this point is clear, and it is
confirmed by one of Professor Franklin's wftnesses. He
began giving the complete order before the arrival of the
police and continued with the same order during the
evacuation of the Computation Center and following the
evacuation when part of the demonstrators stayed close
to the Computation Center building. That this order to
evacuate the building was fully warranted can hardly be
denied. It was that same order that insisted that the
demonstrators withdraw a substantial distance from the
building being evacuated.
Moreover, we conclude that the order to disperse
back to Jordan Way outside the building was reasonable
on its own merits as well. The police knew that violence
had occurred on the Stanford campus during
police-demonstrator confrontations several times during
the past few years; the precaution of moving the crowd
back a substantial distance from the police line was
understandable, and was probably calculated to lessen
injury to both the police and the demonstrators. Thus
we conclude that the police order declaring the
demonstration an illegal assembly and ordering dispersal
was clearly reasonable in these circumstances.
Professor Franklin may have had the right as a citizen
briefly to protest the police order which he believed
unreasonable. But, especially given the strongly negative
police response to his first protest which he himself
noted, he surely did not have the right to increase the
risk of injury to others by urging them to stay and
disobey the police order.
3. Argument that Professor Franklin's Action was
Aimed at Conciliation and Reducing Danger to Those
Present. Professor Franklin argues that his action outside
the Computation Center was aimed primarily at
protecting demonstrators from injury or arrest at the
hands of the police that his argument with faculty
observers (and others) to remain and with the police
against the legality of the dispersal order was aimed at
avoiding such danger to the demonstrators. Some of his
witnesses testified that in their judgment Professor
Franklin's purpose was conciliation and avoidance of
danger to the demonstrators.
We find it plausible that Professor Franklin may have
believed that he was acting to protect the rights of his
friends and co-workers in the "movement" in some ol
his actions. It is clear that those in the small group
clustered in front of the police line as the larger group of
demonstrators moved back were largely members of the
"movement," including several of its best known
participants. It thus became increasingly likely that these
individuals would be in the forefront of a police charge
and most likely to be arrested if, in fact, a charge did
occur. That Professor Franklin should endeavor to
prevent the isolation of these individuals from the rest of
the group of demonstrators and passersby is
understandable.
But that he believed that his actions were basically
conciliatory and aimed primarily at lessening the
likelihood of a police charge and arrest is difficult to
accept. His behavior was surely encouraging other people
to remain at greatly increased risks to themselves.
Shouting loudly and angrily at either faculty observers,
the police, or others in the crowd is hardly calculated to
calm crowd or police behavior, or to lessen the
likelihood of violence. Thus, Professor Franklin's loud
shouts as he turned from Moses some 40-60 feet from
the police could hardly have been calculated to calm the
situation. He apparently addressed Tamm by name only
after he had approached within 10 feet or so of the
police; surely he would have done so sooner had his
main goal been to persuade Tamm, and he would have
not shouted to the crowd upon turning away from
Moses. Professor Franklin described Tamm during the
second confrontation as "more immediately hostile than
I had ever seen him before." Moreover, Professor
Franklin himself testified that he knew "for a certainty"
that a police charge or arrest would occur under such
conditions once the police line-up occurred and the
order to disperse was read. He testified that he knew of
no case where such a situation was not followed by a
police charge or arrests. On his own testimony, he had
these points in mind prior to his discussion with Moses
and his shouting return to confront Tamm. Several of
Professor Franklin's witnesses testified that they too
thought a police charge to be highly likely or inevitable,
and became even surer when they saw Professor Franklin
striding back to confront Tamm the second time. Given
this testimony, it is difficult to accept the argument that
Professor Franklin seriously hoped by his actions to
eliminate the possibility of either a police charge or
arrests outside the Computation Center.
It is difficult to believe that Professor Franklin's duty
as a professor encompassed using others to stay and
confront the police when he felt certain that the result
would be a police charge and arrests, with a danger of
serious personal injury (which he testified is likely
whenever a police charge occurs). He testified that he
personally was resolved not to give way to fascism and
was going to stay and confront the police no matter
what happened. He testified, as did several of his
witnesses, that dispersal would be a political defeat for
the "movement" and an important victory for the
police.
Although Professor Franklin felt certain, or almost
certain, that a police charge and arrest would ensue
soon, he did not advise any people in the demonstrator's
group, either those in the "movement" or other
students, of the danger of a police charge, possible
injury, and arrests. Professor Franklin and some of his
close political associates testified of their awareness of
the impending police action at a time when others, less
experienced, did not anticipate any trouble. Professor
Franklin testified:
"My own experience in having been in just lots and
lots of police confrontations, is that if an order is
given declaring something an illegal assembly, telling
people to disperse, once that takes place then there
are basically one of two things that are going to
happen. Either the pigs are going to charge the people
or they're going to move for a mass bust.
"1 don't think I've ever seen a declaration of an illegal
assembly -maybe I have but I certainly can't
remember-l've never seen a declaration of an illegal
assembly not followed by one of those two actions.
Now it can be seconds; it can be minutes. Sometimes
they can declare an area an illegal assembly and then
nothing happens for some period of time and they're
moving what's really happening is they're moving in
for a mass bust. . . .
"And one of the signs you look for in a police line
prior to a charge is whether—one thing is the visors.
The other thing is whether they're smoking or not. If
they're not smoking then you look upon that as, you
know, a charge could take place at any time. And of
course, one of the things that they try to do is to
make the charge unexpected. So once you've got in a
situation the charge could take place the next second
or it might not take place for some time, but
something is going to happen."
Professor Franklin had difficulty explaining his
failure to warn others. He testified:
"As far as the question of whether I talked to
demonstrators on the lawn of the computer center
about the possibility of arrests and beatings and so
forth: I just—l mean, I may have had—it's possible
that I talked to some people about something about
it. But I certainly don't remember that at all, any
more than 1 remember. ... Well, I'm sure that I
didn't urge anybody to stay and I'm sure I didn't urge
anybody to leave, if that's what-if that's what the
point of that question was."
4. Did Professor Franklin Intentionally Urge and
Incite People to Remain in Defiance of the Police Order
to Disperse? The charge states that "Professor Franklin
significantly interfered with orderly dispersal by
intentionally urging and inciting students and other
persons present at the Computation Center to disregard
or disobey such orders to disperse." The evidence seems
to us convincing that the result of Professor Franklin's
behavior was to help significantly to induce students and
other persons present at the Computation Center to
disregard or disobey such orders to disperse. But
Professor Franklin argues that he did not specifically
address any individual other than Moses and Tamm. He
said, "I wouldn't take it upon myself to do that to
people in that situation because I knew that people were
defenseless in that situation." No witness testified that
Professor Franklin directly addressed other specific
individuals, although there is considerable testimony
that he addressed the crowd in more general terms,
$

urging it to resist the allegedly illegal police order to
disperse. The question is whether these shouts and this
behavior, not addressed to specific individuals other than
Moses and Tamm, amount to intentionally urging and
inciting students and other persons to disregard the
police order.
We find the evidence strongly persuasive that
Professor Franklin intentionally urged and incited
students and others present to disregard or disobey the
police orders. His purpose was to encourage others to
remain. Except for his own denial, all percipient
witnesses testified that Professor Franklin, after leaving
Moses, directly addressed his shouts to the crowd. But
even it he did not directly address the crowd, he must
have expected the likely effect of his behavior under
those circumstances to be to urge and incite others to
stay. Professor Franklin surely would not need to have
addressed each individual by name to have urged them
to stay.
The conclusion that the incitement was intentional is
reinforced by Professor Franklin's testimony that, even
knowing the results of his actions, he would not have
changed his behavior outside the Computation Center.
He said, "The only reasonable course of action that I
could see was what 1 did. And in looking back on it now
from, 1 don't know, eight or nine months, I still can't see
any other alternative."
The charge is not that Professor Franklin disobeyed
the police order himself, but that he intentionally
incited others to disobey the order. His behavior
increased the risk to others, a risk of which many were
unaware. The evidence meets the standards for
incitement that we set out earlier.
CONCLUSION
We find the evidence strongly persuasive that
Professor Franklin ' did significantly interfere with
orderly dispersal following the clearing of the
Computation Center by intentionally urging and inciting
students and other persons present to disregard or
disobey such orders to disperse, that this police order to
disperse was clearly reasonable under the circumstances,
and that Professor Franklin's conduct and speech did
substantially increase the danger of injury to other
persons.
DISSENTING OPINION
Professors Brown and Kennedy, although in accord
with much of the descriptive account of the majority
report on the events outside the Computation Center,
dissent as follows:
We place a sufficiently different interpretive weight
on the evidence at certain crucial points to make us
unable to sustain the charge.
1. The first of these centers on an element of
Professor Franklin's conduct that is central in the
testimony of virtually every witness, his concern that
faculty members remain as observers-a concern without
which many of his actions remain inexplicable. This is a
major substantive point in the conversations with Tamm
and Moses, it persuades Professor Eklof to stay on the
scene when he had decided to leave and persuades
Professor Moses in retrospect that perhaps he should
have stayed, it is a subject Professor Franklin pursues
with Professor Hastorf after the police charge, and it is
the dominant concern in Professor Franldin's later
conversation with Litterman and in a speech in front of
President Lyman's office. He asserts that he felt (a) that
the continuing presence of faculty observers might avert

a police charge, (b) that "respectable" faculty like Moses
might help him persuade the police of the right of
people to remain, and (c) that if there were a charge, the
faculty presence might minimize its brutality. He
testified that he felt a police charge would be
"inevitable" if there was a "withdrawal of the faculty
observers and other kinds of neutral people who had
made up a significant section of that crowd."
We agree with the majority report that "the presence
of faculty observers could have been expected to reduce
the risk of injury to persons." However, that fact,
coupled with Professor Franklin's own concern to keep
faculty observers on the scene, cause us to dissent from
the majority conclusion: "that he believed his actions
were basically conciliatory and aimed primarily at
lessening the likelihood of a police charge and arrest is
difficult to accept." We find the conclusion plausible
rather than difficult even though we believe that
Professor Franklin's manner of seeking this end was
unwise.
2. A second difference of interpretation involves fact
more than motivation, and we find the call a close one
either way. This concerns the crucial period between the
time Professor Franklin leaves Moses and the time he is
back in conversation with Tamm, some 40 to 60 feet
away. His own witnesses state that he was shouting
loudly during these moments, but assert, along with him,
that the comments were addressed only to Moses and
Tamm. The majority report believes that in addition he
spoke directly to others, and that, even if he had not, his
voice and demeanor were such that others would
inevitably hear him, and that he should have known that
his words and actions would influence them not to
disperse. Broholm and Blank are no longer completely
sure that Professor Franklin was directly haranguing the
crowd, although that was their on-the-spot impression.
Moses believes he was, though his assessment is
predicated on action after Professor Franklin turned his
back on him, so that the direction of the shouts is only
conjecture. Waterman believes Professor Franklin was
directly enlisting crowd support, but his timing of the
event is uncertain, and he saw only Professor Franklin's
back and left side. The identity of his audience is thus
once again conjecture. It is clear, however, that by the
time Professor Franklin was within ten feet of Tamm he
was yelling directly at him such words as, "Hey, Don,
this is ridiculous . . . In the interval he was apparently
asserting "that it was not an illegal assembly, and that
people should stay," though no witness produced
unshakeable testimony that he shouted this directly at
individuals within the crowd.
The possible reconstructions not all mutually
exclusive, are (a) that he spoke directly to Moses and
Tamm, but that he was overheard by others, some of
whom responded to his exhortations, (b) that he was
directly urging members of the crowd to stay, or (c) that
he was expressing his disgust and anger at the police
order either to the heavens or to onlookers in general,
rather than as specific instructions to members of the
crowd. There is clear evidence for the first alternative,
evidence (though less persuasive) for the second, and
plausibility for the third. The weight one puts on such
alternative explanations, and the interpretation one
makes of Professor Franklin's actions during these
moments, is dependent on a third consideration.
3. The third matter Involves an element in Professor
Franklin's conduct that, like the first, appears in the
testimony of virtually every witness: his strongly stated
conviction that the police order to disperse was illegal.

This is the second substantive point of his conversations
with both Moses and Tamm. We accept the majority
opinion that it is beyond our province or expertise to
determine whether or not the order was legal, and with
the majority "we conclude that the police order
declaring this demonstration an illegal assembly and
ordering dispersal was clearly reasonable in these
circumstances."
However, if a citizen wishes to question a police order
he believes unreasonable and unlawful, he has the right
to do so for a limited period of time. We place great
weight on this right, and believe that at least in part
Professor Franklin was trying to assert it: he believed the
order to be both unreasonable and unlawful, and so he
exercised the right of a citizen to object to it, in a brief
initial dispute with Tamm, in the attempt to enlist
Moses, and then in the second heated exchange with
Tamm. Ihe elapsed time of these three conversations
was probably no more than three or four minutes. To
Professor Franklin, standing on the grassy area where all
witnesses agree that they had seen no illegal acts, the
order to disperse may have seemed patently
unreasonable. That the Board in hindsight does not share
this assessment does not diminish the right of Professor
Franklin to have held it at the time or to have acted
upon it, lor a reasonable length of time, in the name of
the right of peaceable assembly. The fact that the mood
of the crowd immediately following the evacuation of
the Computation Center was reasonably calm and may
have caused no immediate danger to the police or the
building gives added legitimacy to the right, under such
conditions, to make a brief protest against the order, and
even to seek faculty help in so doing. That Professor
Franklin tried to enlist the aid of Professor Moses in his
exercise of this right is looked upon by no member of
the Board as culpable. It is even arguable that Professor
Franklin, if he did indeed urge "students and others" to
remain, was not engaging in culpable action, but only
reminding them of their own rights as citizens to protest,
at least briefly, an order that might be considered
unlawful or unreasonable.
4. The accumulation of the above considerations
leads us to believe (a) that Professor Franklin tried to get
other faculty members to remain on the scene in order
to reduce the likelihood of a police charge, (b) that his
continuing argument about the order to disperse was an
attempt to protest a police decision he felt to be illegal,
and one which as a citizen he had a right to protest, at
least briefly, and (c) that these two strongly held
convictions, uncontested in the testimony, led him to
loud and angry shouting, clearly directed at Moses and
Tamm, and possibly though not so clearly directed at
others, centering on the need for faculty observers to
stay, and the right of others to stay. The University's
Supplementary Written Brief states, "The issue is
whether a faculty member in a situation laden with the
risk of violent confrontation between demonstrators and
the police is acting properly when by his conduct he
increases that risk." We conclude that, even if one
accepts this as a statement of "the issue," such a
description does not adequately match the conduct
charged, and that there is not in our view strongly
persuasive evidence that his words or actions constituted
an incitement. Consequently, the charge that "Professor
Franklin did significantly interfere with orderly dispersal
by intentionally urging and inciting students and other
persons present at the Computation Center to disregard
or disobey such orders to disperse" is not one that we
can sustain.
A. CHARGES
The relevant University charge concerning the
Computation Center incident is contained in paragraph 9
of the "Statement of Charges."
9. Further, on February 10, 1971 and in connection
with the activity at the Computation Center
described in paragraph 8, students and other persons
were arrested for failure to disperse after orders had
been given to clear an area around the Computation
Center. Professor Franklin signilicantly interfered
with orderly dispersal by intentionally urging and
inciting students and other persons present at the
Computation Center to disregard or disobey such
orders to disperse.
B. FINDING OF FACTS
1. Occupation of the Computation Center. Shortly
before 1:00 p.m. on February 10, 1971, the
Computation Center building was closed on the basis of
a telephone order from Provost Miller, but the computer
was kept running. Handwritten notices were posted on
the doors of the Computation Center; doors, windows,
and gates were locked; and two campus policemen were
stationed at the front door. Provost Miller had been
informed that a group was proceeding from White Plaza
to the Computation Center. An estimated 100 to 200
demonstrators arrived at the Computation Center
shortly after 1:00 p.m. There were apparently no
previous collective decisions or explicit understandings
by the group as to what actions were to be taken or as to
whether to damage the computer. Some subgroups may
have had previous understandings; different individuals
testified as to different expectations. There were no
plans for formal picketing with picket signs as in many
"strikes," and there had been no attempt to
communicate with Computation Center workers about a
strike after the Dinkelspiel meeting of February 9.
At about 1:15 p.m., forcible entry was made into the
Computation Center; the gate was scaled and the back
door forced. About 50 demonstrators then entered
through the back door. As they moved through the
building, they opened other entrances and admitted
other demonstrators. Power to the building and to the
computer was shut off at 1:20 by pulling a master
switch located near the back door. Some 100-200 more
persons entered and milled about inside the
Computation Center. Some demonstrators, according to
officials of the Center, jimmied the door and entered the
machine room. They went to the 2301 drums, yanked
out wires, and flipped switches behind gates or doors on
two of the data storage drums. Other demonstrators in
that group went directly to the racks where tape reels
were stored and began looking through them. The
telephone lines were made inoperative. Once
demonstrators were inside the building and the doors
were thrown open, the Stanford police did not try to

stop movement in and out of the building. Some of the
demonstrators posted themselves at the doors, and to
some extent controlled entry and exit, for example,
denying entry to a photographer.
During this period, there was a continual movement
of demonstrators into and out of the Computation
Center. It is agreed that some time during the
occupation approximately $800 of physical damage was
done to the premises and contents of the Computation
Center, not counting any costs of shut-down time on the
computer. This damage was partly caused by the pulling
of the wires and damage to the 2301 unit, partly to the
premises. Two fire hoses were taken out of racks arid
valves opened, but the water had been turned off earlier
by the University. The printout of each of three printers
was removed. It is agreed that no substantial damage was
done to the computer itself. However, the shutdown,
lasting until about 8:00 p.m., made it impossible for the
Computation Center to process 700-800 student and
faculty jobs scheduled for that period. Montgomery
testified that these jobs would be run during the
succeeding two weeks.
Given the fact that the demonstrators illegally seized
the Computation Center and made impossible
continuation of its regular activities, the Board does not
consider further details on the conduct of the occupiers
important for Charge 9 against Professor Franklin. It
should be noted that the occupiers refused to obey the
requests to leave the building required by law-by Bruce
Wiggins on behalf of Stanford University and by Officers
Marron, Rosa and Tamm of the Santa Clara Sheriffs
office. However, as a context for other events, we note
briefly some undisputed facts concerning the
occupation.
Professor Franklin met his 1:15 class. Only seven of
the 150 registered students were present. He believed the
others were at the Computation Center and suggested
moving the class to the area outside the Center.
Professor Franklin did not hold his class because, he
testified, many of his students were inside the
Computation Center. It is uncontested that he remained
outside the Computation Center, talking with individuals
about a variety of topics prior to the arrival of the
police.
Bruce Wiggins, Stanford Director of Public Safety,
arrived at the Computation Center soon after its
occupation. He walked through and around the building
with Assistant Fire Chief Barr. Soon thereafter, around
2:00 p.m., he telephoned the Santa Clara Sheriffs office
and told them of the occupation.
Shortly after 2:00 p.m., C. D. Marron of the Santa
Clara Sheriffs office arrived at the Computation Center.
He too walked through the building, and then went to
Redwood Hall nearby to confer with Wiggins and others,
including Messrs. Rosenzweig and Schwartz from the

University administration, Sergeant Tamm and Captain
Rosa of the Santa Clara Sheriffs office, and an Assistant
District Attorney of Santa Clara County.
At about 3:00 p.m., it was decided that Wiggins
should return to the Computation Center and issue, in
the name of Stanford University, a declaration of
trespass, declaring the occupation a violation of Stanford
University regulations and ordering the occupants to
leave immediately. Wiggins used a bullhorn as he moved
through the building making this declaration. Wiggins
claims he was jostled, pushed and shoved; it is agreed
that his announcement was greeted by jeers and catcalls,
and that virtually no one left the building in response to
his order. He then returned to the group at Redwood
Hall.
At some point, probably after 3:00 p.m., an informal
meeting was held by the demonstrators. It was chaired
by Janet Weiss, near the door of the Computation
Center, partly inside and partly outside the building.
Although reports on this meeting are somewhat
confused, apparently there was an informal discussion as
to what to do, including whether to continue the
occupation of the Computation Center, what to do if
the police came, and whether to damage the computer.
The discussion, according to Harry Press, a University
witness, included talk about what would be the impact
on student support if the computer were wrecked. Janet
Weiss is reported to have stressed the political neutrality
of machines, urging that they not be damaged.
Apparently agreement was reached to stay in the
Computation Center until the police came, and then to
leave voluntarily without damaging the computer.
Station KZSU, misunderstanding this vote, reported that
the occupiers would damage the computer, but Janet
Weiss asked them to broadcast a retraction of that
report. There may have been other, smaller meetings of
the occupiers during the afternoon; testimony on this
question is confusing.
At about 4:00 p.m., the group in Redwood Hall
decided that Messrs. Marron, Rosa, and Tamm would go
back to the Computation Center and again try to
persuade the occupants to leave voluntarily. They did so,
asking what the occupants wanted, calling attention to
the vulnerability of the computer and the data it
contained, and to possible injury to persons in the
University and in the hospital. The responses of the
demonstrators were that the occupants wanted to get
the Gamut-H program, SRI research, and war-related
research out of the Computation Center; the precise
nature of all the demands is unclear. Marron testified
that there were scattered shouts of "Down with SRI"
and "Get SRI out." Few if any of the occupiers left. The
three officers returned to Redwood Hall.
After further discussion by the group in Redwood
Hall, the three officers again returned to the
Computation Center. The police announced to the
occupants that they had been informed that the SRI
work had been stopped at the Computation Center.
Some demonstrators replied that such word was not
good enough, and they wanted a written statement from
President Lyman. After a brief discussion, the police said
there was nothing more that could be done, and the
three officers returned again to Redwood Hall.
2. Order to Disperse and Police Arrival. Police
officers had been called and their arrival was imminent.
Just before they were expected to arrive, Marron went
out to the front steps of Redwood Hall, and, using a
bullhorn, he made a formal statement declaring the
occupation of the Center and its immediately adjacent
territory unlawful and ordering the demonstrators to
disperse, also stating that they were subject to arrest if
they did not do so. It is uncontested that he made this
announcement three times, pointing in three different
directions, with one aimed directly at the people inside
the Computation Center and the two others at the
people in the area outside the Computation Center to his
left and right. There was no response to these orders to
disperse, although Professor Franklin's witness
Litterman said he heard them.
Very soon thereafter, the police arrived and entered
the Computation Center. Lookouts for the occupiers
observed the police arrival and notified those inside, so
that the occupiers left the building rapidly just as the
police were entering from another direction. The police
made no arrests in the building, although they indicated
that they would have made arrests if the occupiers had
remained in the building. Marron entered the building
immediately after the police, continuing to declare the
assembly an unlawful one, ordering dispersal, and
threatening arrest for any who did not obey the order to
disperse. Since the Computation Center had been
cleared, he then went outside and walked clockwise
around the building continuing to give his order to
disperse. He continued his series of announcements and,
by his testimony, returned to the front of the
Computation Center about eight minutes after the
arrival of the police. A double line of police had been
formed in front of the Center. Marron repeated his
complete order at least three or four times in front of
the Computation Center, stating that the area from the
Computation Center to Jordan Way was to be cleared.
Some demonstrators did not hear or did not know the
extent of the prohibited area. Marron testified that
ordering dispersal from a wide area was common police
practice. He testified to his concern that the police
officers under his command would be vulnerable to
rock-throwing and possible injury if the demonstrators
were permitted to stay close to the police lines and the
building which had just been cleared. As long as a
confrontation between demonstrators and police
persisted, indefinite police presence would have been
necessary to protect the building and computer.
As police lines were formed in front of the
Computation Center and as Marron repeated his
announcement, some clusters of demonstrators remained
in front of the police line, perhaps six to ten feet away,
chanting "Pigs off campus" and other slogans, and
loudly questioning the legality of Marron's order to
disperse. These demonstrators formed several clusters;
they included a number of members of the
"movement." Other demonstrators, faculty observers,
students, and passersby were farther from the police line
in two grassy areas and in the park lot; they were less
active.
After leaving the Computation Center, the small
clusters of demonstrators near the police lines made no
movement to withdraw in response to Marron's repeated
order. At first the more distant persons also did not
withdraw. Professor Franklin, Marron, and other
witnesses who were near the grassy areas testified,
however, that the more distant crowd began to withdraw
as the order to disperse was repeated. Professor Franklin,
in his affidavit prepared shortly after the event, stated
that he believed "most" of the crowd was beginning to
move back; in his oral testimony at the hearing he stated
that he now believes that a smaller number was
beginning to move away-perhaps only more than half,
or fewer. Marron, Moses, and Waterman, testifying for
the University, and Professor Franklin's witness Owen
Blank in a direct report to KZSU from the scene, all
agreed that the portion of the crowd away from the
police lines was definitely moving back in response to
the repeated announcements to disperse. Most of
Professor Franklin's witnesses, primarily individuals
standing near the front portion of the grassy area nearest
the Computation Center, testified that they did not see
any significant part of the crowd moving back. This
apparent contradiction in testimony is explainable, in
part at least, by the fact that those witnesses who had
reason to be observing the rear part of the crowd saw the
movement away, while those who were focusing their
attention on the police lines and events nearby did not
see the movement of the rear portion of the crowd.
3. Professor Franklin's Role. At this stage, Professor
Franklin moved forward and stood in front of a cluster
of demonstrators who were loudly stating that the order
to disperse was illegal. Some of Professor Franklin's
close political associates were part of this cluster. They
were giving a clenched fist salute while vociferously
denouncing the police order. Professor Franklin,
according to testimony and photographs, stood quietly
in front of this active group and observed what was
occurring. He then moved closer to Tamm, who was near
the police line, and argued briefly and vigorously that
the dispersal order was illegal and he had a right to
remain as a faculty observer. Tamm disagreed on both
points, pointing out that Franklin was not on the official
list of faculty observers supplied by the President's
Office. Professor Franklin then wheeled and strode
toward Dean Lincoln Moses. Moses was some 30-50 feet
farther back, perhaps 40-60 feet from Tamm, and was
beginning to leave in response to the police order.
Professor Franklin called out, "Lincoln Moses!".
Professor Franklin shouted some words like "God damn
it, this happens every time the police charge. The faculty
observers are all gone!" He argued loudly that Moses
should not leave, that the order to disperse was
improper, and that faculty observers, like Moses, should
remain to observe possible police brutality. There is
substantial agreement on what Professor Franklin said to
Moses in this brief but loud set of statements. It is
further agreed that Professor Franklin was heard by a
nearby circle of 10 to 12 persons and by others farther
away; although he was close to Moses, Professor
Franklin was shouting his arguments. Professor Franklin
testified that he was being careful while shouting at
Moses not to use language in describing the police which
would reduce the likelihood of his persuading Moses to

stay. Professor Franklin's statements to Moses took
about a minute and a half. Franklin then headed back
toward the police line, some 40-60 feet away.
Witnesses for the University testified that Professor
Franklin was shouting loudly as soon as he took his first
steps back toward the police lines, angrily denouncing
the police order as illegal. He made his way back to
Tamm, some 50 feet distant, through the substantial
group remaining in the first grassy area. The items of
dispute are whether Professor Franklin was addressing
his shouts to the police or to others in the crowd when
he started shouting, and whether his shouts included
exhortations that people not leave.
4. Testimony that Professor Franklin Urged and
Incited the Crowd to Stay. Moses reports that at first he
was convinced by Franklin's statement that he should
stay as a laculty observer and started to follow Franklin
back toward the police line. However, he goes on,
He meanwhile continued talking. He turned his back
to me and went toward the line, talking loudly
and .. . waving his arms or gesticulating. . . . And as
he went, a group of people formed about him and
went with him. And whether he was addressing only
them or generally all who could hear I wouldn't say.
On cross-examination, Moses said,
Then as you [Franklin] went on, you appeared to me
to be encouraging as many people to come as would
come. And that is what turned me around. ... I felt
that I was just being recruited to be one more person
present. ... I took the whole crowd to be provocative
of the police.
Under further cross-examination by Professor Franklin,
Moses reiterated this testimony and his statement that
Professor Franklin was urging people around him to
disobey the police order and return. Although he
admitted it was "conceivable" that Professor Franklin's
words were solely addressed to the police, he said that
his understanding was clearly to the contrary.
Moses was asked by Professor Franklin on
cross-examination whether Professor Franklin could not
have been merely urging faculty observers to join him in
going towards the police lines. Moses responded that
Professor Franklin was not addressing his remarks to
faculty members but to the entire crowd or all within
the sound of his voice. Moses said, "You spoke to me
about faculty people. And then as you went on you
appeared to me to be encouraging as many people to
come as would come. And that is what turned me
around."
Waterman testified that before Franklin approached
Moses,
.... the crowd was definitely starting to drift back
this way ... in fact they were drifting back in
appreciable numbers. ... I definitely had the
impression that the crisis was past, that people were
leaving, and that the situation was about to calm
down.
He then testified that he observed Franklin at this point
crossing the grass in front of Redwood Hall toward the
police, although Waterman was not sure whether before
or after the Moses encounter,
. . . shouting to the crowd, telling them to come back,
challenging the right of the sheriffs men to declare it
an illegal assembly, and saying that they had a perfect
right to hold a peaceful meeting and that they should
return to do so. .. . He seemed to be shouting in
general to the bunch that were leaving and had gotten
about as far as the second grassy plot.
Broholm, reporting from the scene for KZSU,
reported (a tape recording is available) first that "the
crowd was definitely moving back"; and then that
Professor Franklin "was haranguing the crowd to stay"
and resist the order to disperse, and "was berating the
crowd for leaving." On cross-examination by Professor
Franklin, Broholm confirmed this on-the-scene report:
"After you turned away from Moses you turned back in
that direction and began yelling. And again, "You
turned around, faced back toward the police . . . and
you started yelling in that direction." It is important to
note that Broholm placed the Moses-Franklin encounter
and subsequent Franklin shouting near the edge of the
crosswalk in front of Redwood Hall, at least 60 feet
from Tamm and Marron. Under further
cross-examination, Broholm said that he now doubts the
accuracy of his on-the-scene report that Professor
Franklin was "haranguing the crowd to stay," and that
instead Professor Franklin was probably shouting at
Tamm. He did not, however, change his estimate that
Professor Franklin began shouting in an area some 60
feet from Tamm, who was separated from Professor
Franklin by a substantial number of individuals in the
first grassy area. We believe that Broholm's on-the-scene
account can be presumed more accurate than his
recollection eight months later.
Owen Blank, another KZSU announcer, also reported
from the scene (recorded on tape) that the crowd in the
grassy areas was moving away at first, and then turned
and moved back toward the police line as Professor
Franklin was shouting. As Professor Franklin's witness,
Blank attached the accuracy of the taped reports by
Broholm and Blank or, Professor Franklin's role in
reversing the crowd's dispersal, but Blank's testimony
when related to the times on the taped reports instead
confirms the on-the-scene reports by Broholm and
Blank. Although Broholm and Blank apologized to
Moses for errors in Broholm's reporting at the time,
these errors concerned Moses's alleged assent
to Professor Franklin's urgings, not Professor
Franklin's own behavior.
Professor Edward Begle testified that he saw
Professor Franklin apparently urging a group of young
people to stay at the gathering, but it is not clear
whether this was the group of people around Moses and
the details of his testimony are not confirmed by others.
The witnesses who heard Professor Franklin's words
testified that he, as he strode back towards Tamm, was
angry and shouting, repeating the same arguments as
before, that the order to disperse was illegal and the
crowd should not leave. Moses's, Waterman's and
Broholm's testimony was cited above. Professor
Franklin's witness Doering testified that "He [Professor
Franklin] walked away from Moses a couple of paces,
and I think he said some things on the way." Doering
places the Moses encounter at about the group of birth
trees furthest from the police lines, some 30-40 feet
away.
As Professor Franklin returned to confront Tamm, an
indefinite number of other persons moved along, beside,
or behind him. In moving back toward Tamm, Professor
Franklin moved through a substantial number of persons
between Moses and Tamm. These included some of
Professor Franklin's political associates (identified in
pictures) and others not identified. Thus, it seems
certain that Professor Franklin's shouts against dispersal
would be clearly heard by these persons, whether or not
they were primarily addressed to Tamm, and that
Professor Franklin must surely have known that they
would be received by at least these demonstrators

through whom he advanced, whether or not they were
heard by persons behind Moses and Fiofessor
Franklin in the second grassy area.
5. Testimony that Professor Franklin Did Not Urge
and Incite the Crowd to Stay. On the other hand,
Professor Franklin and many of his witnesses testified
that Professor Franklin spoke only to Moses when he
strode from Tamm to Moses, and that he spoke only to
Tamm when he turned from Moses back toward the
police line. They described his comments to both as not
intended to incite other people to disobey the police
order. One of his witnesses, photographer Harrison,
described both the scene and Professor Franklin's
following confrontation with Tamm as "tranquil."
Another witness, Professor Switzer, described the
atmosphere as a "picnic." But these evaluations are
specifically controverted by pictures, tapes and other
testimony. Nearly all, including Professor Charles Stein
who was near Moses, deny hearing Professor Franklin
directly address anyone other than Moses or Tamm.
Most of Professor Franklin's witnesses testified that they
did not hear, or did not remember, what Professor
Franklin was saying as he strode forward, until he was
close to Tamm (e.g., Pace, Lonsdale, Hunkeler). They
report that they heard him shout only as he neared
Tamm, and then only at Tamm. This, however, is not
inconsistent with Moses', Waterman's and Broholm's
testimony that Professor Franklin was shouting earlier
when much farther from the police. Most of Protessor
Franklin's witnesses were nearer the police line, mainly
facing the police, and hence did not observe Professor
Franklin's entire movement forward. But Doering did,
and testified that Professor Franklin spoke as soon as he
left Moses. Hunkeler did not have Professor Franklin
under constant scrutiny and could hear only a few
words.
Professor Franklin testified that he began to shout at
Tamm from a distance because he wanted to be sure that
Tamm understood why he was returning to the police
line and that his action was intended to be conciliatory
and to lessen the danger of a police charge and arrests of
the demonstrators there. But that he should have done
so at such a great distance seems highly implausible
under the circumstances, and conflicts with considerable
testimony from witnesses from both parties. Clearly,
Professor Franklin did, as he stated, address Tamm,
saying, "Don, this is ridiculous ..." as he approached
Tamm and Marron, apparently from a distance of five to
ten feet; this is confirmed by his witnesses who were
near the police line.
With one exception, Professor Franklin's own
witnesses did not support his version of events as he left
Moses. The only witness for Professor Franklin who gave
evidence contradictory to that of the University
witnesses was Downey, who testified that, although he
was not sure, Professor Franklin was not saying anything
as he left Moses and walked towards the police lines. It is
likely that Downey was confused about the timing of his
interaction with Professor Franklin. Downey testified
that he never was with Professor Franklin until after the
encounter with Moses, but pictures show Downey
standing with Professor Franklin and the group shouting
at the police at a time identified by Professor Franklin's
witnesses as prior to his words with Moses. With this
doubtful exception, Professor Franklin produced no
witness who contradicted the testimony of
Administration witnesses who observed his shouting as
he left Moses at a considerable distance from the police
lines.
Professor Franklin was apparently himself confused
as to the locus of his confrontation with Moses in
relation to the police lines, and, in his testimony, he
minimized the distance from the police lines. He
testified that he was only a few steps away from Tamm
when he turned away from Moses.
One witness for Professor Franklin, Stein, supported
this spatial image by testifying that Professor Franklin
was about 15 feet from the police lines. No other
witness for either party supported Professor Franklin on
this point; indeed, five witnesses for Professor Franklin
directly contradicted him in their testimony.
6. Franklin-Tamm Confrontation and Police Charge.
It is agreed, and supported by photographic evidence,
that after Professor Franklin approached Tamm, a
substantial number of people, approximately 30, closed
in around and behind Professor Franklin as he angrily
confronted Tamm. Professor Franklin testified that he
was aware of people moving in from both sides but he
didn't know how many newsmen were present. Some
witnesses, including Professor Franklin's witness,
Litterman, testified that the crowd threatened to engulf
the police officers and Professor Franklin. Professor
Franklin and Tamm stood face to face shouting angrily
at one another. Witnesses of both parties described the
situation as very tense. Professor Franklin was repeating
his basic arguments and Tamm was denying the validity
of both.
After a very short interval, two, perhaps more,
policemen moved rapidly from behind Tamm and
Marron to try to arrest Professor Franklin, but Professor
Franklin slipped away from them, perhaps with the help
of some of his friends. At almost exactly the same time
the police line moved forward on the demonstrators in
what is commonly called a "police charge."
We note, parenthetically, that we do not consider
Professor Franklin's acknowledged urging of Moses and
other faculty observers to stay to be objectionable under
the charge. Formally designated faculty observers were
asked by the University administration to be present,
even though some, not identified to the police, were
apparently struck during the charge. The presence of
faculty observers could have been expected to reduce
the risk of injury to persons.
7. Findings of Fact. The Board finds the evidence
strongly persuasive that: (a) the police order to disperse
was clearly reasonable, given the illegal seizure of the
Computation Center, possible serious damage to the
computer and data stored there, possible danger to
police and demonstrators outside after the building was
cleared, and the need to return the Center promptly to
normal action without police presence; (b) while some
demonstrators refused to disperse after the building was
cleared, a substantial portion of the crowd was moving
back in response to repeated police orders, prior to
Professor Franklin's intervention; (c) Professor Franklin
played a central role in reversing the movement of the
crowd to disperse and his shouts and behavior
significantly increased the likelihood that a substantial
number of those present would stay; (d) Professor
Franklin intended his shouts after leaving Moses to be
heard by, and to influence the crowd to remain at the
scene in defiance of the police order to disperse.
However, even if lie did not directly address his shouts
to the crowd, he must reasonably have expected that a
result of his shouts would be to incite members of the
crowd to disobey the dispersal order, increasing the risk
to themselves; Professor Franklin's conduct and shouts

cannot reasonably be interpreted as merely attempts to
persuade Moses and other faculty observers to stay, to
conciliate the police or the crowd, or to lessen the
danger of a police charge or arrests with their attendant
dangers to the demonstrators. We comment further on
these findings in the following section.
C. SUPPLEMENTA R Y EVIDENCE AND EINDINGS
A number of points in the testimony require special
attention in order to amplify and interpret the findings
of fact indicated above.
1. Charge of University Negligence. Professor
Franklin suggests that the University administration was
negligent in not announcing to the occupiers of the
Computation Center that work on the disputed SRI
contract had, in fact, been halted one or more days
before, because this information might have been
sufficient to induce the occupiers to leave the
Computation Center peacefully. Alternatively, he
implies that had some official of the University
explained that an investigation was under way, this
might have induced the occupiers to lave the building
voluntarily without the police having to be called.
In fact, SRI had apparently stopped using the
computer for the GAMUT-Hand its other programs
prior to February 10, but it had not informed Stanford
of any policy decision regarding GAMUT-H or other SRI
projects on the Stanford computer. The SRI accounts
had not been cancelled. Moreover, the Stanford
administration at that time believed, on the information
received from SRI, that there was no violation of
University policy; SRI had indicated to the University
administration that the research in question was not
classified and was available for publication. Thus Provost
Miller testified that he did not believe it would be proper
for the University to issue any statement pending receipt
of information on SRl's position on the whole matter.
Moreover, the Computer Facilities Committee of the
University was meeting on the afternoon of February
10, during the occupation, precisely to discuss the issues
raised by the GAMLTT-H program.
We do not agree with Professor Franklin's argument
that the University administration's refusal to negotiate
with, or report to, the Computation Center occupiers
justifies the refusal of the demonstrators to leave the
Computation Center which they were illegally
occupying. Some persons believe the University
administration would have been well advised to issue a
public statement that it was investigating the whole
situation, although we find the University
administration's position on the matter easy to
understand, given the uncertainty about SRl's position
and the fact that the relevant University committee was
in fact meeting at 2 p.m. on the afternoon of the
occupation. But even if the University officials involved
were guilty of faulty administrative judgment, this
would in no way justify the illegal occupation of the
Computation Center and its continuance in the face of
both University and police orders to disperse. Moreover,
it is important to remember that the protestors had
made no direct effort vis-a-vis the administration to halt
the GAMUT-H work beyond one unsigned leaflet,
although they had, according to their own testimony,
known of it for at least a week or two; the Computation
Center sit-in was in no sense a "last resort" step after all
legal avenues were exhausted. The demands of the
occupiers were vague, and we see no reason to believe
that they would have left the Center merely on
notification by the administration that the problem was
under active investigation.
2. Argument that Police Order to Disperse was
Unreasonable and Illegal. Professor Franklin argues that
the police order to disperse was unreasonable and
unlawful-that the crowd outside the Computation
Center was peaceful and within its rights of free
assembly as guaranteed by the First Amendment to the
Constitution. Thus, not only was he within his
constitutional rights in refusing to disperse and urging
others not to disperse, but indeed he was following his
duty as a citizen and a professor in so acting.
California law clearly gives to police the authority to
disperse illegal assemblies and sets out the legal
requirements for such orders. Only a court of law, which
we are not, could finally determine whether in fact the
police declaration of illegal assembly and the order to
disperse in this instance was legal. In our judgment, the
police order to disperse was clearly reasonable and, as we
understand the law, was probably legal as well. An illegal
seizure of the Computation Center had occurred, and
both University and police officials were understandably
concerned lest serious damage be done to the valuable
equipment housed there and to the even more valuable
data stored there. It was widely known that major
damage to computers, totalling millions of dollars, had
been done to other university computers.
The order declaring the occupation of the
Computation Center an illegal assembly and ordering
dispersal was a single order aimed at the occupiers of the
Computation Center when they were inside the building
and at those participating in the demonstration outside
the building, both before and following its evacuation.
Marron's testimony on this point is clear, and it is
confirmed by one of Professor Franklin's wftnesses. He
began giving the complete order before the arrival of the
police and continued with the same order during the
evacuation of the Computation Center and following the
evacuation when part of the demonstrators stayed close
to the Computation Center building. That this order to
evacuate the building was fully warranted can hardly be
denied. It was that same order that insisted that the
demonstrators withdraw a substantial distance from the
building being evacuated.
Moreover, we conclude that the order to disperse
back to Jordan Way outside the building was reasonable
on its own merits as well. The police knew that violence
had occurred on the Stanford campus during
police-demonstrator confrontations several times during
the past few years; the precaution of moving the crowd
back a substantial distance from the police line was
understandable, and was probably calculated to lessen
injury to both the police and the demonstrators. Thus
we conclude that the police order declaring the
demonstration an illegal assembly and ordering dispersal
was clearly reasonable in these circumstances.
Professor Franklin may have had the right as a citizen
briefly to protest the police order which he believed
unreasonable. But, especially given the strongly negative
police response to his first protest which he himself
noted, he surely did not have the right to increase the
risk of injury to others by urging them to stay and
disobey the police order.
3. Argument that Professor Franklin's Action was
Aimed at Conciliation and Reducing Danger to Those
Present. Professor Franklin argues that his action outside
the Computation Center was aimed primarily at
protecting demonstrators from injury or arrest at the
hands of the police that his argument with faculty
observers (and others) to remain and with the police
against the legality of the dispersal order was aimed at
avoiding such danger to the demonstrators. Some of his
witnesses testified that in their judgment Professor
Franklin's purpose was conciliation and avoidance of
danger to the demonstrators.
We find it plausible that Professor Franklin may have
believed that he was acting to protect the rights of his
friends and co-workers in the "movement" in some ol
his actions. It is clear that those in the small group
clustered in front of the police line as the larger group of
demonstrators moved back were largely members of the
"movement," including several of its best known
participants. It thus became increasingly likely that these
individuals would be in the forefront of a police charge
and most likely to be arrested if, in fact, a charge did
occur. That Professor Franklin should endeavor to
prevent the isolation of these individuals from the rest of
the group of demonstrators and passersby is
understandable.
But that he believed that his actions were basically
conciliatory and aimed primarily at lessening the
likelihood of a police charge and arrest is difficult to
accept. His behavior was surely encouraging other people
to remain at greatly increased risks to themselves.
Shouting loudly and angrily at either faculty observers,
the police, or others in the crowd is hardly calculated to
calm crowd or police behavior, or to lessen the
likelihood of violence. Thus, Professor Franklin's loud
shouts as he turned from Moses some 40-60 feet from
the police could hardly have been calculated to calm the
situation. He apparently addressed Tamm by name only
after he had approached within 10 feet or so of the
police; surely he would have done so sooner had his
main goal been to persuade Tamm, and he would have
not shouted to the crowd upon turning away from
Moses. Professor Franklin described Tamm during the
second confrontation as "more immediately hostile than
I had ever seen him before." Moreover, Professor
Franklin himself testified that he knew "for a certainty"
that a police charge or arrest would occur under such
conditions once the police line-up occurred and the
order to disperse was read. He testified that he knew of
no case where such a situation was not followed by a
police charge or arrests. On his own testimony, he had
these points in mind prior to his discussion with Moses
and his shouting return to confront Tamm. Several of
Professor Franklin's witnesses testified that they too
thought a police charge to be highly likely or inevitable,
and became even surer when they saw Professor Franklin
striding back to confront Tamm the second time. Given
this testimony, it is difficult to accept the argument that
Professor Franklin seriously hoped by his actions to
eliminate the possibility of either a police charge or
arrests outside the Computation Center.
It is difficult to believe that Professor Franklin's duty
as a professor encompassed using others to stay and
confront the police when he felt certain that the result
would be a police charge and arrests, with a danger of
serious personal injury (which he testified is likely
whenever a police charge occurs). He testified that he
personally was resolved not to give way to fascism and
was going to stay and confront the police no matter
what happened. He testified, as did several of his
witnesses, that dispersal would be a political defeat for
the "movement" and an important victory for the
police.
Although Professor Franklin felt certain, or almost
certain, that a police charge and arrest would ensue
soon, he did not advise any people in the demonstrator's
group, either those in the "movement" or other
students, of the danger of a police charge, possible
injury, and arrests. Professor Franklin and some of his
close political associates testified of their awareness of
the impending police action at a time when others, less
experienced, did not anticipate any trouble. Professor
Franklin testified:
"My own experience in having been in just lots and
lots of police confrontations, is that if an order is
given declaring something an illegal assembly, telling
people to disperse, once that takes place then there
are basically one of two things that are going to
happen. Either the pigs are going to charge the people
or they're going to move for a mass bust.
"1 don't think I've ever seen a declaration of an illegal
assembly -maybe I have but I certainly can't
remember-l've never seen a declaration of an illegal
assembly not followed by one of those two actions.
Now it can be seconds; it can be minutes. Sometimes
they can declare an area an illegal assembly and then
nothing happens for some period of time and they're
moving what's really happening is they're moving in
for a mass bust. . . .
"And one of the signs you look for in a police line
prior to a charge is whether—one thing is the visors.
The other thing is whether they're smoking or not. If
they're not smoking then you look upon that as, you
know, a charge could take place at any time. And of
course, one of the things that they try to do is to
make the charge unexpected. So once you've got in a
situation the charge could take place the next second
or it might not take place for some time, but
something is going to happen."
Professor Franklin had difficulty explaining his
failure to warn others. He testified:
"As far as the question of whether I talked to
demonstrators on the lawn of the computer center
about the possibility of arrests and beatings and so
forth: I just—l mean, I may have had—it's possible
that I talked to some people about something about
it. But I certainly don't remember that at all, any
more than 1 remember. ... Well, I'm sure that I
didn't urge anybody to stay and I'm sure I didn't urge
anybody to leave, if that's what-if that's what the
point of that question was."
4. Did Professor Franklin Intentionally Urge and
Incite People to Remain in Defiance of the Police Order
to Disperse? The charge states that "Professor Franklin
significantly interfered with orderly dispersal by
intentionally urging and inciting students and other
persons present at the Computation Center to disregard
or disobey such orders to disperse." The evidence seems
to us convincing that the result of Professor Franklin's
behavior was to help significantly to induce students and
other persons present at the Computation Center to
disregard or disobey such orders to disperse. But
Professor Franklin argues that he did not specifically
address any individual other than Moses and Tamm. He
said, "I wouldn't take it upon myself to do that to
people in that situation because I knew that people were
defenseless in that situation." No witness testified that
Professor Franklin directly addressed other specific
individuals, although there is considerable testimony
that he addressed the crowd in more general terms,
$

urging it to resist the allegedly illegal police order to
disperse. The question is whether these shouts and this
behavior, not addressed to specific individuals other than
Moses and Tamm, amount to intentionally urging and
inciting students and other persons to disregard the
police order.
We find the evidence strongly persuasive that
Professor Franklin intentionally urged and incited
students and others present to disregard or disobey the
police orders. His purpose was to encourage others to
remain. Except for his own denial, all percipient
witnesses testified that Professor Franklin, after leaving
Moses, directly addressed his shouts to the crowd. But
even it he did not directly address the crowd, he must
have expected the likely effect of his behavior under
those circumstances to be to urge and incite others to
stay. Professor Franklin surely would not need to have
addressed each individual by name to have urged them
to stay.
The conclusion that the incitement was intentional is
reinforced by Professor Franklin's testimony that, even
knowing the results of his actions, he would not have
changed his behavior outside the Computation Center.
He said, "The only reasonable course of action that I
could see was what 1 did. And in looking back on it now
from, 1 don't know, eight or nine months, I still can't see
any other alternative."
The charge is not that Professor Franklin disobeyed
the police order himself, but that he intentionally
incited others to disobey the order. His behavior
increased the risk to others, a risk of which many were
unaware. The evidence meets the standards for
incitement that we set out earlier.
CONCLUSION
We find the evidence strongly persuasive that
Professor Franklin ' did significantly interfere with
orderly dispersal following the clearing of the
Computation Center by intentionally urging and inciting
students and other persons present to disregard or
disobey such orders to disperse, that this police order to
disperse was clearly reasonable under the circumstances,
and that Professor Franklin's conduct and speech did
substantially increase the danger of injury to other
persons.
DISSENTING OPINION
Professors Brown and Kennedy, although in accord
with much of the descriptive account of the majority
report on the events outside the Computation Center,
dissent as follows:
We place a sufficiently different interpretive weight
on the evidence at certain crucial points to make us
unable to sustain the charge.
1. The first of these centers on an element of
Professor Franklin's conduct that is central in the
testimony of virtually every witness, his concern that
faculty members remain as observers-a concern without
which many of his actions remain inexplicable. This is a
major substantive point in the conversations with Tamm
and Moses, it persuades Professor Eklof to stay on the
scene when he had decided to leave and persuades
Professor Moses in retrospect that perhaps he should
have stayed, it is a subject Professor Franklin pursues
with Professor Hastorf after the police charge, and it is
the dominant concern in Professor Franldin's later
conversation with Litterman and in a speech in front of
President Lyman's office. He asserts that he felt (a) that
the continuing presence of faculty observers might avert

a police charge, (b) that "respectable" faculty like Moses
might help him persuade the police of the right of
people to remain, and (c) that if there were a charge, the
faculty presence might minimize its brutality. He
testified that he felt a police charge would be
"inevitable" if there was a "withdrawal of the faculty
observers and other kinds of neutral people who had
made up a significant section of that crowd."
We agree with the majority report that "the presence
of faculty observers could have been expected to reduce
the risk of injury to persons." However, that fact,
coupled with Professor Franklin's own concern to keep
faculty observers on the scene, cause us to dissent from
the majority conclusion: "that he believed his actions
were basically conciliatory and aimed primarily at
lessening the likelihood of a police charge and arrest is
difficult to accept." We find the conclusion plausible
rather than difficult even though we believe that
Professor Franklin's manner of seeking this end was
unwise.
2. A second difference of interpretation involves fact
more than motivation, and we find the call a close one
either way. This concerns the crucial period between the
time Professor Franklin leaves Moses and the time he is
back in conversation with Tamm, some 40 to 60 feet
away. His own witnesses state that he was shouting
loudly during these moments, but assert, along with him,
that the comments were addressed only to Moses and
Tamm. The majority report believes that in addition he
spoke directly to others, and that, even if he had not, his
voice and demeanor were such that others would
inevitably hear him, and that he should have known that
his words and actions would influence them not to
disperse. Broholm and Blank are no longer completely
sure that Professor Franklin was directly haranguing the
crowd, although that was their on-the-spot impression.
Moses believes he was, though his assessment is
predicated on action after Professor Franklin turned his
back on him, so that the direction of the shouts is only
conjecture. Waterman believes Professor Franklin was
directly enlisting crowd support, but his timing of the
event is uncertain, and he saw only Professor Franklin's
back and left side. The identity of his audience is thus
once again conjecture. It is clear, however, that by the
time Professor Franklin was within ten feet of Tamm he
was yelling directly at him such words as, "Hey, Don,
this is ridiculous . . . In the interval he was apparently
asserting "that it was not an illegal assembly, and that
people should stay," though no witness produced
unshakeable testimony that he shouted this directly at
individuals within the crowd.
The possible reconstructions not all mutually
exclusive, are (a) that he spoke directly to Moses and
Tamm, but that he was overheard by others, some of
whom responded to his exhortations, (b) that he was
directly urging members of the crowd to stay, or (c) that
he was expressing his disgust and anger at the police
order either to the heavens or to onlookers in general,
rather than as specific instructions to members of the
crowd. There is clear evidence for the first alternative,
evidence (though less persuasive) for the second, and
plausibility for the third. The weight one puts on such
alternative explanations, and the interpretation one
makes of Professor Franklin's actions during these
moments, is dependent on a third consideration.
3. The third matter Involves an element in Professor
Franklin's conduct that, like the first, appears in the
testimony of virtually every witness: his strongly stated
conviction that the police order to disperse was illegal.

This is the second substantive point of his conversations
with both Moses and Tamm. We accept the majority
opinion that it is beyond our province or expertise to
determine whether or not the order was legal, and with
the majority "we conclude that the police order
declaring this demonstration an illegal assembly and
ordering dispersal was clearly reasonable in these
circumstances."
However, if a citizen wishes to question a police order
he believes unreasonable and unlawful, he has the right
to do so for a limited period of time. We place great
weight on this right, and believe that at least in part
Professor Franklin was trying to assert it: he believed the
order to be both unreasonable and unlawful, and so he
exercised the right of a citizen to object to it, in a brief
initial dispute with Tamm, in the attempt to enlist
Moses, and then in the second heated exchange with
Tamm. Ihe elapsed time of these three conversations
was probably no more than three or four minutes. To
Professor Franklin, standing on the grassy area where all
witnesses agree that they had seen no illegal acts, the
order to disperse may have seemed patently
unreasonable. That the Board in hindsight does not share
this assessment does not diminish the right of Professor
Franklin to have held it at the time or to have acted
upon it, lor a reasonable length of time, in the name of
the right of peaceable assembly. The fact that the mood
of the crowd immediately following the evacuation of
the Computation Center was reasonably calm and may
have caused no immediate danger to the police or the
building gives added legitimacy to the right, under such
conditions, to make a brief protest against the order, and
even to seek faculty help in so doing. That Professor
Franklin tried to enlist the aid of Professor Moses in his
exercise of this right is looked upon by no member of
the Board as culpable. It is even arguable that Professor
Franklin, if he did indeed urge "students and others" to
remain, was not engaging in culpable action, but only
reminding them of their own rights as citizens to protest,
at least briefly, an order that might be considered
unlawful or unreasonable.
4. The accumulation of the above considerations
leads us to believe (a) that Professor Franklin tried to get
other faculty members to remain on the scene in order
to reduce the likelihood of a police charge, (b) that his
continuing argument about the order to disperse was an
attempt to protest a police decision he felt to be illegal,
and one which as a citizen he had a right to protest, at
least briefly, and (c) that these two strongly held
convictions, uncontested in the testimony, led him to
loud and angry shouting, clearly directed at Moses and
Tamm, and possibly though not so clearly directed at
others, centering on the need for faculty observers to
stay, and the right of others to stay. The University's
Supplementary Written Brief states, "The issue is
whether a faculty member in a situation laden with the
risk of violent confrontation between demonstrators and
the police is acting properly when by his conduct he
increases that risk." We conclude that, even if one
accepts this as a statement of "the issue," such a
description does not adequately match the conduct
charged, and that there is not in our view strongly
persuasive evidence that his words or actions constituted
an incitement. Consequently, the charge that "Professor
Franklin did significantly interfere with orderly dispersal
by intentionally urging and inciting students and other
persons present at the Computation Center to disregard
or disobey such orders to disperse" is not one that we
can sustain.
A. CHARGES
The relevant University charge concerning the
Computation Center incident is contained in paragraph 9
of the "Statement of Charges."
9. Further, on February 10, 1971 and in connection
with the activity at the Computation Center
described in paragraph 8, students and other persons
were arrested for failure to disperse after orders had
been given to clear an area around the Computation
Center. Professor Franklin signilicantly interfered
with orderly dispersal by intentionally urging and
inciting students and other persons present at the
Computation Center to disregard or disobey such
orders to disperse.
B. FINDING OF FACTS
1. Occupation of the Computation Center. Shortly
before 1:00 p.m. on February 10, 1971, the
Computation Center building was closed on the basis of
a telephone order from Provost Miller, but the computer
was kept running. Handwritten notices were posted on
the doors of the Computation Center; doors, windows,
and gates were locked; and two campus policemen were
stationed at the front door. Provost Miller had been
informed that a group was proceeding from White Plaza
to the Computation Center. An estimated 100 to 200
demonstrators arrived at the Computation Center
shortly after 1:00 p.m. There were apparently no
previous collective decisions or explicit understandings
by the group as to what actions were to be taken or as to
whether to damage the computer. Some subgroups may
have had previous understandings; different individuals
testified as to different expectations. There were no
plans for formal picketing with picket signs as in many
"strikes," and there had been no attempt to
communicate with Computation Center workers about a
strike after the Dinkelspiel meeting of February 9.
At about 1:15 p.m., forcible entry was made into the
Computation Center; the gate was scaled and the back
door forced. About 50 demonstrators then entered
through the back door. As they moved through the
building, they opened other entrances and admitted
other demonstrators. Power to the building and to the
computer was shut off at 1:20 by pulling a master
switch located near the back door. Some 100-200 more
persons entered and milled about inside the
Computation Center. Some demonstrators, according to
officials of the Center, jimmied the door and entered the
machine room. They went to the 2301 drums, yanked
out wires, and flipped switches behind gates or doors on
two of the data storage drums. Other demonstrators in
that group went directly to the racks where tape reels
were stored and began looking through them. The
telephone lines were made inoperative. Once
demonstrators were inside the building and the doors
were thrown open, the Stanford police did not try to

stop movement in and out of the building. Some of the
demonstrators posted themselves at the doors, and to
some extent controlled entry and exit, for example,
denying entry to a photographer.
During this period, there was a continual movement
of demonstrators into and out of the Computation
Center. It is agreed that some time during the
occupation approximately $800 of physical damage was
done to the premises and contents of the Computation
Center, not counting any costs of shut-down time on the
computer. This damage was partly caused by the pulling
of the wires and damage to the 2301 unit, partly to the
premises. Two fire hoses were taken out of racks arid
valves opened, but the water had been turned off earlier
by the University. The printout of each of three printers
was removed. It is agreed that no substantial damage was
done to the computer itself. However, the shutdown,
lasting until about 8:00 p.m., made it impossible for the
Computation Center to process 700-800 student and
faculty jobs scheduled for that period. Montgomery
testified that these jobs would be run during the
succeeding two weeks.
Given the fact that the demonstrators illegally seized
the Computation Center and made impossible
continuation of its regular activities, the Board does not
consider further details on the conduct of the occupiers
important for Charge 9 against Professor Franklin. It
should be noted that the occupiers refused to obey the
requests to leave the building required by law-by Bruce
Wiggins on behalf of Stanford University and by Officers
Marron, Rosa and Tamm of the Santa Clara Sheriffs
office. However, as a context for other events, we note
briefly some undisputed facts concerning the
occupation.
Professor Franklin met his 1:15 class. Only seven of
the 150 registered students were present. He believed the
others were at the Computation Center and suggested
moving the class to the area outside the Center.
Professor Franklin did not hold his class because, he
testified, many of his students were inside the
Computation Center. It is uncontested that he remained
outside the Computation Center, talking with individuals
about a variety of topics prior to the arrival of the
police.
Bruce Wiggins, Stanford Director of Public Safety,
arrived at the Computation Center soon after its
occupation. He walked through and around the building
with Assistant Fire Chief Barr. Soon thereafter, around
2:00 p.m., he telephoned the Santa Clara Sheriffs office
and told them of the occupation.
Shortly after 2:00 p.m., C. D. Marron of the Santa
Clara Sheriffs office arrived at the Computation Center.
He too walked through the building, and then went to
Redwood Hall nearby to confer with Wiggins and others,
including Messrs. Rosenzweig and Schwartz from the

University administration, Sergeant Tamm and Captain
Rosa of the Santa Clara Sheriffs office, and an Assistant
District Attorney of Santa Clara County.
At about 3:00 p.m., it was decided that Wiggins
should return to the Computation Center and issue, in
the name of Stanford University, a declaration of
trespass, declaring the occupation a violation of Stanford
University regulations and ordering the occupants to
leave immediately. Wiggins used a bullhorn as he moved
through the building making this declaration. Wiggins
claims he was jostled, pushed and shoved; it is agreed
that his announcement was greeted by jeers and catcalls,
and that virtually no one left the building in response to
his order. He then returned to the group at Redwood
Hall.
At some point, probably after 3:00 p.m., an informal
meeting was held by the demonstrators. It was chaired
by Janet Weiss, near the door of the Computation
Center, partly inside and partly outside the building.
Although reports on this meeting are somewhat
confused, apparently there was an informal discussion as
to what to do, including whether to continue the
occupation of the Computation Center, what to do if
the police came, and whether to damage the computer.
The discussion, according to Harry Press, a University
witness, included talk about what would be the impact
on student support if the computer were wrecked. Janet
Weiss is reported to have stressed the political neutrality
of machines, urging that they not be damaged.
Apparently agreement was reached to stay in the
Computation Center until the police came, and then to
leave voluntarily without damaging the computer.
Station KZSU, misunderstanding this vote, reported that
the occupiers would damage the computer, but Janet
Weiss asked them to broadcast a retraction of that
report. There may have been other, smaller meetings of
the occupiers during the afternoon; testimony on this
question is confusing.
At about 4:00 p.m., the group in Redwood Hall
decided that Messrs. Marron, Rosa, and Tamm would go
back to the Computation Center and again try to
persuade the occupants to leave voluntarily. They did so,
asking what the occupants wanted, calling attention to
the vulnerability of the computer and the data it
contained, and to possible injury to persons in the
University and in the hospital. The responses of the
demonstrators were that the occupants wanted to get
the Gamut-H program, SRI research, and war-related
research out of the Computation Center; the precise
nature of all the demands is unclear. Marron testified
that there were scattered shouts of "Down with SRI"
and "Get SRI out." Few if any of the occupiers left. The
three officers returned to Redwood Hall.
After further discussion by the group in Redwood
Hall, the three officers again returned to the
Computation Center. The police announced to the
occupants that they had been informed that the SRI
work had been stopped at the Computation Center.
Some demonstrators replied that such word was not
good enough, and they wanted a written statement from
President Lyman. After a brief discussion, the police said
there was nothing more that could be done, and the
three officers returned again to Redwood Hall.
2. Order to Disperse and Police Arrival. Police
officers had been called and their arrival was imminent.
Just before they were expected to arrive, Marron went
out to the front steps of Redwood Hall, and, using a
bullhorn, he made a formal statement declaring the
occupation of the Center and its immediately adjacent
territory unlawful and ordering the demonstrators to
disperse, also stating that they were subject to arrest if
they did not do so. It is uncontested that he made this
announcement three times, pointing in three different
directions, with one aimed directly at the people inside
the Computation Center and the two others at the
people in the area outside the Computation Center to his
left and right. There was no response to these orders to
disperse, although Professor Franklin's witness
Litterman said he heard them.
Very soon thereafter, the police arrived and entered
the Computation Center. Lookouts for the occupiers
observed the police arrival and notified those inside, so
that the occupiers left the building rapidly just as the
police were entering from another direction. The police
made no arrests in the building, although they indicated
that they would have made arrests if the occupiers had
remained in the building. Marron entered the building
immediately after the police, continuing to declare the
assembly an unlawful one, ordering dispersal, and
threatening arrest for any who did not obey the order to
disperse. Since the Computation Center had been
cleared, he then went outside and walked clockwise
around the building continuing to give his order to
disperse. He continued his series of announcements and,
by his testimony, returned to the front of the
Computation Center about eight minutes after the
arrival of the police. A double line of police had been
formed in front of the Center. Marron repeated his
complete order at least three or four times in front of
the Computation Center, stating that the area from the
Computation Center to Jordan Way was to be cleared.
Some demonstrators did not hear or did not know the
extent of the prohibited area. Marron testified that
ordering dispersal from a wide area was common police
practice. He testified to his concern that the police
officers under his command would be vulnerable to
rock-throwing and possible injury if the demonstrators
were permitted to stay close to the police lines and the
building which had just been cleared. As long as a
confrontation between demonstrators and police
persisted, indefinite police presence would have been
necessary to protect the building and computer.
As police lines were formed in front of the
Computation Center and as Marron repeated his
announcement, some clusters of demonstrators remained
in front of the police line, perhaps six to ten feet away,
chanting "Pigs off campus" and other slogans, and
loudly questioning the legality of Marron's order to
disperse. These demonstrators formed several clusters;
they included a number of members of the
"movement." Other demonstrators, faculty observers,
students, and passersby were farther from the police line
in two grassy areas and in the park lot; they were less
active.
After leaving the Computation Center, the small
clusters of demonstrators near the police lines made no
movement to withdraw in response to Marron's repeated
order. At first the more distant persons also did not
withdraw. Professor Franklin, Marron, and other
witnesses who were near the grassy areas testified,
however, that the more distant crowd began to withdraw
as the order to disperse was repeated. Professor Franklin,
in his affidavit prepared shortly after the event, stated
that he believed "most" of the crowd was beginning to
move back; in his oral testimony at the hearing he stated
that he now believes that a smaller number was
beginning to move away-perhaps only more than half,
or fewer. Marron, Moses, and Waterman, testifying for
the University, and Professor Franklin's witness Owen
Blank in a direct report to KZSU from the scene, all
agreed that the portion of the crowd away from the
police lines was definitely moving back in response to
the repeated announcements to disperse. Most of
Professor Franklin's witnesses, primarily individuals
standing near the front portion of the grassy area nearest
the Computation Center, testified that they did not see
any significant part of the crowd moving back. This
apparent contradiction in testimony is explainable, in
part at least, by the fact that those witnesses who had
reason to be observing the rear part of the crowd saw the
movement away, while those who were focusing their
attention on the police lines and events nearby did not
see the movement of the rear portion of the crowd.
3. Professor Franklin's Role. At this stage, Professor
Franklin moved forward and stood in front of a cluster
of demonstrators who were loudly stating that the order
to disperse was illegal. Some of Professor Franklin's
close political associates were part of this cluster. They
were giving a clenched fist salute while vociferously
denouncing the police order. Professor Franklin,
according to testimony and photographs, stood quietly
in front of this active group and observed what was
occurring. He then moved closer to Tamm, who was near
the police line, and argued briefly and vigorously that
the dispersal order was illegal and he had a right to
remain as a faculty observer. Tamm disagreed on both
points, pointing out that Franklin was not on the official
list of faculty observers supplied by the President's
Office. Professor Franklin then wheeled and strode
toward Dean Lincoln Moses. Moses was some 30-50 feet
farther back, perhaps 40-60 feet from Tamm, and was
beginning to leave in response to the police order.
Professor Franklin called out, "Lincoln Moses!".
Professor Franklin shouted some words like "God damn
it, this happens every time the police charge. The faculty
observers are all gone!" He argued loudly that Moses
should not leave, that the order to disperse was
improper, and that faculty observers, like Moses, should
remain to observe possible police brutality. There is
substantial agreement on what Professor Franklin said to
Moses in this brief but loud set of statements. It is
further agreed that Professor Franklin was heard by a
nearby circle of 10 to 12 persons and by others farther
away; although he was close to Moses, Professor
Franklin was shouting his arguments. Professor Franklin
testified that he was being careful while shouting at
Moses not to use language in describing the police which
would reduce the likelihood of his persuading Moses to

stay. Professor Franklin's statements to Moses took
about a minute and a half. Franklin then headed back
toward the police line, some 40-60 feet away.
Witnesses for the University testified that Professor
Franklin was shouting loudly as soon as he took his first
steps back toward the police lines, angrily denouncing
the police order as illegal. He made his way back to
Tamm, some 50 feet distant, through the substantial
group remaining in the first grassy area. The items of
dispute are whether Professor Franklin was addressing
his shouts to the police or to others in the crowd when
he started shouting, and whether his shouts included
exhortations that people not leave.
4. Testimony that Professor Franklin Urged and
Incited the Crowd to Stay. Moses reports that at first he
was convinced by Franklin's statement that he should
stay as a laculty observer and started to follow Franklin
back toward the police line. However, he goes on,
He meanwhile continued talking. He turned his back
to me and went toward the line, talking loudly
and .. . waving his arms or gesticulating. . . . And as
he went, a group of people formed about him and
went with him. And whether he was addressing only
them or generally all who could hear I wouldn't say.
On cross-examination, Moses said,
Then as you [Franklin] went on, you appeared to me
to be encouraging as many people to come as would
come. And that is what turned me around. ... I felt
that I was just being recruited to be one more person
present. ... I took the whole crowd to be provocative
of the police.
Under further cross-examination by Professor Franklin,
Moses reiterated this testimony and his statement that
Professor Franklin was urging people around him to
disobey the police order and return. Although he
admitted it was "conceivable" that Professor Franklin's
words were solely addressed to the police, he said that
his understanding was clearly to the contrary.
Moses was asked by Professor Franklin on
cross-examination whether Professor Franklin could not
have been merely urging faculty observers to join him in
going towards the police lines. Moses responded that
Professor Franklin was not addressing his remarks to
faculty members but to the entire crowd or all within
the sound of his voice. Moses said, "You spoke to me
about faculty people. And then as you went on you
appeared to me to be encouraging as many people to
come as would come. And that is what turned me
around."
Waterman testified that before Franklin approached
Moses,
.... the crowd was definitely starting to drift back
this way ... in fact they were drifting back in
appreciable numbers. ... I definitely had the
impression that the crisis was past, that people were
leaving, and that the situation was about to calm
down.
He then testified that he observed Franklin at this point
crossing the grass in front of Redwood Hall toward the
police, although Waterman was not sure whether before
or after the Moses encounter,
. . . shouting to the crowd, telling them to come back,
challenging the right of the sheriffs men to declare it
an illegal assembly, and saying that they had a perfect
right to hold a peaceful meeting and that they should
return to do so. .. . He seemed to be shouting in
general to the bunch that were leaving and had gotten
about as far as the second grassy plot.
Broholm, reporting from the scene for KZSU,
reported (a tape recording is available) first that "the
crowd was definitely moving back"; and then that
Professor Franklin "was haranguing the crowd to stay"
and resist the order to disperse, and "was berating the
crowd for leaving." On cross-examination by Professor
Franklin, Broholm confirmed this on-the-scene report:
"After you turned away from Moses you turned back in
that direction and began yelling. And again, "You
turned around, faced back toward the police . . . and
you started yelling in that direction." It is important to
note that Broholm placed the Moses-Franklin encounter
and subsequent Franklin shouting near the edge of the
crosswalk in front of Redwood Hall, at least 60 feet
from Tamm and Marron. Under further
cross-examination, Broholm said that he now doubts the
accuracy of his on-the-scene report that Professor
Franklin was "haranguing the crowd to stay," and that
instead Professor Franklin was probably shouting at
Tamm. He did not, however, change his estimate that
Professor Franklin began shouting in an area some 60
feet from Tamm, who was separated from Professor
Franklin by a substantial number of individuals in the
first grassy area. We believe that Broholm's on-the-scene
account can be presumed more accurate than his
recollection eight months later.
Owen Blank, another KZSU announcer, also reported
from the scene (recorded on tape) that the crowd in the
grassy areas was moving away at first, and then turned
and moved back toward the police line as Professor
Franklin was shouting. As Professor Franklin's witness,
Blank attached the accuracy of the taped reports by
Broholm and Blank or, Professor Franklin's role in
reversing the crowd's dispersal, but Blank's testimony
when related to the times on the taped reports instead
confirms the on-the-scene reports by Broholm and
Blank. Although Broholm and Blank apologized to
Moses for errors in Broholm's reporting at the time,
these errors concerned Moses's alleged assent
to Professor Franklin's urgings, not Professor
Franklin's own behavior.
Professor Edward Begle testified that he saw
Professor Franklin apparently urging a group of young
people to stay at the gathering, but it is not clear
whether this was the group of people around Moses and
the details of his testimony are not confirmed by others.
The witnesses who heard Professor Franklin's words
testified that he, as he strode back towards Tamm, was
angry and shouting, repeating the same arguments as
before, that the order to disperse was illegal and the
crowd should not leave. Moses's, Waterman's and
Broholm's testimony was cited above. Professor
Franklin's witness Doering testified that "He [Professor
Franklin] walked away from Moses a couple of paces,
and I think he said some things on the way." Doering
places the Moses encounter at about the group of birth
trees furthest from the police lines, some 30-40 feet
away.
As Professor Franklin returned to confront Tamm, an
indefinite number of other persons moved along, beside,
or behind him. In moving back toward Tamm, Professor
Franklin moved through a substantial number of persons
between Moses and Tamm. These included some of
Professor Franklin's political associates (identified in
pictures) and others not identified. Thus, it seems
certain that Professor Franklin's shouts against dispersal
would be clearly heard by these persons, whether or not
they were primarily addressed to Tamm, and that
Professor Franklin must surely have known that they
would be received by at least these demonstrators

through whom he advanced, whether or not they were
heard by persons behind Moses and Fiofessor
Franklin in the second grassy area.
5. Testimony that Professor Franklin Did Not Urge
and Incite the Crowd to Stay. On the other hand,
Professor Franklin and many of his witnesses testified
that Professor Franklin spoke only to Moses when he
strode from Tamm to Moses, and that he spoke only to
Tamm when he turned from Moses back toward the
police line. They described his comments to both as not
intended to incite other people to disobey the police
order. One of his witnesses, photographer Harrison,
described both the scene and Professor Franklin's
following confrontation with Tamm as "tranquil."
Another witness, Professor Switzer, described the
atmosphere as a "picnic." But these evaluations are
specifically controverted by pictures, tapes and other
testimony. Nearly all, including Professor Charles Stein
who was near Moses, deny hearing Professor Franklin
directly address anyone other than Moses or Tamm.
Most of Professor Franklin's witnesses testified that they
did not hear, or did not remember, what Professor
Franklin was saying as he strode forward, until he was
close to Tamm (e.g., Pace, Lonsdale, Hunkeler). They
report that they heard him shout only as he neared
Tamm, and then only at Tamm. This, however, is not
inconsistent with Moses', Waterman's and Broholm's
testimony that Professor Franklin was shouting earlier
when much farther from the police. Most of Protessor
Franklin's witnesses were nearer the police line, mainly
facing the police, and hence did not observe Professor
Franklin's entire movement forward. But Doering did,
and testified that Professor Franklin spoke as soon as he
left Moses. Hunkeler did not have Professor Franklin
under constant scrutiny and could hear only a few
words.
Professor Franklin testified that he began to shout at
Tamm from a distance because he wanted to be sure that
Tamm understood why he was returning to the police
line and that his action was intended to be conciliatory
and to lessen the danger of a police charge and arrests of
the demonstrators there. But that he should have done
so at such a great distance seems highly implausible
under the circumstances, and conflicts with considerable
testimony from witnesses from both parties. Clearly,
Professor Franklin did, as he stated, address Tamm,
saying, "Don, this is ridiculous ..." as he approached
Tamm and Marron, apparently from a distance of five to
ten feet; this is confirmed by his witnesses who were
near the police line.
With one exception, Professor Franklin's own
witnesses did not support his version of events as he left
Moses. The only witness for Professor Franklin who gave
evidence contradictory to that of the University
witnesses was Downey, who testified that, although he
was not sure, Professor Franklin was not saying anything
as he left Moses and walked towards the police lines. It is
likely that Downey was confused about the timing of his
interaction with Professor Franklin. Downey testified
that he never was with Professor Franklin until after the
encounter with Moses, but pictures show Downey
standing with Professor Franklin and the group shouting
at the police at a time identified by Professor Franklin's
witnesses as prior to his words with Moses. With this
doubtful exception, Professor Franklin produced no
witness who contradicted the testimony of
Administration witnesses who observed his shouting as
he left Moses at a considerable distance from the police
lines.
Professor Franklin was apparently himself confused
as to the locus of his confrontation with Moses in
relation to the police lines, and, in his testimony, he
minimized the distance from the police lines. He
testified that he was only a few steps away from Tamm
when he turned away from Moses.
One witness for Professor Franklin, Stein, supported
this spatial image by testifying that Professor Franklin
was about 15 feet from the police lines. No other
witness for either party supported Professor Franklin on
this point; indeed, five witnesses for Professor Franklin
directly contradicted him in their testimony.
6. Franklin-Tamm Confrontation and Police Charge.
It is agreed, and supported by photographic evidence,
that after Professor Franklin approached Tamm, a
substantial number of people, approximately 30, closed
in around and behind Professor Franklin as he angrily
confronted Tamm. Professor Franklin testified that he
was aware of people moving in from both sides but he
didn't know how many newsmen were present. Some
witnesses, including Professor Franklin's witness,
Litterman, testified that the crowd threatened to engulf
the police officers and Professor Franklin. Professor
Franklin and Tamm stood face to face shouting angrily
at one another. Witnesses of both parties described the
situation as very tense. Professor Franklin was repeating
his basic arguments and Tamm was denying the validity
of both.
After a very short interval, two, perhaps more,
policemen moved rapidly from behind Tamm and
Marron to try to arrest Professor Franklin, but Professor
Franklin slipped away from them, perhaps with the help
of some of his friends. At almost exactly the same time
the police line moved forward on the demonstrators in
what is commonly called a "police charge."
We note, parenthetically, that we do not consider
Professor Franklin's acknowledged urging of Moses and
other faculty observers to stay to be objectionable under
the charge. Formally designated faculty observers were
asked by the University administration to be present,
even though some, not identified to the police, were
apparently struck during the charge. The presence of
faculty observers could have been expected to reduce
the risk of injury to persons.
7. Findings of Fact. The Board finds the evidence
strongly persuasive that: (a) the police order to disperse
was clearly reasonable, given the illegal seizure of the
Computation Center, possible serious damage to the
computer and data stored there, possible danger to
police and demonstrators outside after the building was
cleared, and the need to return the Center promptly to
normal action without police presence; (b) while some
demonstrators refused to disperse after the building was
cleared, a substantial portion of the crowd was moving
back in response to repeated police orders, prior to
Professor Franklin's intervention; (c) Professor Franklin
played a central role in reversing the movement of the
crowd to disperse and his shouts and behavior
significantly increased the likelihood that a substantial
number of those present would stay; (d) Professor
Franklin intended his shouts after leaving Moses to be
heard by, and to influence the crowd to remain at the
scene in defiance of the police order to disperse.
However, even if lie did not directly address his shouts
to the crowd, he must reasonably have expected that a
result of his shouts would be to incite members of the
crowd to disobey the dispersal order, increasing the risk
to themselves; Professor Franklin's conduct and shouts

cannot reasonably be interpreted as merely attempts to
persuade Moses and other faculty observers to stay, to
conciliate the police or the crowd, or to lessen the
danger of a police charge or arrests with their attendant
dangers to the demonstrators. We comment further on
these findings in the following section.
C. SUPPLEMENTA R Y EVIDENCE AND EINDINGS
A number of points in the testimony require special
attention in order to amplify and interpret the findings
of fact indicated above.
1. Charge of University Negligence. Professor
Franklin suggests that the University administration was
negligent in not announcing to the occupiers of the
Computation Center that work on the disputed SRI
contract had, in fact, been halted one or more days
before, because this information might have been
sufficient to induce the occupiers to leave the
Computation Center peacefully. Alternatively, he
implies that had some official of the University
explained that an investigation was under way, this
might have induced the occupiers to lave the building
voluntarily without the police having to be called.
In fact, SRI had apparently stopped using the
computer for the GAMUT-Hand its other programs
prior to February 10, but it had not informed Stanford
of any policy decision regarding GAMUT-H or other SRI
projects on the Stanford computer. The SRI accounts
had not been cancelled. Moreover, the Stanford
administration at that time believed, on the information
received from SRI, that there was no violation of
University policy; SRI had indicated to the University
administration that the research in question was not
classified and was available for publication. Thus Provost
Miller testified that he did not believe it would be proper
for the University to issue any statement pending receipt
of information on SRl's position on the whole matter.
Moreover, the Computer Facilities Committee of the
University was meeting on the afternoon of February
10, during the occupation, precisely to discuss the issues
raised by the GAMLTT-H program.
We do not agree with Professor Franklin's argument
that the University administration's refusal to negotiate
with, or report to, the Computation Center occupiers
justifies the refusal of the demonstrators to leave the
Computation Center which they were illegally
occupying. Some persons believe the University
administration would have been well advised to issue a
public statement that it was investigating the whole
situation, although we find the University
administration's position on the matter easy to
understand, given the uncertainty about SRl's position
and the fact that the relevant University committee was
in fact meeting at 2 p.m. on the afternoon of the
occupation. But even if the University officials involved
were guilty of faulty administrative judgment, this
would in no way justify the illegal occupation of the
Computation Center and its continuance in the face of
both University and police orders to disperse. Moreover,
it is important to remember that the protestors had
made no direct effort vis-a-vis the administration to halt
the GAMUT-H work beyond one unsigned leaflet,
although they had, according to their own testimony,
known of it for at least a week or two; the Computation
Center sit-in was in no sense a "last resort" step after all
legal avenues were exhausted. The demands of the
occupiers were vague, and we see no reason to believe
that they would have left the Center merely on
notification by the administration that the problem was
under active investigation.
2. Argument that Police Order to Disperse was
Unreasonable and Illegal. Professor Franklin argues that
the police order to disperse was unreasonable and
unlawful-that the crowd outside the Computation
Center was peaceful and within its rights of free
assembly as guaranteed by the First Amendment to the
Constitution. Thus, not only was he within his
constitutional rights in refusing to disperse and urging
others not to disperse, but indeed he was following his
duty as a citizen and a professor in so acting.
California law clearly gives to police the authority to
disperse illegal assemblies and sets out the legal
requirements for such orders. Only a court of law, which
we are not, could finally determine whether in fact the
police declaration of illegal assembly and the order to
disperse in this instance was legal. In our judgment, the
police order to disperse was clearly reasonable and, as we
understand the law, was probably legal as well. An illegal
seizure of the Computation Center had occurred, and
both University and police officials were understandably
concerned lest serious damage be done to the valuable
equipment housed there and to the even more valuable
data stored there. It was widely known that major
damage to computers, totalling millions of dollars, had
been done to other university computers.
The order declaring the occupation of the
Computation Center an illegal assembly and ordering
dispersal was a single order aimed at the occupiers of the
Computation Center when they were inside the building
and at those participating in the demonstration outside
the building, both before and following its evacuation.
Marron's testimony on this point is clear, and it is
confirmed by one of Professor Franklin's wftnesses. He
began giving the complete order before the arrival of the
police and continued with the same order during the
evacuation of the Computation Center and following the
evacuation when part of the demonstrators stayed close
to the Computation Center building. That this order to
evacuate the building was fully warranted can hardly be
denied. It was that same order that insisted that the
demonstrators withdraw a substantial distance from the
building being evacuated.
Moreover, we conclude that the order to disperse
back to Jordan Way outside the building was reasonable
on its own merits as well. The police knew that violence
had occurred on the Stanford campus during
police-demonstrator confrontations several times during
the past few years; the precaution of moving the crowd
back a substantial distance from the police line was
understandable, and was probably calculated to lessen
injury to both the police and the demonstrators. Thus
we conclude that the police order declaring the
demonstration an illegal assembly and ordering dispersal
was clearly reasonable in these circumstances.
Professor Franklin may have had the right as a citizen
briefly to protest the police order which he believed
unreasonable. But, especially given the strongly negative
police response to his first protest which he himself
noted, he surely did not have the right to increase the
risk of injury to others by urging them to stay and
disobey the police order.
3. Argument that Professor Franklin's Action was
Aimed at Conciliation and Reducing Danger to Those
Present. Professor Franklin argues that his action outside
the Computation Center was aimed primarily at
protecting demonstrators from injury or arrest at the
hands of the police that his argument with faculty
observers (and others) to remain and with the police
against the legality of the dispersal order was aimed at
avoiding such danger to the demonstrators. Some of his
witnesses testified that in their judgment Professor
Franklin's purpose was conciliation and avoidance of
danger to the demonstrators.
We find it plausible that Professor Franklin may have
believed that he was acting to protect the rights of his
friends and co-workers in the "movement" in some ol
his actions. It is clear that those in the small group
clustered in front of the police line as the larger group of
demonstrators moved back were largely members of the
"movement," including several of its best known
participants. It thus became increasingly likely that these
individuals would be in the forefront of a police charge
and most likely to be arrested if, in fact, a charge did
occur. That Professor Franklin should endeavor to
prevent the isolation of these individuals from the rest of
the group of demonstrators and passersby is
understandable.
But that he believed that his actions were basically
conciliatory and aimed primarily at lessening the
likelihood of a police charge and arrest is difficult to
accept. His behavior was surely encouraging other people
to remain at greatly increased risks to themselves.
Shouting loudly and angrily at either faculty observers,
the police, or others in the crowd is hardly calculated to
calm crowd or police behavior, or to lessen the
likelihood of violence. Thus, Professor Franklin's loud
shouts as he turned from Moses some 40-60 feet from
the police could hardly have been calculated to calm the
situation. He apparently addressed Tamm by name only
after he had approached within 10 feet or so of the
police; surely he would have done so sooner had his
main goal been to persuade Tamm, and he would have
not shouted to the crowd upon turning away from
Moses. Professor Franklin described Tamm during the
second confrontation as "more immediately hostile than
I had ever seen him before." Moreover, Professor
Franklin himself testified that he knew "for a certainty"
that a police charge or arrest would occur under such
conditions once the police line-up occurred and the
order to disperse was read. He testified that he knew of
no case where such a situation was not followed by a
police charge or arrests. On his own testimony, he had
these points in mind prior to his discussion with Moses
and his shouting return to confront Tamm. Several of
Professor Franklin's witnesses testified that they too
thought a police charge to be highly likely or inevitable,
and became even surer when they saw Professor Franklin
striding back to confront Tamm the second time. Given
this testimony, it is difficult to accept the argument that
Professor Franklin seriously hoped by his actions to
eliminate the possibility of either a police charge or
arrests outside the Computation Center.
It is difficult to believe that Professor Franklin's duty
as a professor encompassed using others to stay and
confront the police when he felt certain that the result
would be a police charge and arrests, with a danger of
serious personal injury (which he testified is likely
whenever a police charge occurs). He testified that he
personally was resolved not to give way to fascism and
was going to stay and confront the police no matter
what happened. He testified, as did several of his
witnesses, that dispersal would be a political defeat for
the "movement" and an important victory for the
police.
Although Professor Franklin felt certain, or almost
certain, that a police charge and arrest would ensue
soon, he did not advise any people in the demonstrator's
group, either those in the "movement" or other
students, of the danger of a police charge, possible
injury, and arrests. Professor Franklin and some of his
close political associates testified of their awareness of
the impending police action at a time when others, less
experienced, did not anticipate any trouble. Professor
Franklin testified:
"My own experience in having been in just lots and
lots of police confrontations, is that if an order is
given declaring something an illegal assembly, telling
people to disperse, once that takes place then there
are basically one of two things that are going to
happen. Either the pigs are going to charge the people
or they're going to move for a mass bust.
"1 don't think I've ever seen a declaration of an illegal
assembly -maybe I have but I certainly can't
remember-l've never seen a declaration of an illegal
assembly not followed by one of those two actions.
Now it can be seconds; it can be minutes. Sometimes
they can declare an area an illegal assembly and then
nothing happens for some period of time and they're
moving what's really happening is they're moving in
for a mass bust. . . .
"And one of the signs you look for in a police line
prior to a charge is whether—one thing is the visors.
The other thing is whether they're smoking or not. If
they're not smoking then you look upon that as, you
know, a charge could take place at any time. And of
course, one of the things that they try to do is to
make the charge unexpected. So once you've got in a
situation the charge could take place the next second
or it might not take place for some time, but
something is going to happen."
Professor Franklin had difficulty explaining his
failure to warn others. He testified:
"As far as the question of whether I talked to
demonstrators on the lawn of the computer center
about the possibility of arrests and beatings and so
forth: I just—l mean, I may have had—it's possible
that I talked to some people about something about
it. But I certainly don't remember that at all, any
more than 1 remember. ... Well, I'm sure that I
didn't urge anybody to stay and I'm sure I didn't urge
anybody to leave, if that's what-if that's what the
point of that question was."
4. Did Professor Franklin Intentionally Urge and
Incite People to Remain in Defiance of the Police Order
to Disperse? The charge states that "Professor Franklin
significantly interfered with orderly dispersal by
intentionally urging and inciting students and other
persons present at the Computation Center to disregard
or disobey such orders to disperse." The evidence seems
to us convincing that the result of Professor Franklin's
behavior was to help significantly to induce students and
other persons present at the Computation Center to
disregard or disobey such orders to disperse. But
Professor Franklin argues that he did not specifically
address any individual other than Moses and Tamm. He
said, "I wouldn't take it upon myself to do that to
people in that situation because I knew that people were
defenseless in that situation." No witness testified that
Professor Franklin directly addressed other specific
individuals, although there is considerable testimony
that he addressed the crowd in more general terms,
$

urging it to resist the allegedly illegal police order to
disperse. The question is whether these shouts and this
behavior, not addressed to specific individuals other than
Moses and Tamm, amount to intentionally urging and
inciting students and other persons to disregard the
police order.
We find the evidence strongly persuasive that
Professor Franklin intentionally urged and incited
students and others present to disregard or disobey the
police orders. His purpose was to encourage others to
remain. Except for his own denial, all percipient
witnesses testified that Professor Franklin, after leaving
Moses, directly addressed his shouts to the crowd. But
even it he did not directly address the crowd, he must
have expected the likely effect of his behavior under
those circumstances to be to urge and incite others to
stay. Professor Franklin surely would not need to have
addressed each individual by name to have urged them
to stay.
The conclusion that the incitement was intentional is
reinforced by Professor Franklin's testimony that, even
knowing the results of his actions, he would not have
changed his behavior outside the Computation Center.
He said, "The only reasonable course of action that I
could see was what 1 did. And in looking back on it now
from, 1 don't know, eight or nine months, I still can't see
any other alternative."
The charge is not that Professor Franklin disobeyed
the police order himself, but that he intentionally
incited others to disobey the order. His behavior
increased the risk to others, a risk of which many were
unaware. The evidence meets the standards for
incitement that we set out earlier.
CONCLUSION
We find the evidence strongly persuasive that
Professor Franklin ' did significantly interfere with
orderly dispersal following the clearing of the
Computation Center by intentionally urging and inciting
students and other persons present to disregard or
disobey such orders to disperse, that this police order to
disperse was clearly reasonable under the circumstances,
and that Professor Franklin's conduct and speech did
substantially increase the danger of injury to other
persons.
DISSENTING OPINION
Professors Brown and Kennedy, although in accord
with much of the descriptive account of the majority
report on the events outside the Computation Center,
dissent as follows:
We place a sufficiently different interpretive weight
on the evidence at certain crucial points to make us
unable to sustain the charge.
1. The first of these centers on an element of
Professor Franklin's conduct that is central in the
testimony of virtually every witness, his concern that
faculty members remain as observers-a concern without
which many of his actions remain inexplicable. This is a
major substantive point in the conversations with Tamm
and Moses, it persuades Professor Eklof to stay on the
scene when he had decided to leave and persuades
Professor Moses in retrospect that perhaps he should
have stayed, it is a subject Professor Franklin pursues
with Professor Hastorf after the police charge, and it is
the dominant concern in Professor Franldin's later
conversation with Litterman and in a speech in front of
President Lyman's office. He asserts that he felt (a) that
the continuing presence of faculty observers might avert

a police charge, (b) that "respectable" faculty like Moses
might help him persuade the police of the right of
people to remain, and (c) that if there were a charge, the
faculty presence might minimize its brutality. He
testified that he felt a police charge would be
"inevitable" if there was a "withdrawal of the faculty
observers and other kinds of neutral people who had
made up a significant section of that crowd."
We agree with the majority report that "the presence
of faculty observers could have been expected to reduce
the risk of injury to persons." However, that fact,
coupled with Professor Franklin's own concern to keep
faculty observers on the scene, cause us to dissent from
the majority conclusion: "that he believed his actions
were basically conciliatory and aimed primarily at
lessening the likelihood of a police charge and arrest is
difficult to accept." We find the conclusion plausible
rather than difficult even though we believe that
Professor Franklin's manner of seeking this end was
unwise.
2. A second difference of interpretation involves fact
more than motivation, and we find the call a close one
either way. This concerns the crucial period between the
time Professor Franklin leaves Moses and the time he is
back in conversation with Tamm, some 40 to 60 feet
away. His own witnesses state that he was shouting
loudly during these moments, but assert, along with him,
that the comments were addressed only to Moses and
Tamm. The majority report believes that in addition he
spoke directly to others, and that, even if he had not, his
voice and demeanor were such that others would
inevitably hear him, and that he should have known that
his words and actions would influence them not to
disperse. Broholm and Blank are no longer completely
sure that Professor Franklin was directly haranguing the
crowd, although that was their on-the-spot impression.
Moses believes he was, though his assessment is
predicated on action after Professor Franklin turned his
back on him, so that the direction of the shouts is only
conjecture. Waterman believes Professor Franklin was
directly enlisting crowd support, but his timing of the
event is uncertain, and he saw only Professor Franklin's
back and left side. The identity of his audience is thus
once again conjecture. It is clear, however, that by the
time Professor Franklin was within ten feet of Tamm he
was yelling directly at him such words as, "Hey, Don,
this is ridiculous . . . In the interval he was apparently
asserting "that it was not an illegal assembly, and that
people should stay," though no witness produced
unshakeable testimony that he shouted this directly at
individuals within the crowd.
The possible reconstructions not all mutually
exclusive, are (a) that he spoke directly to Moses and
Tamm, but that he was overheard by others, some of
whom responded to his exhortations, (b) that he was
directly urging members of the crowd to stay, or (c) that
he was expressing his disgust and anger at the police
order either to the heavens or to onlookers in general,
rather than as specific instructions to members of the
crowd. There is clear evidence for the first alternative,
evidence (though less persuasive) for the second, and
plausibility for the third. The weight one puts on such
alternative explanations, and the interpretation one
makes of Professor Franklin's actions during these
moments, is dependent on a third consideration.
3. The third matter Involves an element in Professor
Franklin's conduct that, like the first, appears in the
testimony of virtually every witness: his strongly stated
conviction that the police order to disperse was illegal.

This is the second substantive point of his conversations
with both Moses and Tamm. We accept the majority
opinion that it is beyond our province or expertise to
determine whether or not the order was legal, and with
the majority "we conclude that the police order
declaring this demonstration an illegal assembly and
ordering dispersal was clearly reasonable in these
circumstances."
However, if a citizen wishes to question a police order
he believes unreasonable and unlawful, he has the right
to do so for a limited period of time. We place great
weight on this right, and believe that at least in part
Professor Franklin was trying to assert it: he believed the
order to be both unreasonable and unlawful, and so he
exercised the right of a citizen to object to it, in a brief
initial dispute with Tamm, in the attempt to enlist
Moses, and then in the second heated exchange with
Tamm. Ihe elapsed time of these three conversations
was probably no more than three or four minutes. To
Professor Franklin, standing on the grassy area where all
witnesses agree that they had seen no illegal acts, the
order to disperse may have seemed patently
unreasonable. That the Board in hindsight does not share
this assessment does not diminish the right of Professor
Franklin to have held it at the time or to have acted
upon it, lor a reasonable length of time, in the name of
the right of peaceable assembly. The fact that the mood
of the crowd immediately following the evacuation of
the Computation Center was reasonably calm and may
have caused no immediate danger to the police or the
building gives added legitimacy to the right, under such
conditions, to make a brief protest against the order, and
even to seek faculty help in so doing. That Professor
Franklin tried to enlist the aid of Professor Moses in his
exercise of this right is looked upon by no member of
the Board as culpable. It is even arguable that Professor
Franklin, if he did indeed urge "students and others" to
remain, was not engaging in culpable action, but only
reminding them of their own rights as citizens to protest,
at least briefly, an order that might be considered
unlawful or unreasonable.
4. The accumulation of the above considerations
leads us to believe (a) that Professor Franklin tried to get
other faculty members to remain on the scene in order
to reduce the likelihood of a police charge, (b) that his
continuing argument about the order to disperse was an
attempt to protest a police decision he felt to be illegal,
and one which as a citizen he had a right to protest, at
least briefly, and (c) that these two strongly held
convictions, uncontested in the testimony, led him to
loud and angry shouting, clearly directed at Moses and
Tamm, and possibly though not so clearly directed at
others, centering on the need for faculty observers to
stay, and the right of others to stay. The University's
Supplementary Written Brief states, "The issue is
whether a faculty member in a situation laden with the
risk of violent confrontation between demonstrators and
the police is acting properly when by his conduct he
increases that risk." We conclude that, even if one
accepts this as a statement of "the issue," such a
description does not adequately match the conduct
charged, and that there is not in our view strongly
persuasive evidence that his words or actions constituted
an incitement. Consequently, the charge that "Professor
Franklin did significantly interfere with orderly dispersal
by intentionally urging and inciting students and other
persons present at the Computation Center to disregard
or disobey such orders to disperse" is not one that we
can sustain.
A. CHARGES
The relevant University charge concerning the
Computation Center incident is contained in paragraph 9
of the "Statement of Charges."
9. Further, on February 10, 1971 and in connection
with the activity at the Computation Center
described in paragraph 8, students and other persons
were arrested for failure to disperse after orders had
been given to clear an area around the Computation
Center. Professor Franklin signilicantly interfered
with orderly dispersal by intentionally urging and
inciting students and other persons present at the
Computation Center to disregard or disobey such
orders to disperse.
B. FINDING OF FACTS
1. Occupation of the Computation Center. Shortly
before 1:00 p.m. on February 10, 1971, the
Computation Center building was closed on the basis of
a telephone order from Provost Miller, but the computer
was kept running. Handwritten notices were posted on
the doors of the Computation Center; doors, windows,
and gates were locked; and two campus policemen were
stationed at the front door. Provost Miller had been
informed that a group was proceeding from White Plaza
to the Computation Center. An estimated 100 to 200
demonstrators arrived at the Computation Center
shortly after 1:00 p.m. There were apparently no
previous collective decisions or explicit understandings
by the group as to what actions were to be taken or as to
whether to damage the computer. Some subgroups may
have had previous understandings; different individuals
testified as to different expectations. There were no
plans for formal picketing with picket signs as in many
"strikes," and there had been no attempt to
communicate with Computation Center workers about a
strike after the Dinkelspiel meeting of February 9.
At about 1:15 p.m., forcible entry was made into the
Computation Center; the gate was scaled and the back
door forced. About 50 demonstrators then entered
through the back door. As they moved through the
building, they opened other entrances and admitted
other demonstrators. Power to the building and to the
computer was shut off at 1:20 by pulling a master
switch located near the back door. Some 100-200 more
persons entered and milled about inside the
Computation Center. Some demonstrators, according to
officials of the Center, jimmied the door and entered the
machine room. They went to the 2301 drums, yanked
out wires, and flipped switches behind gates or doors on
two of the data storage drums. Other demonstrators in
that group went directly to the racks where tape reels
were stored and began looking through them. The
telephone lines were made inoperative. Once
demonstrators were inside the building and the doors
were thrown open, the Stanford police did not try to

stop movement in and out of the building. Some of the
demonstrators posted themselves at the doors, and to
some extent controlled entry and exit, for example,
denying entry to a photographer.
During this period, there was a continual movement
of demonstrators into and out of the Computation
Center. It is agreed that some time during the
occupation approximately $800 of physical damage was
done to the premises and contents of the Computation
Center, not counting any costs of shut-down time on the
computer. This damage was partly caused by the pulling
of the wires and damage to the 2301 unit, partly to the
premises. Two fire hoses were taken out of racks arid
valves opened, but the water had been turned off earlier
by the University. The printout of each of three printers
was removed. It is agreed that no substantial damage was
done to the computer itself. However, the shutdown,
lasting until about 8:00 p.m., made it impossible for the
Computation Center to process 700-800 student and
faculty jobs scheduled for that period. Montgomery
testified that these jobs would be run during the
succeeding two weeks.
Given the fact that the demonstrators illegally seized
the Computation Center and made impossible
continuation of its regular activities, the Board does not
consider further details on the conduct of the occupiers
important for Charge 9 against Professor Franklin. It
should be noted that the occupiers refused to obey the
requests to leave the building required by law-by Bruce
Wiggins on behalf of Stanford University and by Officers
Marron, Rosa and Tamm of the Santa Clara Sheriffs
office. However, as a context for other events, we note
briefly some undisputed facts concerning the
occupation.
Professor Franklin met his 1:15 class. Only seven of
the 150 registered students were present. He believed the
others were at the Computation Center and suggested
moving the class to the area outside the Center.
Professor Franklin did not hold his class because, he
testified, many of his students were inside the
Computation Center. It is uncontested that he remained
outside the Computation Center, talking with individuals
about a variety of topics prior to the arrival of the
police.
Bruce Wiggins, Stanford Director of Public Safety,
arrived at the Computation Center soon after its
occupation. He walked through and around the building
with Assistant Fire Chief Barr. Soon thereafter, around
2:00 p.m., he telephoned the Santa Clara Sheriffs office
and told them of the occupation.
Shortly after 2:00 p.m., C. D. Marron of the Santa
Clara Sheriffs office arrived at the Computation Center.
He too walked through the building, and then went to
Redwood Hall nearby to confer with Wiggins and others,
including Messrs. Rosenzweig and Schwartz from the

University administration, Sergeant Tamm and Captain
Rosa of the Santa Clara Sheriffs office, and an Assistant
District Attorney of Santa Clara County.
At about 3:00 p.m., it was decided that Wiggins
should return to the Computation Center and issue, in
the name of Stanford University, a declaration of
trespass, declaring the occupation a violation of Stanford
University regulations and ordering the occupants to
leave immediately. Wiggins used a bullhorn as he moved
through the building making this declaration. Wiggins
claims he was jostled, pushed and shoved; it is agreed
that his announcement was greeted by jeers and catcalls,
and that virtually no one left the building in response to
his order. He then returned to the group at Redwood
Hall.
At some point, probably after 3:00 p.m., an informal
meeting was held by the demonstrators. It was chaired
by Janet Weiss, near the door of the Computation
Center, partly inside and partly outside the building.
Although reports on this meeting are somewhat
confused, apparently there was an informal discussion as
to what to do, including whether to continue the
occupation of the Computation Center, what to do if
the police came, and whether to damage the computer.
The discussion, according to Harry Press, a University
witness, included talk about what would be the impact
on student support if the computer were wrecked. Janet
Weiss is reported to have stressed the political neutrality
of machines, urging that they not be damaged.
Apparently agreement was reached to stay in the
Computation Center until the police came, and then to
leave voluntarily without damaging the computer.
Station KZSU, misunderstanding this vote, reported that
the occupiers would damage the computer, but Janet
Weiss asked them to broadcast a retraction of that
report. There may have been other, smaller meetings of
the occupiers during the afternoon; testimony on this
question is confusing.
At about 4:00 p.m., the group in Redwood Hall
decided that Messrs. Marron, Rosa, and Tamm would go
back to the Computation Center and again try to
persuade the occupants to leave voluntarily. They did so,
asking what the occupants wanted, calling attention to
the vulnerability of the computer and the data it
contained, and to possible injury to persons in the
University and in the hospital. The responses of the
demonstrators were that the occupants wanted to get
the Gamut-H program, SRI research, and war-related
research out of the Computation Center; the precise
nature of all the demands is unclear. Marron testified
that there were scattered shouts of "Down with SRI"
and "Get SRI out." Few if any of the occupiers left. The
three officers returned to Redwood Hall.
After further discussion by the group in Redwood
Hall, the three officers again returned to the
Computation Center. The police announced to the
occupants that they had been informed that the SRI
work had been stopped at the Computation Center.
Some demonstrators replied that such word was not
good enough, and they wanted a written statement from
President Lyman. After a brief discussion, the police said
there was nothing more that could be done, and the
three officers returned again to Redwood Hall.
2. Order to Disperse and Police Arrival. Police
officers had been called and their arrival was imminent.
Just before they were expected to arrive, Marron went
out to the front steps of Redwood Hall, and, using a
bullhorn, he made a formal statement declaring the
occupation of the Center and its immediately adjacent
territory unlawful and ordering the demonstrators to
disperse, also stating that they were subject to arrest if
they did not do so. It is uncontested that he made this
announcement three times, pointing in three different
directions, with one aimed directly at the people inside
the Computation Center and the two others at the
people in the area outside the Computation Center to his
left and right. There was no response to these orders to
disperse, although Professor Franklin's witness
Litterman said he heard them.
Very soon thereafter, the police arrived and entered
the Computation Center. Lookouts for the occupiers
observed the police arrival and notified those inside, so
that the occupiers left the building rapidly just as the
police were entering from another direction. The police
made no arrests in the building, although they indicated
that they would have made arrests if the occupiers had
remained in the building. Marron entered the building
immediately after the police, continuing to declare the
assembly an unlawful one, ordering dispersal, and
threatening arrest for any who did not obey the order to
disperse. Since the Computation Center had been
cleared, he then went outside and walked clockwise
around the building continuing to give his order to
disperse. He continued his series of announcements and,
by his testimony, returned to the front of the
Computation Center about eight minutes after the
arrival of the police. A double line of police had been
formed in front of the Center. Marron repeated his
complete order at least three or four times in front of
the Computation Center, stating that the area from the
Computation Center to Jordan Way was to be cleared.
Some demonstrators did not hear or did not know the
extent of the prohibited area. Marron testified that
ordering dispersal from a wide area was common police
practice. He testified to his concern that the police
officers under his command would be vulnerable to
rock-throwing and possible injury if the demonstrators
were permitted to stay close to the police lines and the
building which had just been cleared. As long as a
confrontation between demonstrators and police
persisted, indefinite police presence would have been
necessary to protect the building and computer.
As police lines were formed in front of the
Computation Center and as Marron repeated his
announcement, some clusters of demonstrators remained
in front of the police line, perhaps six to ten feet away,
chanting "Pigs off campus" and other slogans, and
loudly questioning the legality of Marron's order to
disperse. These demonstrators formed several clusters;
they included a number of members of the
"movement." Other demonstrators, faculty observers,
students, and passersby were farther from the police line
in two grassy areas and in the park lot; they were less
active.
After leaving the Computation Center, the small
clusters of demonstrators near the police lines made no
movement to withdraw in response to Marron's repeated
order. At first the more distant persons also did not
withdraw. Professor Franklin, Marron, and other
witnesses who were near the grassy areas testified,
however, that the more distant crowd began to withdraw
as the order to disperse was repeated. Professor Franklin,
in his affidavit prepared shortly after the event, stated
that he believed "most" of the crowd was beginning to
move back; in his oral testimony at the hearing he stated
that he now believes that a smaller number was
beginning to move away-perhaps only more than half,
or fewer. Marron, Moses, and Waterman, testifying for
the University, and Professor Franklin's witness Owen
Blank in a direct report to KZSU from the scene, all
agreed that the portion of the crowd away from the
police lines was definitely moving back in response to
the repeated announcements to disperse. Most of
Professor Franklin's witnesses, primarily individuals
standing near the front portion of the grassy area nearest
the Computation Center, testified that they did not see
any significant part of the crowd moving back. This
apparent contradiction in testimony is explainable, in
part at least, by the fact that those witnesses who had
reason to be observing the rear part of the crowd saw the
movement away, while those who were focusing their
attention on the police lines and events nearby did not
see the movement of the rear portion of the crowd.
3. Professor Franklin's Role. At this stage, Professor
Franklin moved forward and stood in front of a cluster
of demonstrators who were loudly stating that the order
to disperse was illegal. Some of Professor Franklin's
close political associates were part of this cluster. They
were giving a clenched fist salute while vociferously
denouncing the police order. Professor Franklin,
according to testimony and photographs, stood quietly
in front of this active group and observed what was
occurring. He then moved closer to Tamm, who was near
the police line, and argued briefly and vigorously that
the dispersal order was illegal and he had a right to
remain as a faculty observer. Tamm disagreed on both
points, pointing out that Franklin was not on the official
list of faculty observers supplied by the President's
Office. Professor Franklin then wheeled and strode
toward Dean Lincoln Moses. Moses was some 30-50 feet
farther back, perhaps 40-60 feet from Tamm, and was
beginning to leave in response to the police order.
Professor Franklin called out, "Lincoln Moses!".
Professor Franklin shouted some words like "God damn
it, this happens every time the police charge. The faculty
observers are all gone!" He argued loudly that Moses
should not leave, that the order to disperse was
improper, and that faculty observers, like Moses, should
remain to observe possible police brutality. There is
substantial agreement on what Professor Franklin said to
Moses in this brief but loud set of statements. It is
further agreed that Professor Franklin was heard by a
nearby circle of 10 to 12 persons and by others farther
away; although he was close to Moses, Professor
Franklin was shouting his arguments. Professor Franklin
testified that he was being careful while shouting at
Moses not to use language in describing the police which
would reduce the likelihood of his persuading Moses to

stay. Professor Franklin's statements to Moses took
about a minute and a half. Franklin then headed back
toward the police line, some 40-60 feet away.
Witnesses for the University testified that Professor
Franklin was shouting loudly as soon as he took his first
steps back toward the police lines, angrily denouncing
the police order as illegal. He made his way back to
Tamm, some 50 feet distant, through the substantial
group remaining in the first grassy area. The items of
dispute are whether Professor Franklin was addressing
his shouts to the police or to others in the crowd when
he started shouting, and whether his shouts included
exhortations that people not leave.
4. Testimony that Professor Franklin Urged and
Incited the Crowd to Stay. Moses reports that at first he
was convinced by Franklin's statement that he should
stay as a laculty observer and started to follow Franklin
back toward the police line. However, he goes on,
He meanwhile continued talking. He turned his back
to me and went toward the line, talking loudly
and .. . waving his arms or gesticulating. . . . And as
he went, a group of people formed about him and
went with him. And whether he was addressing only
them or generally all who could hear I wouldn't say.
On cross-examination, Moses said,
Then as you [Franklin] went on, you appeared to me
to be encouraging as many people to come as would
come. And that is what turned me around. ... I felt
that I was just being recruited to be one more person
present. ... I took the whole crowd to be provocative
of the police.
Under further cross-examination by Professor Franklin,
Moses reiterated this testimony and his statement that
Professor Franklin was urging people around him to
disobey the police order and return. Although he
admitted it was "conceivable" that Professor Franklin's
words were solely addressed to the police, he said that
his understanding was clearly to the contrary.
Moses was asked by Professor Franklin on
cross-examination whether Professor Franklin could not
have been merely urging faculty observers to join him in
going towards the police lines. Moses responded that
Professor Franklin was not addressing his remarks to
faculty members but to the entire crowd or all within
the sound of his voice. Moses said, "You spoke to me
about faculty people. And then as you went on you
appeared to me to be encouraging as many people to
come as would come. And that is what turned me
around."
Waterman testified that before Franklin approached
Moses,
.... the crowd was definitely starting to drift back
this way ... in fact they were drifting back in
appreciable numbers. ... I definitely had the
impression that the crisis was past, that people were
leaving, and that the situation was about to calm
down.
He then testified that he observed Franklin at this point
crossing the grass in front of Redwood Hall toward the
police, although Waterman was not sure whether before
or after the Moses encounter,
. . . shouting to the crowd, telling them to come back,
challenging the right of the sheriffs men to declare it
an illegal assembly, and saying that they had a perfect
right to hold a peaceful meeting and that they should
return to do so. .. . He seemed to be shouting in
general to the bunch that were leaving and had gotten
about as far as the second grassy plot.
Broholm, reporting from the scene for KZSU,
reported (a tape recording is available) first that "the
crowd was definitely moving back"; and then that
Professor Franklin "was haranguing the crowd to stay"
and resist the order to disperse, and "was berating the
crowd for leaving." On cross-examination by Professor
Franklin, Broholm confirmed this on-the-scene report:
"After you turned away from Moses you turned back in
that direction and began yelling. And again, "You
turned around, faced back toward the police . . . and
you started yelling in that direction." It is important to
note that Broholm placed the Moses-Franklin encounter
and subsequent Franklin shouting near the edge of the
crosswalk in front of Redwood Hall, at least 60 feet
from Tamm and Marron. Under further
cross-examination, Broholm said that he now doubts the
accuracy of his on-the-scene report that Professor
Franklin was "haranguing the crowd to stay," and that
instead Professor Franklin was probably shouting at
Tamm. He did not, however, change his estimate that
Professor Franklin began shouting in an area some 60
feet from Tamm, who was separated from Professor
Franklin by a substantial number of individuals in the
first grassy area. We believe that Broholm's on-the-scene
account can be presumed more accurate than his
recollection eight months later.
Owen Blank, another KZSU announcer, also reported
from the scene (recorded on tape) that the crowd in the
grassy areas was moving away at first, and then turned
and moved back toward the police line as Professor
Franklin was shouting. As Professor Franklin's witness,
Blank attached the accuracy of the taped reports by
Broholm and Blank or, Professor Franklin's role in
reversing the crowd's dispersal, but Blank's testimony
when related to the times on the taped reports instead
confirms the on-the-scene reports by Broholm and
Blank. Although Broholm and Blank apologized to
Moses for errors in Broholm's reporting at the time,
these errors concerned Moses's alleged assent
to Professor Franklin's urgings, not Professor
Franklin's own behavior.
Professor Edward Begle testified that he saw
Professor Franklin apparently urging a group of young
people to stay at the gathering, but it is not clear
whether this was the group of people around Moses and
the details of his testimony are not confirmed by others.
The witnesses who heard Professor Franklin's words
testified that he, as he strode back towards Tamm, was
angry and shouting, repeating the same arguments as
before, that the order to disperse was illegal and the
crowd should not leave. Moses's, Waterman's and
Broholm's testimony was cited above. Professor
Franklin's witness Doering testified that "He [Professor
Franklin] walked away from Moses a couple of paces,
and I think he said some things on the way." Doering
places the Moses encounter at about the group of birth
trees furthest from the police lines, some 30-40 feet
away.
As Professor Franklin returned to confront Tamm, an
indefinite number of other persons moved along, beside,
or behind him. In moving back toward Tamm, Professor
Franklin moved through a substantial number of persons
between Moses and Tamm. These included some of
Professor Franklin's political associates (identified in
pictures) and others not identified. Thus, it seems
certain that Professor Franklin's shouts against dispersal
would be clearly heard by these persons, whether or not
they were primarily addressed to Tamm, and that
Professor Franklin must surely have known that they
would be received by at least these demonstrators

through whom he advanced, whether or not they were
heard by persons behind Moses and Fiofessor
Franklin in the second grassy area.
5. Testimony that Professor Franklin Did Not Urge
and Incite the Crowd to Stay. On the other hand,
Professor Franklin and many of his witnesses testified
that Professor Franklin spoke only to Moses when he
strode from Tamm to Moses, and that he spoke only to
Tamm when he turned from Moses back toward the
police line. They described his comments to both as not
intended to incite other people to disobey the police
order. One of his witnesses, photographer Harrison,
described both the scene and Professor Franklin's
following confrontation with Tamm as "tranquil."
Another witness, Professor Switzer, described the
atmosphere as a "picnic." But these evaluations are
specifically controverted by pictures, tapes and other
testimony. Nearly all, including Professor Charles Stein
who was near Moses, deny hearing Professor Franklin
directly address anyone other than Moses or Tamm.
Most of Professor Franklin's witnesses testified that they
did not hear, or did not remember, what Professor
Franklin was saying as he strode forward, until he was
close to Tamm (e.g., Pace, Lonsdale, Hunkeler). They
report that they heard him shout only as he neared
Tamm, and then only at Tamm. This, however, is not
inconsistent with Moses', Waterman's and Broholm's
testimony that Professor Franklin was shouting earlier
when much farther from the police. Most of Protessor
Franklin's witnesses were nearer the police line, mainly
facing the police, and hence did not observe Professor
Franklin's entire movement forward. But Doering did,
and testified that Professor Franklin spoke as soon as he
left Moses. Hunkeler did not have Professor Franklin
under constant scrutiny and could hear only a few
words.
Professor Franklin testified that he began to shout at
Tamm from a distance because he wanted to be sure that
Tamm understood why he was returning to the police
line and that his action was intended to be conciliatory
and to lessen the danger of a police charge and arrests of
the demonstrators there. But that he should have done
so at such a great distance seems highly implausible
under the circumstances, and conflicts with considerable
testimony from witnesses from both parties. Clearly,
Professor Franklin did, as he stated, address Tamm,
saying, "Don, this is ridiculous ..." as he approached
Tamm and Marron, apparently from a distance of five to
ten feet; this is confirmed by his witnesses who were
near the police line.
With one exception, Professor Franklin's own
witnesses did not support his version of events as he left
Moses. The only witness for Professor Franklin who gave
evidence contradictory to that of the University
witnesses was Downey, who testified that, although he
was not sure, Professor Franklin was not saying anything
as he left Moses and walked towards the police lines. It is
likely that Downey was confused about the timing of his
interaction with Professor Franklin. Downey testified
that he never was with Professor Franklin until after the
encounter with Moses, but pictures show Downey
standing with Professor Franklin and the group shouting
at the police at a time identified by Professor Franklin's
witnesses as prior to his words with Moses. With this
doubtful exception, Professor Franklin produced no
witness who contradicted the testimony of
Administration witnesses who observed his shouting as
he left Moses at a considerable distance from the police
lines.
Professor Franklin was apparently himself confused
as to the locus of his confrontation with Moses in
relation to the police lines, and, in his testimony, he
minimized the distance from the police lines. He
testified that he was only a few steps away from Tamm
when he turned away from Moses.
One witness for Professor Franklin, Stein, supported
this spatial image by testifying that Professor Franklin
was about 15 feet from the police lines. No other
witness for either party supported Professor Franklin on
this point; indeed, five witnesses for Professor Franklin
directly contradicted him in their testimony.
6. Franklin-Tamm Confrontation and Police Charge.
It is agreed, and supported by photographic evidence,
that after Professor Franklin approached Tamm, a
substantial number of people, approximately 30, closed
in around and behind Professor Franklin as he angrily
confronted Tamm. Professor Franklin testified that he
was aware of people moving in from both sides but he
didn't know how many newsmen were present. Some
witnesses, including Professor Franklin's witness,
Litterman, testified that the crowd threatened to engulf
the police officers and Professor Franklin. Professor
Franklin and Tamm stood face to face shouting angrily
at one another. Witnesses of both parties described the
situation as very tense. Professor Franklin was repeating
his basic arguments and Tamm was denying the validity
of both.
After a very short interval, two, perhaps more,
policemen moved rapidly from behind Tamm and
Marron to try to arrest Professor Franklin, but Professor
Franklin slipped away from them, perhaps with the help
of some of his friends. At almost exactly the same time
the police line moved forward on the demonstrators in
what is commonly called a "police charge."
We note, parenthetically, that we do not consider
Professor Franklin's acknowledged urging of Moses and
other faculty observers to stay to be objectionable under
the charge. Formally designated faculty observers were
asked by the University administration to be present,
even though some, not identified to the police, were
apparently struck during the charge. The presence of
faculty observers could have been expected to reduce
the risk of injury to persons.
7. Findings of Fact. The Board finds the evidence
strongly persuasive that: (a) the police order to disperse
was clearly reasonable, given the illegal seizure of the
Computation Center, possible serious damage to the
computer and data stored there, possible danger to
police and demonstrators outside after the building was
cleared, and the need to return the Center promptly to
normal action without police presence; (b) while some
demonstrators refused to disperse after the building was
cleared, a substantial portion of the crowd was moving
back in response to repeated police orders, prior to
Professor Franklin's intervention; (c) Professor Franklin
played a central role in reversing the movement of the
crowd to disperse and his shouts and behavior
significantly increased the likelihood that a substantial
number of those present would stay; (d) Professor
Franklin intended his shouts after leaving Moses to be
heard by, and to influence the crowd to remain at the
scene in defiance of the police order to disperse.
However, even if lie did not directly address his shouts
to the crowd, he must reasonably have expected that a
result of his shouts would be to incite members of the
crowd to disobey the dispersal order, increasing the risk
to themselves; Professor Franklin's conduct and shouts

cannot reasonably be interpreted as merely attempts to
persuade Moses and other faculty observers to stay, to
conciliate the police or the crowd, or to lessen the
danger of a police charge or arrests with their attendant
dangers to the demonstrators. We comment further on
these findings in the following section.
C. SUPPLEMENTA R Y EVIDENCE AND EINDINGS
A number of points in the testimony require special
attention in order to amplify and interpret the findings
of fact indicated above.
1. Charge of University Negligence. Professor
Franklin suggests that the University administration was
negligent in not announcing to the occupiers of the
Computation Center that work on the disputed SRI
contract had, in fact, been halted one or more days
before, because this information might have been
sufficient to induce the occupiers to leave the
Computation Center peacefully. Alternatively, he
implies that had some official of the University
explained that an investigation was under way, this
might have induced the occupiers to lave the building
voluntarily without the police having to be called.
In fact, SRI had apparently stopped using the
computer for the GAMUT-Hand its other programs
prior to February 10, but it had not informed Stanford
of any policy decision regarding GAMUT-H or other SRI
projects on the Stanford computer. The SRI accounts
had not been cancelled. Moreover, the Stanford
administration at that time believed, on the information
received from SRI, that there was no violation of
University policy; SRI had indicated to the University
administration that the research in question was not
classified and was available for publication. Thus Provost
Miller testified that he did not believe it would be proper
for the University to issue any statement pending receipt
of information on SRl's position on the whole matter.
Moreover, the Computer Facilities Committee of the
University was meeting on the afternoon of February
10, during the occupation, precisely to discuss the issues
raised by the GAMLTT-H program.
We do not agree with Professor Franklin's argument
that the University administration's refusal to negotiate
with, or report to, the Computation Center occupiers
justifies the refusal of the demonstrators to leave the
Computation Center which they were illegally
occupying. Some persons believe the University
administration would have been well advised to issue a
public statement that it was investigating the whole
situation, although we find the University
administration's position on the matter easy to
understand, given the uncertainty about SRl's position
and the fact that the relevant University committee was
in fact meeting at 2 p.m. on the afternoon of the
occupation. But even if the University officials involved
were guilty of faulty administrative judgment, this
would in no way justify the illegal occupation of the
Computation Center and its continuance in the face of
both University and police orders to disperse. Moreover,
it is important to remember that the protestors had
made no direct effort vis-a-vis the administration to halt
the GAMUT-H work beyond one unsigned leaflet,
although they had, according to their own testimony,
known of it for at least a week or two; the Computation
Center sit-in was in no sense a "last resort" step after all
legal avenues were exhausted. The demands of the
occupiers were vague, and we see no reason to believe
that they would have left the Center merely on
notification by the administration that the problem was
under active investigation.
2. Argument that Police Order to Disperse was
Unreasonable and Illegal. Professor Franklin argues that
the police order to disperse was unreasonable and
unlawful-that the crowd outside the Computation
Center was peaceful and within its rights of free
assembly as guaranteed by the First Amendment to the
Constitution. Thus, not only was he within his
constitutional rights in refusing to disperse and urging
others not to disperse, but indeed he was following his
duty as a citizen and a professor in so acting.
California law clearly gives to police the authority to
disperse illegal assemblies and sets out the legal
requirements for such orders. Only a court of law, which
we are not, could finally determine whether in fact the
police declaration of illegal assembly and the order to
disperse in this instance was legal. In our judgment, the
police order to disperse was clearly reasonable and, as we
understand the law, was probably legal as well. An illegal
seizure of the Computation Center had occurred, and
both University and police officials were understandably
concerned lest serious damage be done to the valuable
equipment housed there and to the even more valuable
data stored there. It was widely known that major
damage to computers, totalling millions of dollars, had
been done to other university computers.
The order declaring the occupation of the
Computation Center an illegal assembly and ordering
dispersal was a single order aimed at the occupiers of the
Computation Center when they were inside the building
and at those participating in the demonstration outside
the building, both before and following its evacuation.
Marron's testimony on this point is clear, and it is
confirmed by one of Professor Franklin's wftnesses. He
began giving the complete order before the arrival of the
police and continued with the same order during the
evacuation of the Computation Center and following the
evacuation when part of the demonstrators stayed close
to the Computation Center building. That this order to
evacuate the building was fully warranted can hardly be
denied. It was that same order that insisted that the
demonstrators withdraw a substantial distance from the
building being evacuated.
Moreover, we conclude that the order to disperse
back to Jordan Way outside the building was reasonable
on its own merits as well. The police knew that violence
had occurred on the Stanford campus during
police-demonstrator confrontations several times during
the past few years; the precaution of moving the crowd
back a substantial distance from the police line was
understandable, and was probably calculated to lessen
injury to both the police and the demonstrators. Thus
we conclude that the police order declaring the
demonstration an illegal assembly and ordering dispersal
was clearly reasonable in these circumstances.
Professor Franklin may have had the right as a citizen
briefly to protest the police order which he believed
unreasonable. But, especially given the strongly negative
police response to his first protest which he himself
noted, he surely did not have the right to increase the
risk of injury to others by urging them to stay and
disobey the police order.
3. Argument that Professor Franklin's Action was
Aimed at Conciliation and Reducing Danger to Those
Present. Professor Franklin argues that his action outside
the Computation Center was aimed primarily at
protecting demonstrators from injury or arrest at the
hands of the police that his argument with faculty
observers (and others) to remain and with the police
against the legality of the dispersal order was aimed at
avoiding such danger to the demonstrators. Some of his
witnesses testified that in their judgment Professor
Franklin's purpose was conciliation and avoidance of
danger to the demonstrators.
We find it plausible that Professor Franklin may have
believed that he was acting to protect the rights of his
friends and co-workers in the "movement" in some ol
his actions. It is clear that those in the small group
clustered in front of the police line as the larger group of
demonstrators moved back were largely members of the
"movement," including several of its best known
participants. It thus became increasingly likely that these
individuals would be in the forefront of a police charge
and most likely to be arrested if, in fact, a charge did
occur. That Professor Franklin should endeavor to
prevent the isolation of these individuals from the rest of
the group of demonstrators and passersby is
understandable.
But that he believed that his actions were basically
conciliatory and aimed primarily at lessening the
likelihood of a police charge and arrest is difficult to
accept. His behavior was surely encouraging other people
to remain at greatly increased risks to themselves.
Shouting loudly and angrily at either faculty observers,
the police, or others in the crowd is hardly calculated to
calm crowd or police behavior, or to lessen the
likelihood of violence. Thus, Professor Franklin's loud
shouts as he turned from Moses some 40-60 feet from
the police could hardly have been calculated to calm the
situation. He apparently addressed Tamm by name only
after he had approached within 10 feet or so of the
police; surely he would have done so sooner had his
main goal been to persuade Tamm, and he would have
not shouted to the crowd upon turning away from
Moses. Professor Franklin described Tamm during the
second confrontation as "more immediately hostile than
I had ever seen him before." Moreover, Professor
Franklin himself testified that he knew "for a certainty"
that a police charge or arrest would occur under such
conditions once the police line-up occurred and the
order to disperse was read. He testified that he knew of
no case where such a situation was not followed by a
police charge or arrests. On his own testimony, he had
these points in mind prior to his discussion with Moses
and his shouting return to confront Tamm. Several of
Professor Franklin's witnesses testified that they too
thought a police charge to be highly likely or inevitable,
and became even surer when they saw Professor Franklin
striding back to confront Tamm the second time. Given
this testimony, it is difficult to accept the argument that
Professor Franklin seriously hoped by his actions to
eliminate the possibility of either a police charge or
arrests outside the Computation Center.
It is difficult to believe that Professor Franklin's duty
as a professor encompassed using others to stay and
confront the police when he felt certain that the result
would be a police charge and arrests, with a danger of
serious personal injury (which he testified is likely
whenever a police charge occurs). He testified that he
personally was resolved not to give way to fascism and
was going to stay and confront the police no matter
what happened. He testified, as did several of his
witnesses, that dispersal would be a political defeat for
the "movement" and an important victory for the
police.
Although Professor Franklin felt certain, or almost
certain, that a police charge and arrest would ensue
soon, he did not advise any people in the demonstrator's
group, either those in the "movement" or other
students, of the danger of a police charge, possible
injury, and arrests. Professor Franklin and some of his
close political associates testified of their awareness of
the impending police action at a time when others, less
experienced, did not anticipate any trouble. Professor
Franklin testified:
"My own experience in having been in just lots and
lots of police confrontations, is that if an order is
given declaring something an illegal assembly, telling
people to disperse, once that takes place then there
are basically one of two things that are going to
happen. Either the pigs are going to charge the people
or they're going to move for a mass bust.
"1 don't think I've ever seen a declaration of an illegal
assembly -maybe I have but I certainly can't
remember-l've never seen a declaration of an illegal
assembly not followed by one of those two actions.
Now it can be seconds; it can be minutes. Sometimes
they can declare an area an illegal assembly and then
nothing happens for some period of time and they're
moving what's really happening is they're moving in
for a mass bust. . . .
"And one of the signs you look for in a police line
prior to a charge is whether—one thing is the visors.
The other thing is whether they're smoking or not. If
they're not smoking then you look upon that as, you
know, a charge could take place at any time. And of
course, one of the things that they try to do is to
make the charge unexpected. So once you've got in a
situation the charge could take place the next second
or it might not take place for some time, but
something is going to happen."
Professor Franklin had difficulty explaining his
failure to warn others. He testified:
"As far as the question of whether I talked to
demonstrators on the lawn of the computer center
about the possibility of arrests and beatings and so
forth: I just—l mean, I may have had—it's possible
that I talked to some people about something about
it. But I certainly don't remember that at all, any
more than 1 remember. ... Well, I'm sure that I
didn't urge anybody to stay and I'm sure I didn't urge
anybody to leave, if that's what-if that's what the
point of that question was."
4. Did Professor Franklin Intentionally Urge and
Incite People to Remain in Defiance of the Police Order
to Disperse? The charge states that "Professor Franklin
significantly interfered with orderly dispersal by
intentionally urging and inciting students and other
persons present at the Computation Center to disregard
or disobey such orders to disperse." The evidence seems
to us convincing that the result of Professor Franklin's
behavior was to help significantly to induce students and
other persons present at the Computation Center to
disregard or disobey such orders to disperse. But
Professor Franklin argues that he did not specifically
address any individual other than Moses and Tamm. He
said, "I wouldn't take it upon myself to do that to
people in that situation because I knew that people were
defenseless in that situation." No witness testified that
Professor Franklin directly addressed other specific
individuals, although there is considerable testimony
that he addressed the crowd in more general terms,
$

urging it to resist the allegedly illegal police order to
disperse. The question is whether these shouts and this
behavior, not addressed to specific individuals other than
Moses and Tamm, amount to intentionally urging and
inciting students and other persons to disregard the
police order.
We find the evidence strongly persuasive that
Professor Franklin intentionally urged and incited
students and others present to disregard or disobey the
police orders. His purpose was to encourage others to
remain. Except for his own denial, all percipient
witnesses testified that Professor Franklin, after leaving
Moses, directly addressed his shouts to the crowd. But
even it he did not directly address the crowd, he must
have expected the likely effect of his behavior under
those circumstances to be to urge and incite others to
stay. Professor Franklin surely would not need to have
addressed each individual by name to have urged them
to stay.
The conclusion that the incitement was intentional is
reinforced by Professor Franklin's testimony that, even
knowing the results of his actions, he would not have
changed his behavior outside the Computation Center.
He said, "The only reasonable course of action that I
could see was what 1 did. And in looking back on it now
from, 1 don't know, eight or nine months, I still can't see
any other alternative."
The charge is not that Professor Franklin disobeyed
the police order himself, but that he intentionally
incited others to disobey the order. His behavior
increased the risk to others, a risk of which many were
unaware. The evidence meets the standards for
incitement that we set out earlier.
CONCLUSION
We find the evidence strongly persuasive that
Professor Franklin ' did significantly interfere with
orderly dispersal following the clearing of the
Computation Center by intentionally urging and inciting
students and other persons present to disregard or
disobey such orders to disperse, that this police order to
disperse was clearly reasonable under the circumstances,
and that Professor Franklin's conduct and speech did
substantially increase the danger of injury to other
persons.
DISSENTING OPINION
Professors Brown and Kennedy, although in accord
with much of the descriptive account of the majority
report on the events outside the Computation Center,
dissent as follows:
We place a sufficiently different interpretive weight
on the evidence at certain crucial points to make us
unable to sustain the charge.
1. The first of these centers on an element of
Professor Franklin's conduct that is central in the
testimony of virtually every witness, his concern that
faculty members remain as observers-a concern without
which many of his actions remain inexplicable. This is a
major substantive point in the conversations with Tamm
and Moses, it persuades Professor Eklof to stay on the
scene when he had decided to leave and persuades
Professor Moses in retrospect that perhaps he should
have stayed, it is a subject Professor Franklin pursues
with Professor Hastorf after the police charge, and it is
the dominant concern in Professor Franldin's later
conversation with Litterman and in a speech in front of
President Lyman's office. He asserts that he felt (a) that
the continuing presence of faculty observers might avert

a police charge, (b) that "respectable" faculty like Moses
might help him persuade the police of the right of
people to remain, and (c) that if there were a charge, the
faculty presence might minimize its brutality. He
testified that he felt a police charge would be
"inevitable" if there was a "withdrawal of the faculty
observers and other kinds of neutral people who had
made up a significant section of that crowd."
We agree with the majority report that "the presence
of faculty observers could have been expected to reduce
the risk of injury to persons." However, that fact,
coupled with Professor Franklin's own concern to keep
faculty observers on the scene, cause us to dissent from
the majority conclusion: "that he believed his actions
were basically conciliatory and aimed primarily at
lessening the likelihood of a police charge and arrest is
difficult to accept." We find the conclusion plausible
rather than difficult even though we believe that
Professor Franklin's manner of seeking this end was
unwise.
2. A second difference of interpretation involves fact
more than motivation, and we find the call a close one
either way. This concerns the crucial period between the
time Professor Franklin leaves Moses and the time he is
back in conversation with Tamm, some 40 to 60 feet
away. His own witnesses state that he was shouting
loudly during these moments, but assert, along with him,
that the comments were addressed only to Moses and
Tamm. The majority report believes that in addition he
spoke directly to others, and that, even if he had not, his
voice and demeanor were such that others would
inevitably hear him, and that he should have known that
his words and actions would influence them not to
disperse. Broholm and Blank are no longer completely
sure that Professor Franklin was directly haranguing the
crowd, although that was their on-the-spot impression.
Moses believes he was, though his assessment is
predicated on action after Professor Franklin turned his
back on him, so that the direction of the shouts is only
conjecture. Waterman believes Professor Franklin was
directly enlisting crowd support, but his timing of the
event is uncertain, and he saw only Professor Franklin's
back and left side. The identity of his audience is thus
once again conjecture. It is clear, however, that by the
time Professor Franklin was within ten feet of Tamm he
was yelling directly at him such words as, "Hey, Don,
this is ridiculous . . . In the interval he was apparently
asserting "that it was not an illegal assembly, and that
people should stay," though no witness produced
unshakeable testimony that he shouted this directly at
individuals within the crowd.
The possible reconstructions not all mutually
exclusive, are (a) that he spoke directly to Moses and
Tamm, but that he was overheard by others, some of
whom responded to his exhortations, (b) that he was
directly urging members of the crowd to stay, or (c) that
he was expressing his disgust and anger at the police
order either to the heavens or to onlookers in general,
rather than as specific instructions to members of the
crowd. There is clear evidence for the first alternative,
evidence (though less persuasive) for the second, and
plausibility for the third. The weight one puts on such
alternative explanations, and the interpretation one
makes of Professor Franklin's actions during these
moments, is dependent on a third consideration.
3. The third matter Involves an element in Professor
Franklin's conduct that, like the first, appears in the
testimony of virtually every witness: his strongly stated
conviction that the police order to disperse was illegal.

This is the second substantive point of his conversations
with both Moses and Tamm. We accept the majority
opinion that it is beyond our province or expertise to
determine whether or not the order was legal, and with
the majority "we conclude that the police order
declaring this demonstration an illegal assembly and
ordering dispersal was clearly reasonable in these
circumstances."
However, if a citizen wishes to question a police order
he believes unreasonable and unlawful, he has the right
to do so for a limited period of time. We place great
weight on this right, and believe that at least in part
Professor Franklin was trying to assert it: he believed the
order to be both unreasonable and unlawful, and so he
exercised the right of a citizen to object to it, in a brief
initial dispute with Tamm, in the attempt to enlist
Moses, and then in the second heated exchange with
Tamm. Ihe elapsed time of these three conversations
was probably no more than three or four minutes. To
Professor Franklin, standing on the grassy area where all
witnesses agree that they had seen no illegal acts, the
order to disperse may have seemed patently
unreasonable. That the Board in hindsight does not share
this assessment does not diminish the right of Professor
Franklin to have held it at the time or to have acted
upon it, lor a reasonable length of time, in the name of
the right of peaceable assembly. The fact that the mood
of the crowd immediately following the evacuation of
the Computation Center was reasonably calm and may
have caused no immediate danger to the police or the
building gives added legitimacy to the right, under such
conditions, to make a brief protest against the order, and
even to seek faculty help in so doing. That Professor
Franklin tried to enlist the aid of Professor Moses in his
exercise of this right is looked upon by no member of
the Board as culpable. It is even arguable that Professor
Franklin, if he did indeed urge "students and others" to
remain, was not engaging in culpable action, but only
reminding them of their own rights as citizens to protest,
at least briefly, an order that might be considered
unlawful or unreasonable.
4. The accumulation of the above considerations
leads us to believe (a) that Professor Franklin tried to get
other faculty members to remain on the scene in order
to reduce the likelihood of a police charge, (b) that his
continuing argument about the order to disperse was an
attempt to protest a police decision he felt to be illegal,
and one which as a citizen he had a right to protest, at
least briefly, and (c) that these two strongly held
convictions, uncontested in the testimony, led him to
loud and angry shouting, clearly directed at Moses and
Tamm, and possibly though not so clearly directed at
others, centering on the need for faculty observers to
stay, and the right of others to stay. The University's
Supplementary Written Brief states, "The issue is
whether a faculty member in a situation laden with the
risk of violent confrontation between demonstrators and
the police is acting properly when by his conduct he
increases that risk." We conclude that, even if one
accepts this as a statement of "the issue," such a
description does not adequately match the conduct
charged, and that there is not in our view strongly
persuasive evidence that his words or actions constituted
an incitement. Consequently, the charge that "Professor
Franklin did significantly interfere with orderly dispersal
by intentionally urging and inciting students and other
persons present at the Computation Center to disregard
or disobey such orders to disperse" is not one that we
can sustain.
A. CHARGES
The relevant University charge concerning the
Computation Center incident is contained in paragraph 9
of the "Statement of Charges."
9. Further, on February 10, 1971 and in connection
with the activity at the Computation Center
described in paragraph 8, students and other persons
were arrested for failure to disperse after orders had
been given to clear an area around the Computation
Center. Professor Franklin signilicantly interfered
with orderly dispersal by intentionally urging and
inciting students and other persons present at the
Computation Center to disregard or disobey such
orders to disperse.
B. FINDING OF FACTS
1. Occupation of the Computation Center. Shortly
before 1:00 p.m. on February 10, 1971, the
Computation Center building was closed on the basis of
a telephone order from Provost Miller, but the computer
was kept running. Handwritten notices were posted on
the doors of the Computation Center; doors, windows,
and gates were locked; and two campus policemen were
stationed at the front door. Provost Miller had been
informed that a group was proceeding from White Plaza
to the Computation Center. An estimated 100 to 200
demonstrators arrived at the Computation Center
shortly after 1:00 p.m. There were apparently no
previous collective decisions or explicit understandings
by the group as to what actions were to be taken or as to
whether to damage the computer. Some subgroups may
have had previous understandings; different individuals
testified as to different expectations. There were no
plans for formal picketing with picket signs as in many
"strikes," and there had been no attempt to
communicate with Computation Center workers about a
strike after the Dinkelspiel meeting of February 9.
At about 1:15 p.m., forcible entry was made into the
Computation Center; the gate was scaled and the back
door forced. About 50 demonstrators then entered
through the back door. As they moved through the
building, they opened other entrances and admitted
other demonstrators. Power to the building and to the
computer was shut off at 1:20 by pulling a master
switch located near the back door. Some 100-200 more
persons entered and milled about inside the
Computation Center. Some demonstrators, according to
officials of the Center, jimmied the door and entered the
machine room. They went to the 2301 drums, yanked
out wires, and flipped switches behind gates or doors on
two of the data storage drums. Other demonstrators in
that group went directly to the racks where tape reels
were stored and began looking through them. The
telephone lines were made inoperative. Once
demonstrators were inside the building and the doors
were thrown open, the Stanford police did not try to

stop movement in and out of the building. Some of the
demonstrators posted themselves at the doors, and to
some extent controlled entry and exit, for example,
denying entry to a photographer.
During this period, there was a continual movement
of demonstrators into and out of the Computation
Center. It is agreed that some time during the
occupation approximately $800 of physical damage was
done to the premises and contents of the Computation
Center, not counting any costs of shut-down time on the
computer. This damage was partly caused by the pulling
of the wires and damage to the 2301 unit, partly to the
premises. Two fire hoses were taken out of racks arid
valves opened, but the water had been turned off earlier
by the University. The printout of each of three printers
was removed. It is agreed that no substantial damage was
done to the computer itself. However, the shutdown,
lasting until about 8:00 p.m., made it impossible for the
Computation Center to process 700-800 student and
faculty jobs scheduled for that period. Montgomery
testified that these jobs would be run during the
succeeding two weeks.
Given the fact that the demonstrators illegally seized
the Computation Center and made impossible
continuation of its regular activities, the Board does not
consider further details on the conduct of the occupiers
important for Charge 9 against Professor Franklin. It
should be noted that the occupiers refused to obey the
requests to leave the building required by law-by Bruce
Wiggins on behalf of Stanford University and by Officers
Marron, Rosa and Tamm of the Santa Clara Sheriffs
office. However, as a context for other events, we note
briefly some undisputed facts concerning the
occupation.
Professor Franklin met his 1:15 class. Only seven of
the 150 registered students were present. He believed the
others were at the Computation Center and suggested
moving the class to the area outside the Center.
Professor Franklin did not hold his class because, he
testified, many of his students were inside the
Computation Center. It is uncontested that he remained
outside the Computation Center, talking with individuals
about a variety of topics prior to the arrival of the
police.
Bruce Wiggins, Stanford Director of Public Safety,
arrived at the Computation Center soon after its
occupation. He walked through and around the building
with Assistant Fire Chief Barr. Soon thereafter, around
2:00 p.m., he telephoned the Santa Clara Sheriffs office
and told them of the occupation.
Shortly after 2:00 p.m., C. D. Marron of the Santa
Clara Sheriffs office arrived at the Computation Center.
He too walked through the building, and then went to
Redwood Hall nearby to confer with Wiggins and others,
including Messrs. Rosenzweig and Schwartz from the

University administration, Sergeant Tamm and Captain
Rosa of the Santa Clara Sheriffs office, and an Assistant
District Attorney of Santa Clara County.
At about 3:00 p.m., it was decided that Wiggins
should return to the Computation Center and issue, in
the name of Stanford University, a declaration of
trespass, declaring the occupation a violation of Stanford
University regulations and ordering the occupants to
leave immediately. Wiggins used a bullhorn as he moved
through the building making this declaration. Wiggins
claims he was jostled, pushed and shoved; it is agreed
that his announcement was greeted by jeers and catcalls,
and that virtually no one left the building in response to
his order. He then returned to the group at Redwood
Hall.
At some point, probably after 3:00 p.m., an informal
meeting was held by the demonstrators. It was chaired
by Janet Weiss, near the door of the Computation
Center, partly inside and partly outside the building.
Although reports on this meeting are somewhat
confused, apparently there was an informal discussion as
to what to do, including whether to continue the
occupation of the Computation Center, what to do if
the police came, and whether to damage the computer.
The discussion, according to Harry Press, a University
witness, included talk about what would be the impact
on student support if the computer were wrecked. Janet
Weiss is reported to have stressed the political neutrality
of machines, urging that they not be damaged.
Apparently agreement was reached to stay in the
Computation Center until the police came, and then to
leave voluntarily without damaging the computer.
Station KZSU, misunderstanding this vote, reported that
the occupiers would damage the computer, but Janet
Weiss asked them to broadcast a retraction of that
report. There may have been other, smaller meetings of
the occupiers during the afternoon; testimony on this
question is confusing.
At about 4:00 p.m., the group in Redwood Hall
decided that Messrs. Marron, Rosa, and Tamm would go
back to the Computation Center and again try to
persuade the occupants to leave voluntarily. They did so,
asking what the occupants wanted, calling attention to
the vulnerability of the computer and the data it
contained, and to possible injury to persons in the
University and in the hospital. The responses of the
demonstrators were that the occupants wanted to get
the Gamut-H program, SRI research, and war-related
research out of the Computation Center; the precise
nature of all the demands is unclear. Marron testified
that there were scattered shouts of "Down with SRI"
and "Get SRI out." Few if any of the occupiers left. The
three officers returned to Redwood Hall.
After further discussion by the group in Redwood
Hall, the three officers again returned to the
Computation Center. The police announced to the
occupants that they had been informed that the SRI
work had been stopped at the Computation Center.
Some demonstrators replied that such word was not
good enough, and they wanted a written statement from
President Lyman. After a brief discussion, the police said
there was nothing more that could be done, and the
three officers returned again to Redwood Hall.
2. Order to Disperse and Police Arrival. Police
officers had been called and their arrival was imminent.
Just before they were expected to arrive, Marron went
out to the front steps of Redwood Hall, and, using a
bullhorn, he made a formal statement declaring the
occupation of the Center and its immediately adjacent
territory unlawful and ordering the demonstrators to
disperse, also stating that they were subject to arrest if
they did not do so. It is uncontested that he made this
announcement three times, pointing in three different
directions, with one aimed directly at the people inside
the Computation Center and the two others at the
people in the area outside the Computation Center to his
left and right. There was no response to these orders to
disperse, although Professor Franklin's witness
Litterman said he heard them.
Very soon thereafter, the police arrived and entered
the Computation Center. Lookouts for the occupiers
observed the police arrival and notified those inside, so
that the occupiers left the building rapidly just as the
police were entering from another direction. The police
made no arrests in the building, although they indicated
that they would have made arrests if the occupiers had
remained in the building. Marron entered the building
immediately after the police, continuing to declare the
assembly an unlawful one, ordering dispersal, and
threatening arrest for any who did not obey the order to
disperse. Since the Computation Center had been
cleared, he then went outside and walked clockwise
around the building continuing to give his order to
disperse. He continued his series of announcements and,
by his testimony, returned to the front of the
Computation Center about eight minutes after the
arrival of the police. A double line of police had been
formed in front of the Center. Marron repeated his
complete order at least three or four times in front of
the Computation Center, stating that the area from the
Computation Center to Jordan Way was to be cleared.
Some demonstrators did not hear or did not know the
extent of the prohibited area. Marron testified that
ordering dispersal from a wide area was common police
practice. He testified to his concern that the police
officers under his command would be vulnerable to
rock-throwing and possible injury if the demonstrators
were permitted to stay close to the police lines and the
building which had just been cleared. As long as a
confrontation between demonstrators and police
persisted, indefinite police presence would have been
necessary to protect the building and computer.
As police lines were formed in front of the
Computation Center and as Marron repeated his
announcement, some clusters of demonstrators remained
in front of the police line, perhaps six to ten feet away,
chanting "Pigs off campus" and other slogans, and
loudly questioning the legality of Marron's order to
disperse. These demonstrators formed several clusters;
they included a number of members of the
"movement." Other demonstrators, faculty observers,
students, and passersby were farther from the police line
in two grassy areas and in the park lot; they were less
active.
After leaving the Computation Center, the small
clusters of demonstrators near the police lines made no
movement to withdraw in response to Marron's repeated
order. At first the more distant persons also did not
withdraw. Professor Franklin, Marron, and other
witnesses who were near the grassy areas testified,
however, that the more distant crowd began to withdraw
as the order to disperse was repeated. Professor Franklin,
in his affidavit prepared shortly after the event, stated
that he believed "most" of the crowd was beginning to
move back; in his oral testimony at the hearing he stated
that he now believes that a smaller number was
beginning to move away-perhaps only more than half,
or fewer. Marron, Moses, and Waterman, testifying for
the University, and Professor Franklin's witness Owen
Blank in a direct report to KZSU from the scene, all
agreed that the portion of the crowd away from the
police lines was definitely moving back in response to
the repeated announcements to disperse. Most of
Professor Franklin's witnesses, primarily individuals
standing near the front portion of the grassy area nearest
the Computation Center, testified that they did not see
any significant part of the crowd moving back. This
apparent contradiction in testimony is explainable, in
part at least, by the fact that those witnesses who had
reason to be observing the rear part of the crowd saw the
movement away, while those who were focusing their
attention on the police lines and events nearby did not
see the movement of the rear portion of the crowd.
3. Professor Franklin's Role. At this stage, Professor
Franklin moved forward and stood in front of a cluster
of demonstrators who were loudly stating that the order
to disperse was illegal. Some of Professor Franklin's
close political associates were part of this cluster. They
were giving a clenched fist salute while vociferously
denouncing the police order. Professor Franklin,
according to testimony and photographs, stood quietly
in front of this active group and observed what was
occurring. He then moved closer to Tamm, who was near
the police line, and argued briefly and vigorously that
the dispersal order was illegal and he had a right to
remain as a faculty observer. Tamm disagreed on both
points, pointing out that Franklin was not on the official
list of faculty observers supplied by the President's
Office. Professor Franklin then wheeled and strode
toward Dean Lincoln Moses. Moses was some 30-50 feet
farther back, perhaps 40-60 feet from Tamm, and was
beginning to leave in response to the police order.
Professor Franklin called out, "Lincoln Moses!".
Professor Franklin shouted some words like "God damn
it, this happens every time the police charge. The faculty
observers are all gone!" He argued loudly that Moses
should not leave, that the order to disperse was
improper, and that faculty observers, like Moses, should
remain to observe possible police brutality. There is
substantial agreement on what Professor Franklin said to
Moses in this brief but loud set of statements. It is
further agreed that Professor Franklin was heard by a
nearby circle of 10 to 12 persons and by others farther
away; although he was close to Moses, Professor
Franklin was shouting his arguments. Professor Franklin
testified that he was being careful while shouting at
Moses not to use language in describing the police which
would reduce the likelihood of his persuading Moses to

stay. Professor Franklin's statements to Moses took
about a minute and a half. Franklin then headed back
toward the police line, some 40-60 feet away.
Witnesses for the University testified that Professor
Franklin was shouting loudly as soon as he took his first
steps back toward the police lines, angrily denouncing
the police order as illegal. He made his way back to
Tamm, some 50 feet distant, through the substantial
group remaining in the first grassy area. The items of
dispute are whether Professor Franklin was addressing
his shouts to the police or to others in the crowd when
he started shouting, and whether his shouts included
exhortations that people not leave.
4. Testimony that Professor Franklin Urged and
Incited the Crowd to Stay. Moses reports that at first he
was convinced by Franklin's statement that he should
stay as a laculty observer and started to follow Franklin
back toward the police line. However, he goes on,
He meanwhile continued talking. He turned his back
to me and went toward the line, talking loudly
and .. . waving his arms or gesticulating. . . . And as
he went, a group of people formed about him and
went with him. And whether he was addressing only
them or generally all who could hear I wouldn't say.
On cross-examination, Moses said,
Then as you [Franklin] went on, you appeared to me
to be encouraging as many people to come as would
come. And that is what turned me around. ... I felt
that I was just being recruited to be one more person
present. ... I took the whole crowd to be provocative
of the police.
Under further cross-examination by Professor Franklin,
Moses reiterated this testimony and his statement that
Professor Franklin was urging people around him to
disobey the police order and return. Although he
admitted it was "conceivable" that Professor Franklin's
words were solely addressed to the police, he said that
his understanding was clearly to the contrary.
Moses was asked by Professor Franklin on
cross-examination whether Professor Franklin could not
have been merely urging faculty observers to join him in
going towards the police lines. Moses responded that
Professor Franklin was not addressing his remarks to
faculty members but to the entire crowd or all within
the sound of his voice. Moses said, "You spoke to me
about faculty people. And then as you went on you
appeared to me to be encouraging as many people to
come as would come. And that is what turned me
around."
Waterman testified that before Franklin approached
Moses,
.... the crowd was definitely starting to drift back
this way ... in fact they were drifting back in
appreciable numbers. ... I definitely had the
impression that the crisis was past, that people were
leaving, and that the situation was about to calm
down.
He then testified that he observed Franklin at this point
crossing the grass in front of Redwood Hall toward the
police, although Waterman was not sure whether before
or after the Moses encounter,
. . . shouting to the crowd, telling them to come back,
challenging the right of the sheriffs men to declare it
an illegal assembly, and saying that they had a perfect
right to hold a peaceful meeting and that they should
return to do so. .. . He seemed to be shouting in
general to the bunch that were leaving and had gotten
about as far as the second grassy plot.
Broholm, reporting from the scene for KZSU,
reported (a tape recording is available) first that "the
crowd was definitely moving back"; and then that
Professor Franklin "was haranguing the crowd to stay"
and resist the order to disperse, and "was berating the
crowd for leaving." On cross-examination by Professor
Franklin, Broholm confirmed this on-the-scene report:
"After you turned away from Moses you turned back in
that direction and began yelling. And again, "You
turned around, faced back toward the police . . . and
you started yelling in that direction." It is important to
note that Broholm placed the Moses-Franklin encounter
and subsequent Franklin shouting near the edge of the
crosswalk in front of Redwood Hall, at least 60 feet
from Tamm and Marron. Under further
cross-examination, Broholm said that he now doubts the
accuracy of his on-the-scene report that Professor
Franklin was "haranguing the crowd to stay," and that
instead Professor Franklin was probably shouting at
Tamm. He did not, however, change his estimate that
Professor Franklin began shouting in an area some 60
feet from Tamm, who was separated from Professor
Franklin by a substantial number of individuals in the
first grassy area. We believe that Broholm's on-the-scene
account can be presumed more accurate than his
recollection eight months later.
Owen Blank, another KZSU announcer, also reported
from the scene (recorded on tape) that the crowd in the
grassy areas was moving away at first, and then turned
and moved back toward the police line as Professor
Franklin was shouting. As Professor Franklin's witness,
Blank attached the accuracy of the taped reports by
Broholm and Blank or, Professor Franklin's role in
reversing the crowd's dispersal, but Blank's testimony
when related to the times on the taped reports instead
confirms the on-the-scene reports by Broholm and
Blank. Although Broholm and Blank apologized to
Moses for errors in Broholm's reporting at the time,
these errors concerned Moses's alleged assent
to Professor Franklin's urgings, not Professor
Franklin's own behavior.
Professor Edward Begle testified that he saw
Professor Franklin apparently urging a group of young
people to stay at the gathering, but it is not clear
whether this was the group of people around Moses and
the details of his testimony are not confirmed by others.
The witnesses who heard Professor Franklin's words
testified that he, as he strode back towards Tamm, was
angry and shouting, repeating the same arguments as
before, that the order to disperse was illegal and the
crowd should not leave. Moses's, Waterman's and
Broholm's testimony was cited above. Professor
Franklin's witness Doering testified that "He [Professor
Franklin] walked away from Moses a couple of paces,
and I think he said some things on the way." Doering
places the Moses encounter at about the group of birth
trees furthest from the police lines, some 30-40 feet
away.
As Professor Franklin returned to confront Tamm, an
indefinite number of other persons moved along, beside,
or behind him. In moving back toward Tamm, Professor
Franklin moved through a substantial number of persons
between Moses and Tamm. These included some of
Professor Franklin's political associates (identified in
pictures) and others not identified. Thus, it seems
certain that Professor Franklin's shouts against dispersal
would be clearly heard by these persons, whether or not
they were primarily addressed to Tamm, and that
Professor Franklin must surely have known that they
would be received by at least these demonstrators

through whom he advanced, whether or not they were
heard by persons behind Moses and Fiofessor
Franklin in the second grassy area.
5. Testimony that Professor Franklin Did Not Urge
and Incite the Crowd to Stay. On the other hand,
Professor Franklin and many of his witnesses testified
that Professor Franklin spoke only to Moses when he
strode from Tamm to Moses, and that he spoke only to
Tamm when he turned from Moses back toward the
police line. They described his comments to both as not
intended to incite other people to disobey the police
order. One of his witnesses, photographer Harrison,
described both the scene and Professor Franklin's
following confrontation with Tamm as "tranquil."
Another witness, Professor Switzer, described the
atmosphere as a "picnic." But these evaluations are
specifically controverted by pictures, tapes and other
testimony. Nearly all, including Professor Charles Stein
who was near Moses, deny hearing Professor Franklin
directly address anyone other than Moses or Tamm.
Most of Professor Franklin's witnesses testified that they
did not hear, or did not remember, what Professor
Franklin was saying as he strode forward, until he was
close to Tamm (e.g., Pace, Lonsdale, Hunkeler). They
report that they heard him shout only as he neared
Tamm, and then only at Tamm. This, however, is not
inconsistent with Moses', Waterman's and Broholm's
testimony that Professor Franklin was shouting earlier
when much farther from the police. Most of Protessor
Franklin's witnesses were nearer the police line, mainly
facing the police, and hence did not observe Professor
Franklin's entire movement forward. But Doering did,
and testified that Professor Franklin spoke as soon as he
left Moses. Hunkeler did not have Professor Franklin
under constant scrutiny and could hear only a few
words.
Professor Franklin testified that he began to shout at
Tamm from a distance because he wanted to be sure that
Tamm understood why he was returning to the police
line and that his action was intended to be conciliatory
and to lessen the danger of a police charge and arrests of
the demonstrators there. But that he should have done
so at such a great distance seems highly implausible
under the circumstances, and conflicts with considerable
testimony from witnesses from both parties. Clearly,
Professor Franklin did, as he stated, address Tamm,
saying, "Don, this is ridiculous ..." as he approached
Tamm and Marron, apparently from a distance of five to
ten feet; this is confirmed by his witnesses who were
near the police line.
With one exception, Professor Franklin's own
witnesses did not support his version of events as he left
Moses. The only witness for Professor Franklin who gave
evidence contradictory to that of the University
witnesses was Downey, who testified that, although he
was not sure, Professor Franklin was not saying anything
as he left Moses and walked towards the police lines. It is
likely that Downey was confused about the timing of his
interaction with Professor Franklin. Downey testified
that he never was with Professor Franklin until after the
encounter with Moses, but pictures show Downey
standing with Professor Franklin and the group shouting
at the police at a time identified by Professor Franklin's
witnesses as prior to his words with Moses. With this
doubtful exception, Professor Franklin produced no
witness who contradicted the testimony of
Administration witnesses who observed his shouting as
he left Moses at a considerable distance from the police
lines.
Professor Franklin was apparently himself confused
as to the locus of his confrontation with Moses in
relation to the police lines, and, in his testimony, he
minimized the distance from the police lines. He
testified that he was only a few steps away from Tamm
when he turned away from Moses.
One witness for Professor Franklin, Stein, supported
this spatial image by testifying that Professor Franklin
was about 15 feet from the police lines. No other
witness for either party supported Professor Franklin on
this point; indeed, five witnesses for Professor Franklin
directly contradicted him in their testimony.
6. Franklin-Tamm Confrontation and Police Charge.
It is agreed, and supported by photographic evidence,
that after Professor Franklin approached Tamm, a
substantial number of people, approximately 30, closed
in around and behind Professor Franklin as he angrily
confronted Tamm. Professor Franklin testified that he
was aware of people moving in from both sides but he
didn't know how many newsmen were present. Some
witnesses, including Professor Franklin's witness,
Litterman, testified that the crowd threatened to engulf
the police officers and Professor Franklin. Professor
Franklin and Tamm stood face to face shouting angrily
at one another. Witnesses of both parties described the
situation as very tense. Professor Franklin was repeating
his basic arguments and Tamm was denying the validity
of both.
After a very short interval, two, perhaps more,
policemen moved rapidly from behind Tamm and
Marron to try to arrest Professor Franklin, but Professor
Franklin slipped away from them, perhaps with the help
of some of his friends. At almost exactly the same time
the police line moved forward on the demonstrators in
what is commonly called a "police charge."
We note, parenthetically, that we do not consider
Professor Franklin's acknowledged urging of Moses and
other faculty observers to stay to be objectionable under
the charge. Formally designated faculty observers were
asked by the University administration to be present,
even though some, not identified to the police, were
apparently struck during the charge. The presence of
faculty observers could have been expected to reduce
the risk of injury to persons.
7. Findings of Fact. The Board finds the evidence
strongly persuasive that: (a) the police order to disperse
was clearly reasonable, given the illegal seizure of the
Computation Center, possible serious damage to the
computer and data stored there, possible danger to
police and demonstrators outside after the building was
cleared, and the need to return the Center promptly to
normal action without police presence; (b) while some
demonstrators refused to disperse after the building was
cleared, a substantial portion of the crowd was moving
back in response to repeated police orders, prior to
Professor Franklin's intervention; (c) Professor Franklin
played a central role in reversing the movement of the
crowd to disperse and his shouts and behavior
significantly increased the likelihood that a substantial
number of those present would stay; (d) Professor
Franklin intended his shouts after leaving Moses to be
heard by, and to influence the crowd to remain at the
scene in defiance of the police order to disperse.
However, even if lie did not directly address his shouts
to the crowd, he must reasonably have expected that a
result of his shouts would be to incite members of the
crowd to disobey the dispersal order, increasing the risk
to themselves; Professor Franklin's conduct and shouts

cannot reasonably be interpreted as merely attempts to
persuade Moses and other faculty observers to stay, to
conciliate the police or the crowd, or to lessen the
danger of a police charge or arrests with their attendant
dangers to the demonstrators. We comment further on
these findings in the following section.
C. SUPPLEMENTA R Y EVIDENCE AND EINDINGS
A number of points in the testimony require special
attention in order to amplify and interpret the findings
of fact indicated above.
1. Charge of University Negligence. Professor
Franklin suggests that the University administration was
negligent in not announcing to the occupiers of the
Computation Center that work on the disputed SRI
contract had, in fact, been halted one or more days
before, because this information might have been
sufficient to induce the occupiers to leave the
Computation Center peacefully. Alternatively, he
implies that had some official of the University
explained that an investigation was under way, this
might have induced the occupiers to lave the building
voluntarily without the police having to be called.
In fact, SRI had apparently stopped using the
computer for the GAMUT-Hand its other programs
prior to February 10, but it had not informed Stanford
of any policy decision regarding GAMUT-H or other SRI
projects on the Stanford computer. The SRI accounts
had not been cancelled. Moreover, the Stanford
administration at that time believed, on the information
received from SRI, that there was no violation of
University policy; SRI had indicated to the University
administration that the research in question was not
classified and was available for publication. Thus Provost
Miller testified that he did not believe it would be proper
for the University to issue any statement pending receipt
of information on SRl's position on the whole matter.
Moreover, the Computer Facilities Committee of the
University was meeting on the afternoon of February
10, during the occupation, precisely to discuss the issues
raised by the GAMLTT-H program.
We do not agree with Professor Franklin's argument
that the University administration's refusal to negotiate
with, or report to, the Computation Center occupiers
justifies the refusal of the demonstrators to leave the
Computation Center which they were illegally
occupying. Some persons believe the University
administration would have been well advised to issue a
public statement that it was investigating the whole
situation, although we find the University
administration's position on the matter easy to
understand, given the uncertainty about SRl's position
and the fact that the relevant University committee was
in fact meeting at 2 p.m. on the afternoon of the
occupation. But even if the University officials involved
were guilty of faulty administrative judgment, this
would in no way justify the illegal occupation of the
Computation Center and its continuance in the face of
both University and police orders to disperse. Moreover,
it is important to remember that the protestors had
made no direct effort vis-a-vis the administration to halt
the GAMUT-H work beyond one unsigned leaflet,
although they had, according to their own testimony,
known of it for at least a week or two; the Computation
Center sit-in was in no sense a "last resort" step after all
legal avenues were exhausted. The demands of the
occupiers were vague, and we see no reason to believe
that they would have left the Center merely on
notification by the administration that the problem was
under active investigation.
2. Argument that Police Order to Disperse was
Unreasonable and Illegal. Professor Franklin argues that
the police order to disperse was unreasonable and
unlawful-that the crowd outside the Computation
Center was peaceful and within its rights of free
assembly as guaranteed by the First Amendment to the
Constitution. Thus, not only was he within his
constitutional rights in refusing to disperse and urging
others not to disperse, but indeed he was following his
duty as a citizen and a professor in so acting.
California law clearly gives to police the authority to
disperse illegal assemblies and sets out the legal
requirements for such orders. Only a court of law, which
we are not, could finally determine whether in fact the
police declaration of illegal assembly and the order to
disperse in this instance was legal. In our judgment, the
police order to disperse was clearly reasonable and, as we
understand the law, was probably legal as well. An illegal
seizure of the Computation Center had occurred, and
both University and police officials were understandably
concerned lest serious damage be done to the valuable
equipment housed there and to the even more valuable
data stored there. It was widely known that major
damage to computers, totalling millions of dollars, had
been done to other university computers.
The order declaring the occupation of the
Computation Center an illegal assembly and ordering
dispersal was a single order aimed at the occupiers of the
Computation Center when they were inside the building
and at those participating in the demonstration outside
the building, both before and following its evacuation.
Marron's testimony on this point is clear, and it is
confirmed by one of Professor Franklin's wftnesses. He
began giving the complete order before the arrival of the
police and continued with the same order during the
evacuation of the Computation Center and following the
evacuation when part of the demonstrators stayed close
to the Computation Center building. That this order to
evacuate the building was fully warranted can hardly be
denied. It was that same order that insisted that the
demonstrators withdraw a substantial distance from the
building being evacuated.
Moreover, we conclude that the order to disperse
back to Jordan Way outside the building was reasonable
on its own merits as well. The police knew that violence
had occurred on the Stanford campus during
police-demonstrator confrontations several times during
the past few years; the precaution of moving the crowd
back a substantial distance from the police line was
understandable, and was probably calculated to lessen
injury to both the police and the demonstrators. Thus
we conclude that the police order declaring the
demonstration an illegal assembly and ordering dispersal
was clearly reasonable in these circumstances.
Professor Franklin may have had the right as a citizen
briefly to protest the police order which he believed
unreasonable. But, especially given the strongly negative
police response to his first protest which he himself
noted, he surely did not have the right to increase the
risk of injury to others by urging them to stay and
disobey the police order.
3. Argument that Professor Franklin's Action was
Aimed at Conciliation and Reducing Danger to Those
Present. Professor Franklin argues that his action outside
the Computation Center was aimed primarily at
protecting demonstrators from injury or arrest at the
hands of the police that his argument with faculty
observers (and others) to remain and with the police
against the legality of the dispersal order was aimed at
avoiding such danger to the demonstrators. Some of his
witnesses testified that in their judgment Professor
Franklin's purpose was conciliation and avoidance of
danger to the demonstrators.
We find it plausible that Professor Franklin may have
believed that he was acting to protect the rights of his
friends and co-workers in the "movement" in some ol
his actions. It is clear that those in the small group
clustered in front of the police line as the larger group of
demonstrators moved back were largely members of the
"movement," including several of its best known
participants. It thus became increasingly likely that these
individuals would be in the forefront of a police charge
and most likely to be arrested if, in fact, a charge did
occur. That Professor Franklin should endeavor to
prevent the isolation of these individuals from the rest of
the group of demonstrators and passersby is
understandable.
But that he believed that his actions were basically
conciliatory and aimed primarily at lessening the
likelihood of a police charge and arrest is difficult to
accept. His behavior was surely encouraging other people
to remain at greatly increased risks to themselves.
Shouting loudly and angrily at either faculty observers,
the police, or others in the crowd is hardly calculated to
calm crowd or police behavior, or to lessen the
likelihood of violence. Thus, Professor Franklin's loud
shouts as he turned from Moses some 40-60 feet from
the police could hardly have been calculated to calm the
situation. He apparently addressed Tamm by name only
after he had approached within 10 feet or so of the
police; surely he would have done so sooner had his
main goal been to persuade Tamm, and he would have
not shouted to the crowd upon turning away from
Moses. Professor Franklin described Tamm during the
second confrontation as "more immediately hostile than
I had ever seen him before." Moreover, Professor
Franklin himself testified that he knew "for a certainty"
that a police charge or arrest would occur under such
conditions once the police line-up occurred and the
order to disperse was read. He testified that he knew of
no case where such a situation was not followed by a
police charge or arrests. On his own testimony, he had
these points in mind prior to his discussion with Moses
and his shouting return to confront Tamm. Several of
Professor Franklin's witnesses testified that they too
thought a police charge to be highly likely or inevitable,
and became even surer when they saw Professor Franklin
striding back to confront Tamm the second time. Given
this testimony, it is difficult to accept the argument that
Professor Franklin seriously hoped by his actions to
eliminate the possibility of either a police charge or
arrests outside the Computation Center.
It is difficult to believe that Professor Franklin's duty
as a professor encompassed using others to stay and
confront the police when he felt certain that the result
would be a police charge and arrests, with a danger of
serious personal injury (which he testified is likely
whenever a police charge occurs). He testified that he
personally was resolved not to give way to fascism and
was going to stay and confront the police no matter
what happened. He testified, as did several of his
witnesses, that dispersal would be a political defeat for
the "movement" and an important victory for the
police.
Although Professor Franklin felt certain, or almost
certain, that a police charge and arrest would ensue
soon, he did not advise any people in the demonstrator's
group, either those in the "movement" or other
students, of the danger of a police charge, possible
injury, and arrests. Professor Franklin and some of his
close political associates testified of their awareness of
the impending police action at a time when others, less
experienced, did not anticipate any trouble. Professor
Franklin testified:
"My own experience in having been in just lots and
lots of police confrontations, is that if an order is
given declaring something an illegal assembly, telling
people to disperse, once that takes place then there
are basically one of two things that are going to
happen. Either the pigs are going to charge the people
or they're going to move for a mass bust.
"1 don't think I've ever seen a declaration of an illegal
assembly -maybe I have but I certainly can't
remember-l've never seen a declaration of an illegal
assembly not followed by one of those two actions.
Now it can be seconds; it can be minutes. Sometimes
they can declare an area an illegal assembly and then
nothing happens for some period of time and they're
moving what's really happening is they're moving in
for a mass bust. . . .
"And one of the signs you look for in a police line
prior to a charge is whether—one thing is the visors.
The other thing is whether they're smoking or not. If
they're not smoking then you look upon that as, you
know, a charge could take place at any time. And of
course, one of the things that they try to do is to
make the charge unexpected. So once you've got in a
situation the charge could take place the next second
or it might not take place for some time, but
something is going to happen."
Professor Franklin had difficulty explaining his
failure to warn others. He testified:
"As far as the question of whether I talked to
demonstrators on the lawn of the computer center
about the possibility of arrests and beatings and so
forth: I just—l mean, I may have had—it's possible
that I talked to some people about something about
it. But I certainly don't remember that at all, any
more than 1 remember. ... Well, I'm sure that I
didn't urge anybody to stay and I'm sure I didn't urge
anybody to leave, if that's what-if that's what the
point of that question was."
4. Did Professor Franklin Intentionally Urge and
Incite People to Remain in Defiance of the Police Order
to Disperse? The charge states that "Professor Franklin
significantly interfered with orderly dispersal by
intentionally urging and inciting students and other
persons present at the Computation Center to disregard
or disobey such orders to disperse." The evidence seems
to us convincing that the result of Professor Franklin's
behavior was to help significantly to induce students and
other persons present at the Computation Center to
disregard or disobey such orders to disperse. But
Professor Franklin argues that he did not specifically
address any individual other than Moses and Tamm. He
said, "I wouldn't take it upon myself to do that to
people in that situation because I knew that people were
defenseless in that situation." No witness testified that
Professor Franklin directly addressed other specific
individuals, although there is considerable testimony
that he addressed the crowd in more general terms,
$

urging it to resist the allegedly illegal police order to
disperse. The question is whether these shouts and this
behavior, not addressed to specific individuals other than
Moses and Tamm, amount to intentionally urging and
inciting students and other persons to disregard the
police order.
We find the evidence strongly persuasive that
Professor Franklin intentionally urged and incited
students and others present to disregard or disobey the
police orders. His purpose was to encourage others to
remain. Except for his own denial, all percipient
witnesses testified that Professor Franklin, after leaving
Moses, directly addressed his shouts to the crowd. But
even it he did not directly address the crowd, he must
have expected the likely effect of his behavior under
those circumstances to be to urge and incite others to
stay. Professor Franklin surely would not need to have
addressed each individual by name to have urged them
to stay.
The conclusion that the incitement was intentional is
reinforced by Professor Franklin's testimony that, even
knowing the results of his actions, he would not have
changed his behavior outside the Computation Center.
He said, "The only reasonable course of action that I
could see was what 1 did. And in looking back on it now
from, 1 don't know, eight or nine months, I still can't see
any other alternative."
The charge is not that Professor Franklin disobeyed
the police order himself, but that he intentionally
incited others to disobey the order. His behavior
increased the risk to others, a risk of which many were
unaware. The evidence meets the standards for
incitement that we set out earlier.
CONCLUSION
We find the evidence strongly persuasive that
Professor Franklin ' did significantly interfere with
orderly dispersal following the clearing of the
Computation Center by intentionally urging and inciting
students and other persons present to disregard or
disobey such orders to disperse, that this police order to
disperse was clearly reasonable under the circumstances,
and that Professor Franklin's conduct and speech did
substantially increase the danger of injury to other
persons.
DISSENTING OPINION
Professors Brown and Kennedy, although in accord
with much of the descriptive account of the majority
report on the events outside the Computation Center,
dissent as follows:
We place a sufficiently different interpretive weight
on the evidence at certain crucial points to make us
unable to sustain the charge.
1. The first of these centers on an element of
Professor Franklin's conduct that is central in the
testimony of virtually every witness, his concern that
faculty members remain as observers-a concern without
which many of his actions remain inexplicable. This is a
major substantive point in the conversations with Tamm
and Moses, it persuades Professor Eklof to stay on the
scene when he had decided to leave and persuades
Professor Moses in retrospect that perhaps he should
have stayed, it is a subject Professor Franklin pursues
with Professor Hastorf after the police charge, and it is
the dominant concern in Professor Franldin's later
conversation with Litterman and in a speech in front of
President Lyman's office. He asserts that he felt (a) that
the continuing presence of faculty observers might avert

a police charge, (b) that "respectable" faculty like Moses
might help him persuade the police of the right of
people to remain, and (c) that if there were a charge, the
faculty presence might minimize its brutality. He
testified that he felt a police charge would be
"inevitable" if there was a "withdrawal of the faculty
observers and other kinds of neutral people who had
made up a significant section of that crowd."
We agree with the majority report that "the presence
of faculty observers could have been expected to reduce
the risk of injury to persons." However, that fact,
coupled with Professor Franklin's own concern to keep
faculty observers on the scene, cause us to dissent from
the majority conclusion: "that he believed his actions
were basically conciliatory and aimed primarily at
lessening the likelihood of a police charge and arrest is
difficult to accept." We find the conclusion plausible
rather than difficult even though we believe that
Professor Franklin's manner of seeking this end was
unwise.
2. A second difference of interpretation involves fact
more than motivation, and we find the call a close one
either way. This concerns the crucial period between the
time Professor Franklin leaves Moses and the time he is
back in conversation with Tamm, some 40 to 60 feet
away. His own witnesses state that he was shouting
loudly during these moments, but assert, along with him,
that the comments were addressed only to Moses and
Tamm. The majority report believes that in addition he
spoke directly to others, and that, even if he had not, his
voice and demeanor were such that others would
inevitably hear him, and that he should have known that
his words and actions would influence them not to
disperse. Broholm and Blank are no longer completely
sure that Professor Franklin was directly haranguing the
crowd, although that was their on-the-spot impression.
Moses believes he was, though his assessment is
predicated on action after Professor Franklin turned his
back on him, so that the direction of the shouts is only
conjecture. Waterman believes Professor Franklin was
directly enlisting crowd support, but his timing of the
event is uncertain, and he saw only Professor Franklin's
back and left side. The identity of his audience is thus
once again conjecture. It is clear, however, that by the
time Professor Franklin was within ten feet of Tamm he
was yelling directly at him such words as, "Hey, Don,
this is ridiculous . . . In the interval he was apparently
asserting "that it was not an illegal assembly, and that
people should stay," though no witness produced
unshakeable testimony that he shouted this directly at
individuals within the crowd.
The possible reconstructions not all mutually
exclusive, are (a) that he spoke directly to Moses and
Tamm, but that he was overheard by others, some of
whom responded to his exhortations, (b) that he was
directly urging members of the crowd to stay, or (c) that
he was expressing his disgust and anger at the police
order either to the heavens or to onlookers in general,
rather than as specific instructions to members of the
crowd. There is clear evidence for the first alternative,
evidence (though less persuasive) for the second, and
plausibility for the third. The weight one puts on such
alternative explanations, and the interpretation one
makes of Professor Franklin's actions during these
moments, is dependent on a third consideration.
3. The third matter Involves an element in Professor
Franklin's conduct that, like the first, appears in the
testimony of virtually every witness: his strongly stated
conviction that the police order to disperse was illegal.

This is the second substantive point of his conversations
with both Moses and Tamm. We accept the majority
opinion that it is beyond our province or expertise to
determine whether or not the order was legal, and with
the majority "we conclude that the police order
declaring this demonstration an illegal assembly and
ordering dispersal was clearly reasonable in these
circumstances."
However, if a citizen wishes to question a police order
he believes unreasonable and unlawful, he has the right
to do so for a limited period of time. We place great
weight on this right, and believe that at least in part
Professor Franklin was trying to assert it: he believed the
order to be both unreasonable and unlawful, and so he
exercised the right of a citizen to object to it, in a brief
initial dispute with Tamm, in the attempt to enlist
Moses, and then in the second heated exchange with
Tamm. Ihe elapsed time of these three conversations
was probably no more than three or four minutes. To
Professor Franklin, standing on the grassy area where all
witnesses agree that they had seen no illegal acts, the
order to disperse may have seemed patently
unreasonable. That the Board in hindsight does not share
this assessment does not diminish the right of Professor
Franklin to have held it at the time or to have acted
upon it, lor a reasonable length of time, in the name of
the right of peaceable assembly. The fact that the mood
of the crowd immediately following the evacuation of
the Computation Center was reasonably calm and may
have caused no immediate danger to the police or the
building gives added legitimacy to the right, under such
conditions, to make a brief protest against the order, and
even to seek faculty help in so doing. That Professor
Franklin tried to enlist the aid of Professor Moses in his
exercise of this right is looked upon by no member of
the Board as culpable. It is even arguable that Professor
Franklin, if he did indeed urge "students and others" to
remain, was not engaging in culpable action, but only
reminding them of their own rights as citizens to protest,
at least briefly, an order that might be considered
unlawful or unreasonable.
4. The accumulation of the above considerations
leads us to believe (a) that Professor Franklin tried to get
other faculty members to remain on the scene in order
to reduce the likelihood of a police charge, (b) that his
continuing argument about the order to disperse was an
attempt to protest a police decision he felt to be illegal,
and one which as a citizen he had a right to protest, at
least briefly, and (c) that these two strongly held
convictions, uncontested in the testimony, led him to
loud and angry shouting, clearly directed at Moses and
Tamm, and possibly though not so clearly directed at
others, centering on the need for faculty observers to
stay, and the right of others to stay. The University's
Supplementary Written Brief states, "The issue is
whether a faculty member in a situation laden with the
risk of violent confrontation between demonstrators and
the police is acting properly when by his conduct he
increases that risk." We conclude that, even if one
accepts this as a statement of "the issue," such a
description does not adequately match the conduct
charged, and that there is not in our view strongly
persuasive evidence that his words or actions constituted
an incitement. Consequently, the charge that "Professor
Franklin did significantly interfere with orderly dispersal
by intentionally urging and inciting students and other
persons present at the Computation Center to disregard
or disobey such orders to disperse" is not one that we
can sustain.
A. CHARGES
The relevant University charge concerning the
Computation Center incident is contained in paragraph 9
of the "Statement of Charges."
9. Further, on February 10, 1971 and in connection
with the activity at the Computation Center
described in paragraph 8, students and other persons
were arrested for failure to disperse after orders had
been given to clear an area around the Computation
Center. Professor Franklin signilicantly interfered
with orderly dispersal by intentionally urging and
inciting students and other persons present at the
Computation Center to disregard or disobey such
orders to disperse.
B. FINDING OF FACTS
1. Occupation of the Computation Center. Shortly
before 1:00 p.m. on February 10, 1971, the
Computation Center building was closed on the basis of
a telephone order from Provost Miller, but the computer
was kept running. Handwritten notices were posted on
the doors of the Computation Center; doors, windows,
and gates were locked; and two campus policemen were
stationed at the front door. Provost Miller had been
informed that a group was proceeding from White Plaza
to the Computation Center. An estimated 100 to 200
demonstrators arrived at the Computation Center
shortly after 1:00 p.m. There were apparently no
previous collective decisions or explicit understandings
by the group as to what actions were to be taken or as to
whether to damage the computer. Some subgroups may
have had previous understandings; different individuals
testified as to different expectations. There were no
plans for formal picketing with picket signs as in many
"strikes," and there had been no attempt to
communicate with Computation Center workers about a
strike after the Dinkelspiel meeting of February 9.
At about 1:15 p.m., forcible entry was made into the
Computation Center; the gate was scaled and the back
door forced. About 50 demonstrators then entered
through the back door. As they moved through the
building, they opened other entrances and admitted
other demonstrators. Power to the building and to the
computer was shut off at 1:20 by pulling a master
switch located near the back door. Some 100-200 more
persons entered and milled about inside the
Computation Center. Some demonstrators, according to
officials of the Center, jimmied the door and entered the
machine room. They went to the 2301 drums, yanked
out wires, and flipped switches behind gates or doors on
two of the data storage drums. Other demonstrators in
that group went directly to the racks where tape reels
were stored and began looking through them. The
telephone lines were made inoperative. Once
demonstrators were inside the building and the doors
were thrown open, the Stanford police did not try to

stop movement in and out of the building. Some of the
demonstrators posted themselves at the doors, and to
some extent controlled entry and exit, for example,
denying entry to a photographer.
During this period, there was a continual movement
of demonstrators into and out of the Computation
Center. It is agreed that some time during the
occupation approximately $800 of physical damage was
done to the premises and contents of the Computation
Center, not counting any costs of shut-down time on the
computer. This damage was partly caused by the pulling
of the wires and damage to the 2301 unit, partly to the
premises. Two fire hoses were taken out of racks arid
valves opened, but the water had been turned off earlier
by the University. The printout of each of three printers
was removed. It is agreed that no substantial damage was
done to the computer itself. However, the shutdown,
lasting until about 8:00 p.m., made it impossible for the
Computation Center to process 700-800 student and
faculty jobs scheduled for that period. Montgomery
testified that these jobs would be run during the
succeeding two weeks.
Given the fact that the demonstrators illegally seized
the Computation Center and made impossible
continuation of its regular activities, the Board does not
consider further details on the conduct of the occupiers
important for Charge 9 against Professor Franklin. It
should be noted that the occupiers refused to obey the
requests to leave the building required by law-by Bruce
Wiggins on behalf of Stanford University and by Officers
Marron, Rosa and Tamm of the Santa Clara Sheriffs
office. However, as a context for other events, we note
briefly some undisputed facts concerning the
occupation.
Professor Franklin met his 1:15 class. Only seven of
the 150 registered students were present. He believed the
others were at the Computation Center and suggested
moving the class to the area outside the Center.
Professor Franklin did not hold his class because, he
testified, many of his students were inside the
Computation Center. It is uncontested that he remained
outside the Computation Center, talking with individuals
about a variety of topics prior to the arrival of the
police.
Bruce Wiggins, Stanford Director of Public Safety,
arrived at the Computation Center soon after its
occupation. He walked through and around the building
with Assistant Fire Chief Barr. Soon thereafter, around
2:00 p.m., he telephoned the Santa Clara Sheriffs office
and told them of the occupation.
Shortly after 2:00 p.m., C. D. Marron of the Santa
Clara Sheriffs office arrived at the Computation Center.
He too walked through the building, and then went to
Redwood Hall nearby to confer with Wiggins and others,
including Messrs. Rosenzweig and Schwartz from the

University administration, Sergeant Tamm and Captain
Rosa of the Santa Clara Sheriffs office, and an Assistant
District Attorney of Santa Clara County.
At about 3:00 p.m., it was decided that Wiggins
should return to the Computation Center and issue, in
the name of Stanford University, a declaration of
trespass, declaring the occupation a violation of Stanford
University regulations and ordering the occupants to
leave immediately. Wiggins used a bullhorn as he moved
through the building making this declaration. Wiggins
claims he was jostled, pushed and shoved; it is agreed
that his announcement was greeted by jeers and catcalls,
and that virtually no one left the building in response to
his order. He then returned to the group at Redwood
Hall.
At some point, probably after 3:00 p.m., an informal
meeting was held by the demonstrators. It was chaired
by Janet Weiss, near the door of the Computation
Center, partly inside and partly outside the building.
Although reports on this meeting are somewhat
confused, apparently there was an informal discussion as
to what to do, including whether to continue the
occupation of the Computation Center, what to do if
the police came, and whether to damage the computer.
The discussion, according to Harry Press, a University
witness, included talk about what would be the impact
on student support if the computer were wrecked. Janet
Weiss is reported to have stressed the political neutrality
of machines, urging that they not be damaged.
Apparently agreement was reached to stay in the
Computation Center until the police came, and then to
leave voluntarily without damaging the computer.
Station KZSU, misunderstanding this vote, reported that
the occupiers would damage the computer, but Janet
Weiss asked them to broadcast a retraction of that
report. There may have been other, smaller meetings of
the occupiers during the afternoon; testimony on this
question is confusing.
At about 4:00 p.m., the group in Redwood Hall
decided that Messrs. Marron, Rosa, and Tamm would go
back to the Computation Center and again try to
persuade the occupants to leave voluntarily. They did so,
asking what the occupants wanted, calling attention to
the vulnerability of the computer and the data it
contained, and to possible injury to persons in the
University and in the hospital. The responses of the
demonstrators were that the occupants wanted to get
the Gamut-H program, SRI research, and war-related
research out of the Computation Center; the precise
nature of all the demands is unclear. Marron testified
that there were scattered shouts of "Down with SRI"
and "Get SRI out." Few if any of the occupiers left. The
three officers returned to Redwood Hall.
After further discussion by the group in Redwood
Hall, the three officers again returned to the
Computation Center. The police announced to the
occupants that they had been informed that the SRI
work had been stopped at the Computation Center.
Some demonstrators replied that such word was not
good enough, and they wanted a written statement from
President Lyman. After a brief discussion, the police said
there was nothing more that could be done, and the
three officers returned again to Redwood Hall.
2. Order to Disperse and Police Arrival. Police
officers had been called and their arrival was imminent.
Just before they were expected to arrive, Marron went
out to the front steps of Redwood Hall, and, using a
bullhorn, he made a formal statement declaring the
occupation of the Center and its immediately adjacent
territory unlawful and ordering the demonstrators to
disperse, also stating that they were subject to arrest if
they did not do so. It is uncontested that he made this
announcement three times, pointing in three different
directions, with one aimed directly at the people inside
the Computation Center and the two others at the
people in the area outside the Computation Center to his
left and right. There was no response to these orders to
disperse, although Professor Franklin's witness
Litterman said he heard them.
Very soon thereafter, the police arrived and entered
the Computation Center. Lookouts for the occupiers
observed the police arrival and notified those inside, so
that the occupiers left the building rapidly just as the
police were entering from another direction. The police
made no arrests in the building, although they indicated
that they would have made arrests if the occupiers had
remained in the building. Marron entered the building
immediately after the police, continuing to declare the
assembly an unlawful one, ordering dispersal, and
threatening arrest for any who did not obey the order to
disperse. Since the Computation Center had been
cleared, he then went outside and walked clockwise
around the building continuing to give his order to
disperse. He continued his series of announcements and,
by his testimony, returned to the front of the
Computation Center about eight minutes after the
arrival of the police. A double line of police had been
formed in front of the Center. Marron repeated his
complete order at least three or four times in front of
the Computation Center, stating that the area from the
Computation Center to Jordan Way was to be cleared.
Some demonstrators did not hear or did not know the
extent of the prohibited area. Marron testified that
ordering dispersal from a wide area was common police
practice. He testified to his concern that the police
officers under his command would be vulnerable to
rock-throwing and possible injury if the demonstrators
were permitted to stay close to the police lines and the
building which had just been cleared. As long as a
confrontation between demonstrators and police
persisted, indefinite police presence would have been
necessary to protect the building and computer.
As police lines were formed in front of the
Computation Center and as Marron repeated his
announcement, some clusters of demonstrators remained
in front of the police line, perhaps six to ten feet away,
chanting "Pigs off campus" and other slogans, and
loudly questioning the legality of Marron's order to
disperse. These demonstrators formed several clusters;
they included a number of members of the
"movement." Other demonstrators, faculty observers,
students, and passersby were farther from the police line
in two grassy areas and in the park lot; they were less
active.
After leaving the Computation Center, the small
clusters of demonstrators near the police lines made no
movement to withdraw in response to Marron's repeated
order. At first the more distant persons also did not
withdraw. Professor Franklin, Marron, and other
witnesses who were near the grassy areas testified,
however, that the more distant crowd began to withdraw
as the order to disperse was repeated. Professor Franklin,
in his affidavit prepared shortly after the event, stated
that he believed "most" of the crowd was beginning to
move back; in his oral testimony at the hearing he stated
that he now believes that a smaller number was
beginning to move away-perhaps only more than half,
or fewer. Marron, Moses, and Waterman, testifying for
the University, and Professor Franklin's witness Owen
Blank in a direct report to KZSU from the scene, all
agreed that the portion of the crowd away from the
police lines was definitely moving back in response to
the repeated announcements to disperse. Most of
Professor Franklin's witnesses, primarily individuals
standing near the front portion of the grassy area nearest
the Computation Center, testified that they did not see
any significant part of the crowd moving back. This
apparent contradiction in testimony is explainable, in
part at least, by the fact that those witnesses who had
reason to be observing the rear part of the crowd saw the
movement away, while those who were focusing their
attention on the police lines and events nearby did not
see the movement of the rear portion of the crowd.
3. Professor Franklin's Role. At this stage, Professor
Franklin moved forward and stood in front of a cluster
of demonstrators who were loudly stating that the order
to disperse was illegal. Some of Professor Franklin's
close political associates were part of this cluster. They
were giving a clenched fist salute while vociferously
denouncing the police order. Professor Franklin,
according to testimony and photographs, stood quietly
in front of this active group and observed what was
occurring. He then moved closer to Tamm, who was near
the police line, and argued briefly and vigorously that
the dispersal order was illegal and he had a right to
remain as a faculty observer. Tamm disagreed on both
points, pointing out that Franklin was not on the official
list of faculty observers supplied by the President's
Office. Professor Franklin then wheeled and strode
toward Dean Lincoln Moses. Moses was some 30-50 feet
farther back, perhaps 40-60 feet from Tamm, and was
beginning to leave in response to the police order.
Professor Franklin called out, "Lincoln Moses!".
Professor Franklin shouted some words like "God damn
it, this happens every time the police charge. The faculty
observers are all gone!" He argued loudly that Moses
should not leave, that the order to disperse was
improper, and that faculty observers, like Moses, should
remain to observe possible police brutality. There is
substantial agreement on what Professor Franklin said to
Moses in this brief but loud set of statements. It is
further agreed that Professor Franklin was heard by a
nearby circle of 10 to 12 persons and by others farther
away; although he was close to Moses, Professor
Franklin was shouting his arguments. Professor Franklin
testified that he was being careful while shouting at
Moses not to use language in describing the police which
would reduce the likelihood of his persuading Moses to

stay. Professor Franklin's statements to Moses took
about a minute and a half. Franklin then headed back
toward the police line, some 40-60 feet away.
Witnesses for the University testified that Professor
Franklin was shouting loudly as soon as he took his first
steps back toward the police lines, angrily denouncing
the police order as illegal. He made his way back to
Tamm, some 50 feet distant, through the substantial
group remaining in the first grassy area. The items of
dispute are whether Professor Franklin was addressing
his shouts to the police or to others in the crowd when
he started shouting, and whether his shouts included
exhortations that people not leave.
4. Testimony that Professor Franklin Urged and
Incited the Crowd to Stay. Moses reports that at first he
was convinced by Franklin's statement that he should
stay as a laculty observer and started to follow Franklin
back toward the police line. However, he goes on,
He meanwhile continued talking. He turned his back
to me and went toward the line, talking loudly
and .. . waving his arms or gesticulating. . . . And as
he went, a group of people formed about him and
went with him. And whether he was addressing only
them or generally all who could hear I wouldn't say.
On cross-examination, Moses said,
Then as you [Franklin] went on, you appeared to me
to be encouraging as many people to come as would
come. And that is what turned me around. ... I felt
that I was just being recruited to be one more person
present. ... I took the whole crowd to be provocative
of the police.
Under further cross-examination by Professor Franklin,
Moses reiterated this testimony and his statement that
Professor Franklin was urging people around him to
disobey the police order and return. Although he
admitted it was "conceivable" that Professor Franklin's
words were solely addressed to the police, he said that
his understanding was clearly to the contrary.
Moses was asked by Professor Franklin on
cross-examination whether Professor Franklin could not
have been merely urging faculty observers to join him in
going towards the police lines. Moses responded that
Professor Franklin was not addressing his remarks to
faculty members but to the entire crowd or all within
the sound of his voice. Moses said, "You spoke to me
about faculty people. And then as you went on you
appeared to me to be encouraging as many people to
come as would come. And that is what turned me
around."
Waterman testified that before Franklin approached
Moses,
.... the crowd was definitely starting to drift back
this way ... in fact they were drifting back in
appreciable numbers. ... I definitely had the
impression that the crisis was past, that people were
leaving, and that the situation was about to calm
down.
He then testified that he observed Franklin at this point
crossing the grass in front of Redwood Hall toward the
police, although Waterman was not sure whether before
or after the Moses encounter,
. . . shouting to the crowd, telling them to come back,
challenging the right of the sheriffs men to declare it
an illegal assembly, and saying that they had a perfect
right to hold a peaceful meeting and that they should
return to do so. .. . He seemed to be shouting in
general to the bunch that were leaving and had gotten
about as far as the second grassy plot.
Broholm, reporting from the scene for KZSU,
reported (a tape recording is available) first that "the
crowd was definitely moving back"; and then that
Professor Franklin "was haranguing the crowd to stay"
and resist the order to disperse, and "was berating the
crowd for leaving." On cross-examination by Professor
Franklin, Broholm confirmed this on-the-scene report:
"After you turned away from Moses you turned back in
that direction and began yelling. And again, "You
turned around, faced back toward the police . . . and
you started yelling in that direction." It is important to
note that Broholm placed the Moses-Franklin encounter
and subsequent Franklin shouting near the edge of the
crosswalk in front of Redwood Hall, at least 60 feet
from Tamm and Marron. Under further
cross-examination, Broholm said that he now doubts the
accuracy of his on-the-scene report that Professor
Franklin was "haranguing the crowd to stay," and that
instead Professor Franklin was probably shouting at
Tamm. He did not, however, change his estimate that
Professor Franklin began shouting in an area some 60
feet from Tamm, who was separated from Professor
Franklin by a substantial number of individuals in the
first grassy area. We believe that Broholm's on-the-scene
account can be presumed more accurate than his
recollection eight months later.
Owen Blank, another KZSU announcer, also reported
from the scene (recorded on tape) that the crowd in the
grassy areas was moving away at first, and then turned
and moved back toward the police line as Professor
Franklin was shouting. As Professor Franklin's witness,
Blank attached the accuracy of the taped reports by
Broholm and Blank or, Professor Franklin's role in
reversing the crowd's dispersal, but Blank's testimony
when related to the times on the taped reports instead
confirms the on-the-scene reports by Broholm and
Blank. Although Broholm and Blank apologized to
Moses for errors in Broholm's reporting at the time,
these errors concerned Moses's alleged assent
to Professor Franklin's urgings, not Professor
Franklin's own behavior.
Professor Edward Begle testified that he saw
Professor Franklin apparently urging a group of young
people to stay at the gathering, but it is not clear
whether this was the group of people around Moses and
the details of his testimony are not confirmed by others.
The witnesses who heard Professor Franklin's words
testified that he, as he strode back towards Tamm, was
angry and shouting, repeating the same arguments as
before, that the order to disperse was illegal and the
crowd should not leave. Moses's, Waterman's and
Broholm's testimony was cited above. Professor
Franklin's witness Doering testified that "He [Professor
Franklin] walked away from Moses a couple of paces,
and I think he said some things on the way." Doering
places the Moses encounter at about the group of birth
trees furthest from the police lines, some 30-40 feet
away.
As Professor Franklin returned to confront Tamm, an
indefinite number of other persons moved along, beside,
or behind him. In moving back toward Tamm, Professor
Franklin moved through a substantial number of persons
between Moses and Tamm. These included some of
Professor Franklin's political associates (identified in
pictures) and others not identified. Thus, it seems
certain that Professor Franklin's shouts against dispersal
would be clearly heard by these persons, whether or not
they were primarily addressed to Tamm, and that
Professor Franklin must surely have known that they
would be received by at least these demonstrators

through whom he advanced, whether or not they were
heard by persons behind Moses and Fiofessor
Franklin in the second grassy area.
5. Testimony that Professor Franklin Did Not Urge
and Incite the Crowd to Stay. On the other hand,
Professor Franklin and many of his witnesses testified
that Professor Franklin spoke only to Moses when he
strode from Tamm to Moses, and that he spoke only to
Tamm when he turned from Moses back toward the
police line. They described his comments to both as not
intended to incite other people to disobey the police
order. One of his witnesses, photographer Harrison,
described both the scene and Professor Franklin's
following confrontation with Tamm as "tranquil."
Another witness, Professor Switzer, described the
atmosphere as a "picnic." But these evaluations are
specifically controverted by pictures, tapes and other
testimony. Nearly all, including Professor Charles Stein
who was near Moses, deny hearing Professor Franklin
directly address anyone other than Moses or Tamm.
Most of Professor Franklin's witnesses testified that they
did not hear, or did not remember, what Professor
Franklin was saying as he strode forward, until he was
close to Tamm (e.g., Pace, Lonsdale, Hunkeler). They
report that they heard him shout only as he neared
Tamm, and then only at Tamm. This, however, is not
inconsistent with Moses', Waterman's and Broholm's
testimony that Professor Franklin was shouting earlier
when much farther from the police. Most of Protessor
Franklin's witnesses were nearer the police line, mainly
facing the police, and hence did not observe Professor
Franklin's entire movement forward. But Doering did,
and testified that Professor Franklin spoke as soon as he
left Moses. Hunkeler did not have Professor Franklin
under constant scrutiny and could hear only a few
words.
Professor Franklin testified that he began to shout at
Tamm from a distance because he wanted to be sure that
Tamm understood why he was returning to the police
line and that his action was intended to be conciliatory
and to lessen the danger of a police charge and arrests of
the demonstrators there. But that he should have done
so at such a great distance seems highly implausible
under the circumstances, and conflicts with considerable
testimony from witnesses from both parties. Clearly,
Professor Franklin did, as he stated, address Tamm,
saying, "Don, this is ridiculous ..." as he approached
Tamm and Marron, apparently from a distance of five to
ten feet; this is confirmed by his witnesses who were
near the police line.
With one exception, Professor Franklin's own
witnesses did not support his version of events as he left
Moses. The only witness for Professor Franklin who gave
evidence contradictory to that of the University
witnesses was Downey, who testified that, although he
was not sure, Professor Franklin was not saying anything
as he left Moses and walked towards the police lines. It is
likely that Downey was confused about the timing of his
interaction with Professor Franklin. Downey testified
that he never was with Professor Franklin until after the
encounter with Moses, but pictures show Downey
standing with Professor Franklin and the group shouting
at the police at a time identified by Professor Franklin's
witnesses as prior to his words with Moses. With this
doubtful exception, Professor Franklin produced no
witness who contradicted the testimony of
Administration witnesses who observed his shouting as
he left Moses at a considerable distance from the police
lines.
Professor Franklin was apparently himself confused
as to the locus of his confrontation with Moses in
relation to the police lines, and, in his testimony, he
minimized the distance from the police lines. He
testified that he was only a few steps away from Tamm
when he turned away from Moses.
One witness for Professor Franklin, Stein, supported
this spatial image by testifying that Professor Franklin
was about 15 feet from the police lines. No other
witness for either party supported Professor Franklin on
this point; indeed, five witnesses for Professor Franklin
directly contradicted him in their testimony.
6. Franklin-Tamm Confrontation and Police Charge.
It is agreed, and supported by photographic evidence,
that after Professor Franklin approached Tamm, a
substantial number of people, approximately 30, closed
in around and behind Professor Franklin as he angrily
confronted Tamm. Professor Franklin testified that he
was aware of people moving in from both sides but he
didn't know how many newsmen were present. Some
witnesses, including Professor Franklin's witness,
Litterman, testified that the crowd threatened to engulf
the police officers and Professor Franklin. Professor
Franklin and Tamm stood face to face shouting angrily
at one another. Witnesses of both parties described the
situation as very tense. Professor Franklin was repeating
his basic arguments and Tamm was denying the validity
of both.
After a very short interval, two, perhaps more,
policemen moved rapidly from behind Tamm and
Marron to try to arrest Professor Franklin, but Professor
Franklin slipped away from them, perhaps with the help
of some of his friends. At almost exactly the same time
the police line moved forward on the demonstrators in
what is commonly called a "police charge."
We note, parenthetically, that we do not consider
Professor Franklin's acknowledged urging of Moses and
other faculty observers to stay to be objectionable under
the charge. Formally designated faculty observers were
asked by the University administration to be present,
even though some, not identified to the police, were
apparently struck during the charge. The presence of
faculty observers could have been expected to reduce
the risk of injury to persons.
7. Findings of Fact. The Board finds the evidence
strongly persuasive that: (a) the police order to disperse
was clearly reasonable, given the illegal seizure of the
Computation Center, possible serious damage to the
computer and data stored there, possible danger to
police and demonstrators outside after the building was
cleared, and the need to return the Center promptly to
normal action without police presence; (b) while some
demonstrators refused to disperse after the building was
cleared, a substantial portion of the crowd was moving
back in response to repeated police orders, prior to
Professor Franklin's intervention; (c) Professor Franklin
played a central role in reversing the movement of the
crowd to disperse and his shouts and behavior
significantly increased the likelihood that a substantial
number of those present would stay; (d) Professor
Franklin intended his shouts after leaving Moses to be
heard by, and to influence the crowd to remain at the
scene in defiance of the police order to disperse.
However, even if lie did not directly address his shouts
to the crowd, he must reasonably have expected that a
result of his shouts would be to incite members of the
crowd to disobey the dispersal order, increasing the risk
to themselves; Professor Franklin's conduct and shouts

cannot reasonably be interpreted as merely attempts to
persuade Moses and other faculty observers to stay, to
conciliate the police or the crowd, or to lessen the
danger of a police charge or arrests with their attendant
dangers to the demonstrators. We comment further on
these findings in the following section.
C. SUPPLEMENTA R Y EVIDENCE AND EINDINGS
A number of points in the testimony require special
attention in order to amplify and interpret the findings
of fact indicated above.
1. Charge of University Negligence. Professor
Franklin suggests that the University administration was
negligent in not announcing to the occupiers of the
Computation Center that work on the disputed SRI
contract had, in fact, been halted one or more days
before, because this information might have been
sufficient to induce the occupiers to leave the
Computation Center peacefully. Alternatively, he
implies that had some official of the University
explained that an investigation was under way, this
might have induced the occupiers to lave the building
voluntarily without the police having to be called.
In fact, SRI had apparently stopped using the
computer for the GAMUT-Hand its other programs
prior to February 10, but it had not informed Stanford
of any policy decision regarding GAMUT-H or other SRI
projects on the Stanford computer. The SRI accounts
had not been cancelled. Moreover, the Stanford
administration at that time believed, on the information
received from SRI, that there was no violation of
University policy; SRI had indicated to the University
administration that the research in question was not
classified and was available for publication. Thus Provost
Miller testified that he did not believe it would be proper
for the University to issue any statement pending receipt
of information on SRl's position on the whole matter.
Moreover, the Computer Facilities Committee of the
University was meeting on the afternoon of February
10, during the occupation, precisely to discuss the issues
raised by the GAMLTT-H program.
We do not agree with Professor Franklin's argument
that the University administration's refusal to negotiate
with, or report to, the Computation Center occupiers
justifies the refusal of the demonstrators to leave the
Computation Center which they were illegally
occupying. Some persons believe the University
administration would have been well advised to issue a
public statement that it was investigating the whole
situation, although we find the University
administration's position on the matter easy to
understand, given the uncertainty about SRl's position
and the fact that the relevant University committee was
in fact meeting at 2 p.m. on the afternoon of the
occupation. But even if the University officials involved
were guilty of faulty administrative judgment, this
would in no way justify the illegal occupation of the
Computation Center and its continuance in the face of
both University and police orders to disperse. Moreover,
it is important to remember that the protestors had
made no direct effort vis-a-vis the administration to halt
the GAMUT-H work beyond one unsigned leaflet,
although they had, according to their own testimony,
known of it for at least a week or two; the Computation
Center sit-in was in no sense a "last resort" step after all
legal avenues were exhausted. The demands of the
occupiers were vague, and we see no reason to believe
that they would have left the Center merely on
notification by the administration that the problem was
under active investigation.
2. Argument that Police Order to Disperse was
Unreasonable and Illegal. Professor Franklin argues that
the police order to disperse was unreasonable and
unlawful-that the crowd outside the Computation
Center was peaceful and within its rights of free
assembly as guaranteed by the First Amendment to the
Constitution. Thus, not only was he within his
constitutional rights in refusing to disperse and urging
others not to disperse, but indeed he was following his
duty as a citizen and a professor in so acting.
California law clearly gives to police the authority to
disperse illegal assemblies and sets out the legal
requirements for such orders. Only a court of law, which
we are not, could finally determine whether in fact the
police declaration of illegal assembly and the order to
disperse in this instance was legal. In our judgment, the
police order to disperse was clearly reasonable and, as we
understand the law, was probably legal as well. An illegal
seizure of the Computation Center had occurred, and
both University and police officials were understandably
concerned lest serious damage be done to the valuable
equipment housed there and to the even more valuable
data stored there. It was widely known that major
damage to computers, totalling millions of dollars, had
been done to other university computers.
The order declaring the occupation of the
Computation Center an illegal assembly and ordering
dispersal was a single order aimed at the occupiers of the
Computation Center when they were inside the building
and at those participating in the demonstration outside
the building, both before and following its evacuation.
Marron's testimony on this point is clear, and it is
confirmed by one of Professor Franklin's wftnesses. He
began giving the complete order before the arrival of the
police and continued with the same order during the
evacuation of the Computation Center and following the
evacuation when part of the demonstrators stayed close
to the Computation Center building. That this order to
evacuate the building was fully warranted can hardly be
denied. It was that same order that insisted that the
demonstrators withdraw a substantial distance from the
building being evacuated.
Moreover, we conclude that the order to disperse
back to Jordan Way outside the building was reasonable
on its own merits as well. The police knew that violence
had occurred on the Stanford campus during
police-demonstrator confrontations several times during
the past few years; the precaution of moving the crowd
back a substantial distance from the police line was
understandable, and was probably calculated to lessen
injury to both the police and the demonstrators. Thus
we conclude that the police order declaring the
demonstration an illegal assembly and ordering dispersal
was clearly reasonable in these circumstances.
Professor Franklin may have had the right as a citizen
briefly to protest the police order which he believed
unreasonable. But, especially given the strongly negative
police response to his first protest which he himself
noted, he surely did not have the right to increase the
risk of injury to others by urging them to stay and
disobey the police order.
3. Argument that Professor Franklin's Action was
Aimed at Conciliation and Reducing Danger to Those
Present. Professor Franklin argues that his action outside
the Computation Center was aimed primarily at
protecting demonstrators from injury or arrest at the
hands of the police that his argument with faculty
observers (and others) to remain and with the police
against the legality of the dispersal order was aimed at
avoiding such danger to the demonstrators. Some of his
witnesses testified that in their judgment Professor
Franklin's purpose was conciliation and avoidance of
danger to the demonstrators.
We find it plausible that Professor Franklin may have
believed that he was acting to protect the rights of his
friends and co-workers in the "movement" in some ol
his actions. It is clear that those in the small group
clustered in front of the police line as the larger group of
demonstrators moved back were largely members of the
"movement," including several of its best known
participants. It thus became increasingly likely that these
individuals would be in the forefront of a police charge
and most likely to be arrested if, in fact, a charge did
occur. That Professor Franklin should endeavor to
prevent the isolation of these individuals from the rest of
the group of demonstrators and passersby is
understandable.
But that he believed that his actions were basically
conciliatory and aimed primarily at lessening the
likelihood of a police charge and arrest is difficult to
accept. His behavior was surely encouraging other people
to remain at greatly increased risks to themselves.
Shouting loudly and angrily at either faculty observers,
the police, or others in the crowd is hardly calculated to
calm crowd or police behavior, or to lessen the
likelihood of violence. Thus, Professor Franklin's loud
shouts as he turned from Moses some 40-60 feet from
the police could hardly have been calculated to calm the
situation. He apparently addressed Tamm by name only
after he had approached within 10 feet or so of the
police; surely he would have done so sooner had his
main goal been to persuade Tamm, and he would have
not shouted to the crowd upon turning away from
Moses. Professor Franklin described Tamm during the
second confrontation as "more immediately hostile than
I had ever seen him before." Moreover, Professor
Franklin himself testified that he knew "for a certainty"
that a police charge or arrest would occur under such
conditions once the police line-up occurred and the
order to disperse was read. He testified that he knew of
no case where such a situation was not followed by a
police charge or arrests. On his own testimony, he had
these points in mind prior to his discussion with Moses
and his shouting return to confront Tamm. Several of
Professor Franklin's witnesses testified that they too
thought a police charge to be highly likely or inevitable,
and became even surer when they saw Professor Franklin
striding back to confront Tamm the second time. Given
this testimony, it is difficult to accept the argument that
Professor Franklin seriously hoped by his actions to
eliminate the possibility of either a police charge or
arrests outside the Computation Center.
It is difficult to believe that Professor Franklin's duty
as a professor encompassed using others to stay and
confront the police when he felt certain that the result
would be a police charge and arrests, with a danger of
serious personal injury (which he testified is likely
whenever a police charge occurs). He testified that he
personally was resolved not to give way to fascism and
was going to stay and confront the police no matter
what happened. He testified, as did several of his
witnesses, that dispersal would be a political defeat for
the "movement" and an important victory for the
police.
Although Professor Franklin felt certain, or almost
certain, that a police charge and arrest would ensue
soon, he did not advise any people in the demonstrator's
group, either those in the "movement" or other
students, of the danger of a police charge, possible
injury, and arrests. Professor Franklin and some of his
close political associates testified of their awareness of
the impending police action at a time when others, less
experienced, did not anticipate any trouble. Professor
Franklin testified:
"My own experience in having been in just lots and
lots of police confrontations, is that if an order is
given declaring something an illegal assembly, telling
people to disperse, once that takes place then there
are basically one of two things that are going to
happen. Either the pigs are going to charge the people
or they're going to move for a mass bust.
"1 don't think I've ever seen a declaration of an illegal
assembly -maybe I have but I certainly can't
remember-l've never seen a declaration of an illegal
assembly not followed by one of those two actions.
Now it can be seconds; it can be minutes. Sometimes
they can declare an area an illegal assembly and then
nothing happens for some period of time and they're
moving what's really happening is they're moving in
for a mass bust. . . .
"And one of the signs you look for in a police line
prior to a charge is whether—one thing is the visors.
The other thing is whether they're smoking or not. If
they're not smoking then you look upon that as, you
know, a charge could take place at any time. And of
course, one of the things that they try to do is to
make the charge unexpected. So once you've got in a
situation the charge could take place the next second
or it might not take place for some time, but
something is going to happen."
Professor Franklin had difficulty explaining his
failure to warn others. He testified:
"As far as the question of whether I talked to
demonstrators on the lawn of the computer center
about the possibility of arrests and beatings and so
forth: I just—l mean, I may have had—it's possible
that I talked to some people about something about
it. But I certainly don't remember that at all, any
more than 1 remember. ... Well, I'm sure that I
didn't urge anybody to stay and I'm sure I didn't urge
anybody to leave, if that's what-if that's what the
point of that question was."
4. Did Professor Franklin Intentionally Urge and
Incite People to Remain in Defiance of the Police Order
to Disperse? The charge states that "Professor Franklin
significantly interfered with orderly dispersal by
intentionally urging and inciting students and other
persons present at the Computation Center to disregard
or disobey such orders to disperse." The evidence seems
to us convincing that the result of Professor Franklin's
behavior was to help significantly to induce students and
other persons present at the Computation Center to
disregard or disobey such orders to disperse. But
Professor Franklin argues that he did not specifically
address any individual other than Moses and Tamm. He
said, "I wouldn't take it upon myself to do that to
people in that situation because I knew that people were
defenseless in that situation." No witness testified that
Professor Franklin directly addressed other specific
individuals, although there is considerable testimony
that he addressed the crowd in more general terms,
$

urging it to resist the allegedly illegal police order to
disperse. The question is whether these shouts and this
behavior, not addressed to specific individuals other than
Moses and Tamm, amount to intentionally urging and
inciting students and other persons to disregard the
police order.
We find the evidence strongly persuasive that
Professor Franklin intentionally urged and incited
students and others present to disregard or disobey the
police orders. His purpose was to encourage others to
remain. Except for his own denial, all percipient
witnesses testified that Professor Franklin, after leaving
Moses, directly addressed his shouts to the crowd. But
even it he did not directly address the crowd, he must
have expected the likely effect of his behavior under
those circumstances to be to urge and incite others to
stay. Professor Franklin surely would not need to have
addressed each individual by name to have urged them
to stay.
The conclusion that the incitement was intentional is
reinforced by Professor Franklin's testimony that, even
knowing the results of his actions, he would not have
changed his behavior outside the Computation Center.
He said, "The only reasonable course of action that I
could see was what 1 did. And in looking back on it now
from, 1 don't know, eight or nine months, I still can't see
any other alternative."
The charge is not that Professor Franklin disobeyed
the police order himself, but that he intentionally
incited others to disobey the order. His behavior
increased the risk to others, a risk of which many were
unaware. The evidence meets the standards for
incitement that we set out earlier.
CONCLUSION
We find the evidence strongly persuasive that
Professor Franklin ' did significantly interfere with
orderly dispersal following the clearing of the
Computation Center by intentionally urging and inciting
students and other persons present to disregard or
disobey such orders to disperse, that this police order to
disperse was clearly reasonable under the circumstances,
and that Professor Franklin's conduct and speech did
substantially increase the danger of injury to other
persons.
DISSENTING OPINION
Professors Brown and Kennedy, although in accord
with much of the descriptive account of the majority
report on the events outside the Computation Center,
dissent as follows:
We place a sufficiently different interpretive weight
on the evidence at certain crucial points to make us
unable to sustain the charge.
1. The first of these centers on an element of
Professor Franklin's conduct that is central in the
testimony of virtually every witness, his concern that
faculty members remain as observers-a concern without
which many of his actions remain inexplicable. This is a
major substantive point in the conversations with Tamm
and Moses, it persuades Professor Eklof to stay on the
scene when he had decided to leave and persuades
Professor Moses in retrospect that perhaps he should
have stayed, it is a subject Professor Franklin pursues
with Professor Hastorf after the police charge, and it is
the dominant concern in Professor Franldin's later
conversation with Litterman and in a speech in front of
President Lyman's office. He asserts that he felt (a) that
the continuing presence of faculty observers might avert

a police charge, (b) that "respectable" faculty like Moses
might help him persuade the police of the right of
people to remain, and (c) that if there were a charge, the
faculty presence might minimize its brutality. He
testified that he felt a police charge would be
"inevitable" if there was a "withdrawal of the faculty
observers and other kinds of neutral people who had
made up a significant section of that crowd."
We agree with the majority report that "the presence
of faculty observers could have been expected to reduce
the risk of injury to persons." However, that fact,
coupled with Professor Franklin's own concern to keep
faculty observers on the scene, cause us to dissent from
the majority conclusion: "that he believed his actions
were basically conciliatory and aimed primarily at
lessening the likelihood of a police charge and arrest is
difficult to accept." We find the conclusion plausible
rather than difficult even though we believe that
Professor Franklin's manner of seeking this end was
unwise.
2. A second difference of interpretation involves fact
more than motivation, and we find the call a close one
either way. This concerns the crucial period between the
time Professor Franklin leaves Moses and the time he is
back in conversation with Tamm, some 40 to 60 feet
away. His own witnesses state that he was shouting
loudly during these moments, but assert, along with him,
that the comments were addressed only to Moses and
Tamm. The majority report believes that in addition he
spoke directly to others, and that, even if he had not, his
voice and demeanor were such that others would
inevitably hear him, and that he should have known that
his words and actions would influence them not to
disperse. Broholm and Blank are no longer completely
sure that Professor Franklin was directly haranguing the
crowd, although that was their on-the-spot impression.
Moses believes he was, though his assessment is
predicated on action after Professor Franklin turned his
back on him, so that the direction of the shouts is only
conjecture. Waterman believes Professor Franklin was
directly enlisting crowd support, but his timing of the
event is uncertain, and he saw only Professor Franklin's
back and left side. The identity of his audience is thus
once again conjecture. It is clear, however, that by the
time Professor Franklin was within ten feet of Tamm he
was yelling directly at him such words as, "Hey, Don,
this is ridiculous . . . In the interval he was apparently
asserting "that it was not an illegal assembly, and that
people should stay," though no witness produced
unshakeable testimony that he shouted this directly at
individuals within the crowd.
The possible reconstructions not all mutually
exclusive, are (a) that he spoke directly to Moses and
Tamm, but that he was overheard by others, some of
whom responded to his exhortations, (b) that he was
directly urging members of the crowd to stay, or (c) that
he was expressing his disgust and anger at the police
order either to the heavens or to onlookers in general,
rather than as specific instructions to members of the
crowd. There is clear evidence for the first alternative,
evidence (though less persuasive) for the second, and
plausibility for the third. The weight one puts on such
alternative explanations, and the interpretation one
makes of Professor Franklin's actions during these
moments, is dependent on a third consideration.
3. The third matter Involves an element in Professor
Franklin's conduct that, like the first, appears in the
testimony of virtually every witness: his strongly stated
conviction that the police order to disperse was illegal.

This is the second substantive point of his conversations
with both Moses and Tamm. We accept the majority
opinion that it is beyond our province or expertise to
determine whether or not the order was legal, and with
the majority "we conclude that the police order
declaring this demonstration an illegal assembly and
ordering dispersal was clearly reasonable in these
circumstances."
However, if a citizen wishes to question a police order
he believes unreasonable and unlawful, he has the right
to do so for a limited period of time. We place great
weight on this right, and believe that at least in part
Professor Franklin was trying to assert it: he believed the
order to be both unreasonable and unlawful, and so he
exercised the right of a citizen to object to it, in a brief
initial dispute with Tamm, in the attempt to enlist
Moses, and then in the second heated exchange with
Tamm. Ihe elapsed time of these three conversations
was probably no more than three or four minutes. To
Professor Franklin, standing on the grassy area where all
witnesses agree that they had seen no illegal acts, the
order to disperse may have seemed patently
unreasonable. That the Board in hindsight does not share
this assessment does not diminish the right of Professor
Franklin to have held it at the time or to have acted
upon it, lor a reasonable length of time, in the name of
the right of peaceable assembly. The fact that the mood
of the crowd immediately following the evacuation of
the Computation Center was reasonably calm and may
have caused no immediate danger to the police or the
building gives added legitimacy to the right, under such
conditions, to make a brief protest against the order, and
even to seek faculty help in so doing. That Professor
Franklin tried to enlist the aid of Professor Moses in his
exercise of this right is looked upon by no member of
the Board as culpable. It is even arguable that Professor
Franklin, if he did indeed urge "students and others" to
remain, was not engaging in culpable action, but only
reminding them of their own rights as citizens to protest,
at least briefly, an order that might be considered
unlawful or unreasonable.
4. The accumulation of the above considerations
leads us to believe (a) that Professor Franklin tried to get
other faculty members to remain on the scene in order
to reduce the likelihood of a police charge, (b) that his
continuing argument about the order to disperse was an
attempt to protest a police decision he felt to be illegal,
and one which as a citizen he had a right to protest, at
least briefly, and (c) that these two strongly held
convictions, uncontested in the testimony, led him to
loud and angry shouting, clearly directed at Moses and
Tamm, and possibly though not so clearly directed at
others, centering on the need for faculty observers to
stay, and the right of others to stay. The University's
Supplementary Written Brief states, "The issue is
whether a faculty member in a situation laden with the
risk of violent confrontation between demonstrators and
the police is acting properly when by his conduct he
increases that risk." We conclude that, even if one
accepts this as a statement of "the issue," such a
description does not adequately match the conduct
charged, and that there is not in our view strongly
persuasive evidence that his words or actions constituted
an incitement. Consequently, the charge that "Professor
Franklin did significantly interfere with orderly dispersal
by intentionally urging and inciting students and other
persons present at the Computation Center to disregard
or disobey such orders to disperse" is not one that we
can sustain.
A. CHARGES
The relevant University charge concerning the
Computation Center incident is contained in paragraph 9
of the "Statement of Charges."
9. Further, on February 10, 1971 and in connection
with the activity at the Computation Center
described in paragraph 8, students and other persons
were arrested for failure to disperse after orders had
been given to clear an area around the Computation
Center. Professor Franklin signilicantly interfered
with orderly dispersal by intentionally urging and
inciting students and other persons present at the
Computation Center to disregard or disobey such
orders to disperse.
B. FINDING OF FACTS
1. Occupation of the Computation Center. Shortly
before 1:00 p.m. on February 10, 1971, the
Computation Center building was closed on the basis of
a telephone order from Provost Miller, but the computer
was kept running. Handwritten notices were posted on
the doors of the Computation Center; doors, windows,
and gates were locked; and two campus policemen were
stationed at the front door. Provost Miller had been
informed that a group was proceeding from White Plaza
to the Computation Center. An estimated 100 to 200
demonstrators arrived at the Computation Center
shortly after 1:00 p.m. There were apparently no
previous collective decisions or explicit understandings
by the group as to what actions were to be taken or as to
whether to damage the computer. Some subgroups may
have had previous understandings; different individuals
testified as to different expectations. There were no
plans for formal picketing with picket signs as in many
"strikes," and there had been no attempt to
communicate with Computation Center workers about a
strike after the Dinkelspiel meeting of February 9.
At about 1:15 p.m., forcible entry was made into the
Computation Center; the gate was scaled and the back
door forced. About 50 demonstrators then entered
through the back door. As they moved through the
building, they opened other entrances and admitted
other demonstrators. Power to the building and to the
computer was shut off at 1:20 by pulling a master
switch located near the back door. Some 100-200 more
persons entered and milled about inside the
Computation Center. Some demonstrators, according to
officials of the Center, jimmied the door and entered the
machine room. They went to the 2301 drums, yanked
out wires, and flipped switches behind gates or doors on
two of the data storage drums. Other demonstrators in
that group went directly to the racks where tape reels
were stored and began looking through them. The
telephone lines were made inoperative. Once
demonstrators were inside the building and the doors
were thrown open, the Stanford police did not try to

stop movement in and out of the building. Some of the
demonstrators posted themselves at the doors, and to
some extent controlled entry and exit, for example,
denying entry to a photographer.
During this period, there was a continual movement
of demonstrators into and out of the Computation
Center. It is agreed that some time during the
occupation approximately $800 of physical damage was
done to the premises and contents of the Computation
Center, not counting any costs of shut-down time on the
computer. This damage was partly caused by the pulling
of the wires and damage to the 2301 unit, partly to the
premises. Two fire hoses were taken out of racks arid
valves opened, but the water had been turned off earlier
by the University. The printout of each of three printers
was removed. It is agreed that no substantial damage was
done to the computer itself. However, the shutdown,
lasting until about 8:00 p.m., made it impossible for the
Computation Center to process 700-800 student and
faculty jobs scheduled for that period. Montgomery
testified that these jobs would be run during the
succeeding two weeks.
Given the fact that the demonstrators illegally seized
the Computation Center and made impossible
continuation of its regular activities, the Board does not
consider further details on the conduct of the occupiers
important for Charge 9 against Professor Franklin. It
should be noted that the occupiers refused to obey the
requests to leave the building required by law-by Bruce
Wiggins on behalf of Stanford University and by Officers
Marron, Rosa and Tamm of the Santa Clara Sheriffs
office. However, as a context for other events, we note
briefly some undisputed facts concerning the
occupation.
Professor Franklin met his 1:15 class. Only seven of
the 150 registered students were present. He believed the
others were at the Computation Center and suggested
moving the class to the area outside the Center.
Professor Franklin did not hold his class because, he
testified, many of his students were inside the
Computation Center. It is uncontested that he remained
outside the Computation Center, talking with individuals
about a variety of topics prior to the arrival of the
police.
Bruce Wiggins, Stanford Director of Public Safety,
arrived at the Computation Center soon after its
occupation. He walked through and around the building
with Assistant Fire Chief Barr. Soon thereafter, around
2:00 p.m., he telephoned the Santa Clara Sheriffs office
and told them of the occupation.
Shortly after 2:00 p.m., C. D. Marron of the Santa
Clara Sheriffs office arrived at the Computation Center.
He too walked through the building, and then went to
Redwood Hall nearby to confer with Wiggins and others,
including Messrs. Rosenzweig and Schwartz from the

University administration, Sergeant Tamm and Captain
Rosa of the Santa Clara Sheriffs office, and an Assistant
District Attorney of Santa Clara County.
At about 3:00 p.m., it was decided that Wiggins
should return to the Computation Center and issue, in
the name of Stanford University, a declaration of
trespass, declaring the occupation a violation of Stanford
University regulations and ordering the occupants to
leave immediately. Wiggins used a bullhorn as he moved
through the building making this declaration. Wiggins
claims he was jostled, pushed and shoved; it is agreed
that his announcement was greeted by jeers and catcalls,
and that virtually no one left the building in response to
his order. He then returned to the group at Redwood
Hall.
At some point, probably after 3:00 p.m., an informal
meeting was held by the demonstrators. It was chaired
by Janet Weiss, near the door of the Computation
Center, partly inside and partly outside the building.
Although reports on this meeting are somewhat
confused, apparently there was an informal discussion as
to what to do, including whether to continue the
occupation of the Computation Center, what to do if
the police came, and whether to damage the computer.
The discussion, according to Harry Press, a University
witness, included talk about what would be the impact
on student support if the computer were wrecked. Janet
Weiss is reported to have stressed the political neutrality
of machines, urging that they not be damaged.
Apparently agreement was reached to stay in the
Computation Center until the police came, and then to
leave voluntarily without damaging the computer.
Station KZSU, misunderstanding this vote, reported that
the occupiers would damage the computer, but Janet
Weiss asked them to broadcast a retraction of that
report. There may have been other, smaller meetings of
the occupiers during the afternoon; testimony on this
question is confusing.
At about 4:00 p.m., the group in Redwood Hall
decided that Messrs. Marron, Rosa, and Tamm would go
back to the Computation Center and again try to
persuade the occupants to leave voluntarily. They did so,
asking what the occupants wanted, calling attention to
the vulnerability of the computer and the data it
contained, and to possible injury to persons in the
University and in the hospital. The responses of the
demonstrators were that the occupants wanted to get
the Gamut-H program, SRI research, and war-related
research out of the Computation Center; the precise
nature of all the demands is unclear. Marron testified
that there were scattered shouts of "Down with SRI"
and "Get SRI out." Few if any of the occupiers left. The
three officers returned to Redwood Hall.
After further discussion by the group in Redwood
Hall, the three officers again returned to the
Computation Center. The police announced to the
occupants that they had been informed that the SRI
work had been stopped at the Computation Center.
Some demonstrators replied that such word was not
good enough, and they wanted a written statement from
President Lyman. After a brief discussion, the police said
there was nothing more that could be done, and the
three officers returned again to Redwood Hall.
2. Order to Disperse and Police Arrival. Police
officers had been called and their arrival was imminent.
Just before they were expected to arrive, Marron went
out to the front steps of Redwood Hall, and, using a
bullhorn, he made a formal statement declaring the
occupation of the Center and its immediately adjacent
territory unlawful and ordering the demonstrators to
disperse, also stating that they were subject to arrest if
they did not do so. It is uncontested that he made this
announcement three times, pointing in three different
directions, with one aimed directly at the people inside
the Computation Center and the two others at the
people in the area outside the Computation Center to his
left and right. There was no response to these orders to
disperse, although Professor Franklin's witness
Litterman said he heard them.
Very soon thereafter, the police arrived and entered
the Computation Center. Lookouts for the occupiers
observed the police arrival and notified those inside, so
that the occupiers left the building rapidly just as the
police were entering from another direction. The police
made no arrests in the building, although they indicated
that they would have made arrests if the occupiers had
remained in the building. Marron entered the building
immediately after the police, continuing to declare the
assembly an unlawful one, ordering dispersal, and
threatening arrest for any who did not obey the order to
disperse. Since the Computation Center had been
cleared, he then went outside and walked clockwise
around the building continuing to give his order to
disperse. He continued his series of announcements and,
by his testimony, returned to the front of the
Computation Center about eight minutes after the
arrival of the police. A double line of police had been
formed in front of the Center. Marron repeated his
complete order at least three or four times in front of
the Computation Center, stating that the area from the
Computation Center to Jordan Way was to be cleared.
Some demonstrators did not hear or did not know the
extent of the prohibited area. Marron testified that
ordering dispersal from a wide area was common police
practice. He testified to his concern that the police
officers under his command would be vulnerable to
rock-throwing and possible injury if the demonstrators
were permitted to stay close to the police lines and the
building which had just been cleared. As long as a
confrontation between demonstrators and police
persisted, indefinite police presence would have been
necessary to protect the building and computer.
As police lines were formed in front of the
Computation Center and as Marron repeated his
announcement, some clusters of demonstrators remained
in front of the police line, perhaps six to ten feet away,
chanting "Pigs off campus" and other slogans, and
loudly questioning the legality of Marron's order to
disperse. These demonstrators formed several clusters;
they included a number of members of the
"movement." Other demonstrators, faculty observers,
students, and passersby were farther from the police line
in two grassy areas and in the park lot; they were less
active.
After leaving the Computation Center, the small
clusters of demonstrators near the police lines made no
movement to withdraw in response to Marron's repeated
order. At first the more distant persons also did not
withdraw. Professor Franklin, Marron, and other
witnesses who were near the grassy areas testified,
however, that the more distant crowd began to withdraw
as the order to disperse was repeated. Professor Franklin,
in his affidavit prepared shortly after the event, stated
that he believed "most" of the crowd was beginning to
move back; in his oral testimony at the hearing he stated
that he now believes that a smaller number was
beginning to move away-perhaps only more than half,
or fewer. Marron, Moses, and Waterman, testifying for
the University, and Professor Franklin's witness Owen
Blank in a direct report to KZSU from the scene, all
agreed that the portion of the crowd away from the
police lines was definitely moving back in response to
the repeated announcements to disperse. Most of
Professor Franklin's witnesses, primarily individuals
standing near the front portion of the grassy area nearest
the Computation Center, testified that they did not see
any significant part of the crowd moving back. This
apparent contradiction in testimony is explainable, in
part at least, by the fact that those witnesses who had
reason to be observing the rear part of the crowd saw the
movement away, while those who were focusing their
attention on the police lines and events nearby did not
see the movement of the rear portion of the crowd.
3. Professor Franklin's Role. At this stage, Professor
Franklin moved forward and stood in front of a cluster
of demonstrators who were loudly stating that the order
to disperse was illegal. Some of Professor Franklin's
close political associates were part of this cluster. They
were giving a clenched fist salute while vociferously
denouncing the police order. Professor Franklin,
according to testimony and photographs, stood quietly
in front of this active group and observed what was
occurring. He then moved closer to Tamm, who was near
the police line, and argued briefly and vigorously that
the dispersal order was illegal and he had a right to
remain as a faculty observer. Tamm disagreed on both
points, pointing out that Franklin was not on the official
list of faculty observers supplied by the President's
Office. Professor Franklin then wheeled and strode
toward Dean Lincoln Moses. Moses was some 30-50 feet
farther back, perhaps 40-60 feet from Tamm, and was
beginning to leave in response to the police order.
Professor Franklin called out, "Lincoln Moses!".
Professor Franklin shouted some words like "God damn
it, this happens every time the police charge. The faculty
observers are all gone!" He argued loudly that Moses
should not leave, that the order to disperse was
improper, and that faculty observers, like Moses, should
remain to observe possible police brutality. There is
substantial agreement on what Professor Franklin said to
Moses in this brief but loud set of statements. It is
further agreed that Professor Franklin was heard by a
nearby circle of 10 to 12 persons and by others farther
away; although he was close to Moses, Professor
Franklin was shouting his arguments. Professor Franklin
testified that he was being careful while shouting at
Moses not to use language in describing the police which
would reduce the likelihood of his persuading Moses to

stay. Professor Franklin's statements to Moses took
about a minute and a half. Franklin then headed back
toward the police line, some 40-60 feet away.
Witnesses for the University testified that Professor
Franklin was shouting loudly as soon as he took his first
steps back toward the police lines, angrily denouncing
the police order as illegal. He made his way back to
Tamm, some 50 feet distant, through the substantial
group remaining in the first grassy area. The items of
dispute are whether Professor Franklin was addressing
his shouts to the police or to others in the crowd when
he started shouting, and whether his shouts included
exhortations that people not leave.
4. Testimony that Professor Franklin Urged and
Incited the Crowd to Stay. Moses reports that at first he
was convinced by Franklin's statement that he should
stay as a laculty observer and started to follow Franklin
back toward the police line. However, he goes on,
He meanwhile continued talking. He turned his back
to me and went toward the line, talking loudly
and .. . waving his arms or gesticulating. . . . And as
he went, a group of people formed about him and
went with him. And whether he was addressing only
them or generally all who could hear I wouldn't say.
On cross-examination, Moses said,
Then as you [Franklin] went on, you appeared to me
to be encouraging as many people to come as would
come. And that is what turned me around. ... I felt
that I was just being recruited to be one more person
present. ... I took the whole crowd to be provocative
of the police.
Under further cross-examination by Professor Franklin,
Moses reiterated this testimony and his statement that
Professor Franklin was urging people around him to
disobey the police order and return. Although he
admitted it was "conceivable" that Professor Franklin's
words were solely addressed to the police, he said that
his understanding was clearly to the contrary.
Moses was asked by Professor Franklin on
cross-examination whether Professor Franklin could not
have been merely urging faculty observers to join him in
going towards the police lines. Moses responded that
Professor Franklin was not addressing his remarks to
faculty members but to the entire crowd or all within
the sound of his voice. Moses said, "You spoke to me
about faculty people. And then as you went on you
appeared to me to be encouraging as many people to
come as would come. And that is what turned me
around."
Waterman testified that before Franklin approached
Moses,
.... the crowd was definitely starting to drift back
this way ... in fact they were drifting back in
appreciable numbers. ... I definitely had the
impression that the crisis was past, that people were
leaving, and that the situation was about to calm
down.
He then testified that he observed Franklin at this point
crossing the grass in front of Redwood Hall toward the
police, although Waterman was not sure whether before
or after the Moses encounter,
. . . shouting to the crowd, telling them to come back,
challenging the right of the sheriffs men to declare it
an illegal assembly, and saying that they had a perfect
right to hold a peaceful meeting and that they should
return to do so. .. . He seemed to be shouting in
general to the bunch that were leaving and had gotten
about as far as the second grassy plot.
Broholm, reporting from the scene for KZSU,
reported (a tape recording is available) first that "the
crowd was definitely moving back"; and then that
Professor Franklin "was haranguing the crowd to stay"
and resist the order to disperse, and "was berating the
crowd for leaving." On cross-examination by Professor
Franklin, Broholm confirmed this on-the-scene report:
"After you turned away from Moses you turned back in
that direction and began yelling. And again, "You
turned around, faced back toward the police . . . and
you started yelling in that direction." It is important to
note that Broholm placed the Moses-Franklin encounter
and subsequent Franklin shouting near the edge of the
crosswalk in front of Redwood Hall, at least 60 feet
from Tamm and Marron. Under further
cross-examination, Broholm said that he now doubts the
accuracy of his on-the-scene report that Professor
Franklin was "haranguing the crowd to stay," and that
instead Professor Franklin was probably shouting at
Tamm. He did not, however, change his estimate that
Professor Franklin began shouting in an area some 60
feet from Tamm, who was separated from Professor
Franklin by a substantial number of individuals in the
first grassy area. We believe that Broholm's on-the-scene
account can be presumed more accurate than his
recollection eight months later.
Owen Blank, another KZSU announcer, also reported
from the scene (recorded on tape) that the crowd in the
grassy areas was moving away at first, and then turned
and moved back toward the police line as Professor
Franklin was shouting. As Professor Franklin's witness,
Blank attached the accuracy of the taped reports by
Broholm and Blank or, Professor Franklin's role in
reversing the crowd's dispersal, but Blank's testimony
when related to the times on the taped reports instead
confirms the on-the-scene reports by Broholm and
Blank. Although Broholm and Blank apologized to
Moses for errors in Broholm's reporting at the time,
these errors concerned Moses's alleged assent
to Professor Franklin's urgings, not Professor
Franklin's own behavior.
Professor Edward Begle testified that he saw
Professor Franklin apparently urging a group of young
people to stay at the gathering, but it is not clear
whether this was the group of people around Moses and
the details of his testimony are not confirmed by others.
The witnesses who heard Professor Franklin's words
testified that he, as he strode back towards Tamm, was
angry and shouting, repeating the same arguments as
before, that the order to disperse was illegal and the
crowd should not leave. Moses's, Waterman's and
Broholm's testimony was cited above. Professor
Franklin's witness Doering testified that "He [Professor
Franklin] walked away from Moses a couple of paces,
and I think he said some things on the way." Doering
places the Moses encounter at about the group of birth
trees furthest from the police lines, some 30-40 feet
away.
As Professor Franklin returned to confront Tamm, an
indefinite number of other persons moved along, beside,
or behind him. In moving back toward Tamm, Professor
Franklin moved through a substantial number of persons
between Moses and Tamm. These included some of
Professor Franklin's political associates (identified in
pictures) and others not identified. Thus, it seems
certain that Professor Franklin's shouts against dispersal
would be clearly heard by these persons, whether or not
they were primarily addressed to Tamm, and that
Professor Franklin must surely have known that they
would be received by at least these demonstrators

through whom he advanced, whether or not they were
heard by persons behind Moses and Fiofessor
Franklin in the second grassy area.
5. Testimony that Professor Franklin Did Not Urge
and Incite the Crowd to Stay. On the other hand,
Professor Franklin and many of his witnesses testified
that Professor Franklin spoke only to Moses when he
strode from Tamm to Moses, and that he spoke only to
Tamm when he turned from Moses back toward the
police line. They described his comments to both as not
intended to incite other people to disobey the police
order. One of his witnesses, photographer Harrison,
described both the scene and Professor Franklin's
following confrontation with Tamm as "tranquil."
Another witness, Professor Switzer, described the
atmosphere as a "picnic." But these evaluations are
specifically controverted by pictures, tapes and other
testimony. Nearly all, including Professor Charles Stein
who was near Moses, deny hearing Professor Franklin
directly address anyone other than Moses or Tamm.
Most of Professor Franklin's witnesses testified that they
did not hear, or did not remember, what Professor
Franklin was saying as he strode forward, until he was
close to Tamm (e.g., Pace, Lonsdale, Hunkeler). They
report that they heard him shout only as he neared
Tamm, and then only at Tamm. This, however, is not
inconsistent with Moses', Waterman's and Broholm's
testimony that Professor Franklin was shouting earlier
when much farther from the police. Most of Protessor
Franklin's witnesses were nearer the police line, mainly
facing the police, and hence did not observe Professor
Franklin's entire movement forward. But Doering did,
and testified that Professor Franklin spoke as soon as he
left Moses. Hunkeler did not have Professor Franklin
under constant scrutiny and could hear only a few
words.
Professor Franklin testified that he began to shout at
Tamm from a distance because he wanted to be sure that
Tamm understood why he was returning to the police
line and that his action was intended to be conciliatory
and to lessen the danger of a police charge and arrests of
the demonstrators there. But that he should have done
so at such a great distance seems highly implausible
under the circumstances, and conflicts with considerable
testimony from witnesses from both parties. Clearly,
Professor Franklin did, as he stated, address Tamm,
saying, "Don, this is ridiculous ..." as he approached
Tamm and Marron, apparently from a distance of five to
ten feet; this is confirmed by his witnesses who were
near the police line.
With one exception, Professor Franklin's own
witnesses did not support his version of events as he left
Moses. The only witness for Professor Franklin who gave
evidence contradictory to that of the University
witnesses was Downey, who testified that, although he
was not sure, Professor Franklin was not saying anything
as he left Moses and walked towards the police lines. It is
likely that Downey was confused about the timing of his
interaction with Professor Franklin. Downey testified
that he never was with Professor Franklin until after the
encounter with Moses, but pictures show Downey
standing with Professor Franklin and the group shouting
at the police at a time identified by Professor Franklin's
witnesses as prior to his words with Moses. With this
doubtful exception, Professor Franklin produced no
witness who contradicted the testimony of
Administration witnesses who observed his shouting as
he left Moses at a considerable distance from the police
lines.
Professor Franklin was apparently himself confused
as to the locus of his confrontation with Moses in
relation to the police lines, and, in his testimony, he
minimized the distance from the police lines. He
testified that he was only a few steps away from Tamm
when he turned away from Moses.
One witness for Professor Franklin, Stein, supported
this spatial image by testifying that Professor Franklin
was about 15 feet from the police lines. No other
witness for either party supported Professor Franklin on
this point; indeed, five witnesses for Professor Franklin
directly contradicted him in their testimony.
6. Franklin-Tamm Confrontation and Police Charge.
It is agreed, and supported by photographic evidence,
that after Professor Franklin approached Tamm, a
substantial number of people, approximately 30, closed
in around and behind Professor Franklin as he angrily
confronted Tamm. Professor Franklin testified that he
was aware of people moving in from both sides but he
didn't know how many newsmen were present. Some
witnesses, including Professor Franklin's witness,
Litterman, testified that the crowd threatened to engulf
the police officers and Professor Franklin. Professor
Franklin and Tamm stood face to face shouting angrily
at one another. Witnesses of both parties described the
situation as very tense. Professor Franklin was repeating
his basic arguments and Tamm was denying the validity
of both.
After a very short interval, two, perhaps more,
policemen moved rapidly from behind Tamm and
Marron to try to arrest Professor Franklin, but Professor
Franklin slipped away from them, perhaps with the help
of some of his friends. At almost exactly the same time
the police line moved forward on the demonstrators in
what is commonly called a "police charge."
We note, parenthetically, that we do not consider
Professor Franklin's acknowledged urging of Moses and
other faculty observers to stay to be objectionable under
the charge. Formally designated faculty observers were
asked by the University administration to be present,
even though some, not identified to the police, were
apparently struck during the charge. The presence of
faculty observers could have been expected to reduce
the risk of injury to persons.
7. Findings of Fact. The Board finds the evidence
strongly persuasive that: (a) the police order to disperse
was clearly reasonable, given the illegal seizure of the
Computation Center, possible serious damage to the
computer and data stored there, possible danger to
police and demonstrators outside after the building was
cleared, and the need to return the Center promptly to
normal action without police presence; (b) while some
demonstrators refused to disperse after the building was
cleared, a substantial portion of the crowd was moving
back in response to repeated police orders, prior to
Professor Franklin's intervention; (c) Professor Franklin
played a central role in reversing the movement of the
crowd to disperse and his shouts and behavior
significantly increased the likelihood that a substantial
number of those present would stay; (d) Professor
Franklin intended his shouts after leaving Moses to be
heard by, and to influence the crowd to remain at the
scene in defiance of the police order to disperse.
However, even if lie did not directly address his shouts
to the crowd, he must reasonably have expected that a
result of his shouts would be to incite members of the
crowd to disobey the dispersal order, increasing the risk
to themselves; Professor Franklin's conduct and shouts

cannot reasonably be interpreted as merely attempts to
persuade Moses and other faculty observers to stay, to
conciliate the police or the crowd, or to lessen the
danger of a police charge or arrests with their attendant
dangers to the demonstrators. We comment further on
these findings in the following section.
C. SUPPLEMENTA R Y EVIDENCE AND EINDINGS
A number of points in the testimony require special
attention in order to amplify and interpret the findings
of fact indicated above.
1. Charge of University Negligence. Professor
Franklin suggests that the University administration was
negligent in not announcing to the occupiers of the
Computation Center that work on the disputed SRI
contract had, in fact, been halted one or more days
before, because this information might have been
sufficient to induce the occupiers to leave the
Computation Center peacefully. Alternatively, he
implies that had some official of the University
explained that an investigation was under way, this
might have induced the occupiers to lave the building
voluntarily without the police having to be called.
In fact, SRI had apparently stopped using the
computer for the GAMUT-Hand its other programs
prior to February 10, but it had not informed Stanford
of any policy decision regarding GAMUT-H or other SRI
projects on the Stanford computer. The SRI accounts
had not been cancelled. Moreover, the Stanford
administration at that time believed, on the information
received from SRI, that there was no violation of
University policy; SRI had indicated to the University
administration that the research in question was not
classified and was available for publication. Thus Provost
Miller testified that he did not believe it would be proper
for the University to issue any statement pending receipt
of information on SRl's position on the whole matter.
Moreover, the Computer Facilities Committee of the
University was meeting on the afternoon of February
10, during the occupation, precisely to discuss the issues
raised by the GAMLTT-H program.
We do not agree with Professor Franklin's argument
that the University administration's refusal to negotiate
with, or report to, the Computation Center occupiers
justifies the refusal of the demonstrators to leave the
Computation Center which they were illegally
occupying. Some persons believe the University
administration would have been well advised to issue a
public statement that it was investigating the whole
situation, although we find the University
administration's position on the matter easy to
understand, given the uncertainty about SRl's position
and the fact that the relevant University committee was
in fact meeting at 2 p.m. on the afternoon of the
occupation. But even if the University officials involved
were guilty of faulty administrative judgment, this
would in no way justify the illegal occupation of the
Computation Center and its continuance in the face of
both University and police orders to disperse. Moreover,
it is important to remember that the protestors had
made no direct effort vis-a-vis the administration to halt
the GAMUT-H work beyond one unsigned leaflet,
although they had, according to their own testimony,
known of it for at least a week or two; the Computation
Center sit-in was in no sense a "last resort" step after all
legal avenues were exhausted. The demands of the
occupiers were vague, and we see no reason to believe
that they would have left the Center merely on
notification by the administration that the problem was
under active investigation.
2. Argument that Police Order to Disperse was
Unreasonable and Illegal. Professor Franklin argues that
the police order to disperse was unreasonable and
unlawful-that the crowd outside the Computation
Center was peaceful and within its rights of free
assembly as guaranteed by the First Amendment to the
Constitution. Thus, not only was he within his
constitutional rights in refusing to disperse and urging
others not to disperse, but indeed he was following his
duty as a citizen and a professor in so acting.
California law clearly gives to police the authority to
disperse illegal assemblies and sets out the legal
requirements for such orders. Only a court of law, which
we are not, could finally determine whether in fact the
police declaration of illegal assembly and the order to
disperse in this instance was legal. In our judgment, the
police order to disperse was clearly reasonable and, as we
understand the law, was probably legal as well. An illegal
seizure of the Computation Center had occurred, and
both University and police officials were understandably
concerned lest serious damage be done to the valuable
equipment housed there and to the even more valuable
data stored there. It was widely known that major
damage to computers, totalling millions of dollars, had
been done to other university computers.
The order declaring the occupation of the
Computation Center an illegal assembly and ordering
dispersal was a single order aimed at the occupiers of the
Computation Center when they were inside the building
and at those participating in the demonstration outside
the building, both before and following its evacuation.
Marron's testimony on this point is clear, and it is
confirmed by one of Professor Franklin's wftnesses. He
began giving the complete order before the arrival of the
police and continued with the same order during the
evacuation of the Computation Center and following the
evacuation when part of the demonstrators stayed close
to the Computation Center building. That this order to
evacuate the building was fully warranted can hardly be
denied. It was that same order that insisted that the
demonstrators withdraw a substantial distance from the
building being evacuated.
Moreover, we conclude that the order to disperse
back to Jordan Way outside the building was reasonable
on its own merits as well. The police knew that violence
had occurred on the Stanford campus during
police-demonstrator confrontations several times during
the past few years; the precaution of moving the crowd
back a substantial distance from the police line was
understandable, and was probably calculated to lessen
injury to both the police and the demonstrators. Thus
we conclude that the police order declaring the
demonstration an illegal assembly and ordering dispersal
was clearly reasonable in these circumstances.
Professor Franklin may have had the right as a citizen
briefly to protest the police order which he believed
unreasonable. But, especially given the strongly negative
police response to his first protest which he himself
noted, he surely did not have the right to increase the
risk of injury to others by urging them to stay and
disobey the police order.
3. Argument that Professor Franklin's Action was
Aimed at Conciliation and Reducing Danger to Those
Present. Professor Franklin argues that his action outside
the Computation Center was aimed primarily at
protecting demonstrators from injury or arrest at the
hands of the police that his argument with faculty
observers (and others) to remain and with the police
against the legality of the dispersal order was aimed at
avoiding such danger to the demonstrators. Some of his
witnesses testified that in their judgment Professor
Franklin's purpose was conciliation and avoidance of
danger to the demonstrators.
We find it plausible that Professor Franklin may have
believed that he was acting to protect the rights of his
friends and co-workers in the "movement" in some ol
his actions. It is clear that those in the small group
clustered in front of the police line as the larger group of
demonstrators moved back were largely members of the
"movement," including several of its best known
participants. It thus became increasingly likely that these
individuals would be in the forefront of a police charge
and most likely to be arrested if, in fact, a charge did
occur. That Professor Franklin should endeavor to
prevent the isolation of these individuals from the rest of
the group of demonstrators and passersby is
understandable.
But that he believed that his actions were basically
conciliatory and aimed primarily at lessening the
likelihood of a police charge and arrest is difficult to
accept. His behavior was surely encouraging other people
to remain at greatly increased risks to themselves.
Shouting loudly and angrily at either faculty observers,
the police, or others in the crowd is hardly calculated to
calm crowd or police behavior, or to lessen the
likelihood of violence. Thus, Professor Franklin's loud
shouts as he turned from Moses some 40-60 feet from
the police could hardly have been calculated to calm the
situation. He apparently addressed Tamm by name only
after he had approached within 10 feet or so of the
police; surely he would have done so sooner had his
main goal been to persuade Tamm, and he would have
not shouted to the crowd upon turning away from
Moses. Professor Franklin described Tamm during the
second confrontation as "more immediately hostile than
I had ever seen him before." Moreover, Professor
Franklin himself testified that he knew "for a certainty"
that a police charge or arrest would occur under such
conditions once the police line-up occurred and the
order to disperse was read. He testified that he knew of
no case where such a situation was not followed by a
police charge or arrests. On his own testimony, he had
these points in mind prior to his discussion with Moses
and his shouting return to confront Tamm. Several of
Professor Franklin's witnesses testified that they too
thought a police charge to be highly likely or inevitable,
and became even surer when they saw Professor Franklin
striding back to confront Tamm the second time. Given
this testimony, it is difficult to accept the argument that
Professor Franklin seriously hoped by his actions to
eliminate the possibility of either a police charge or
arrests outside the Computation Center.
It is difficult to believe that Professor Franklin's duty
as a professor encompassed using others to stay and
confront the police when he felt certain that the result
would be a police charge and arrests, with a danger of
serious personal injury (which he testified is likely
whenever a police charge occurs). He testified that he
personally was resolved not to give way to fascism and
was going to stay and confront the police no matter
what happened. He testified, as did several of his
witnesses, that dispersal would be a political defeat for
the "movement" and an important victory for the
police.
Although Professor Franklin felt certain, or almost
certain, that a police charge and arrest would ensue
soon, he did not advise any people in the demonstrator's
group, either those in the "movement" or other
students, of the danger of a police charge, possible
injury, and arrests. Professor Franklin and some of his
close political associates testified of their awareness of
the impending police action at a time when others, less
experienced, did not anticipate any trouble. Professor
Franklin testified:
"My own experience in having been in just lots and
lots of police confrontations, is that if an order is
given declaring something an illegal assembly, telling
people to disperse, once that takes place then there
are basically one of two things that are going to
happen. Either the pigs are going to charge the people
or they're going to move for a mass bust.
"1 don't think I've ever seen a declaration of an illegal
assembly -maybe I have but I certainly can't
remember-l've never seen a declaration of an illegal
assembly not followed by one of those two actions.
Now it can be seconds; it can be minutes. Sometimes
they can declare an area an illegal assembly and then
nothing happens for some period of time and they're
moving what's really happening is they're moving in
for a mass bust. . . .
"And one of the signs you look for in a police line
prior to a charge is whether—one thing is the visors.
The other thing is whether they're smoking or not. If
they're not smoking then you look upon that as, you
know, a charge could take place at any time. And of
course, one of the things that they try to do is to
make the charge unexpected. So once you've got in a
situation the charge could take place the next second
or it might not take place for some time, but
something is going to happen."
Professor Franklin had difficulty explaining his
failure to warn others. He testified:
"As far as the question of whether I talked to
demonstrators on the lawn of the computer center
about the possibility of arrests and beatings and so
forth: I just—l mean, I may have had—it's possible
that I talked to some people about something about
it. But I certainly don't remember that at all, any
more than 1 remember. ... Well, I'm sure that I
didn't urge anybody to stay and I'm sure I didn't urge
anybody to leave, if that's what-if that's what the
point of that question was."
4. Did Professor Franklin Intentionally Urge and
Incite People to Remain in Defiance of the Police Order
to Disperse? The charge states that "Professor Franklin
significantly interfered with orderly dispersal by
intentionally urging and inciting students and other
persons present at the Computation Center to disregard
or disobey such orders to disperse." The evidence seems
to us convincing that the result of Professor Franklin's
behavior was to help significantly to induce students and
other persons present at the Computation Center to
disregard or disobey such orders to disperse. But
Professor Franklin argues that he did not specifically
address any individual other than Moses and Tamm. He
said, "I wouldn't take it upon myself to do that to
people in that situation because I knew that people were
defenseless in that situation." No witness testified that
Professor Franklin directly addressed other specific
individuals, although there is considerable testimony
that he addressed the crowd in more general terms,
$

urging it to resist the allegedly illegal police order to
disperse. The question is whether these shouts and this
behavior, not addressed to specific individuals other than
Moses and Tamm, amount to intentionally urging and
inciting students and other persons to disregard the
police order.
We find the evidence strongly persuasive that
Professor Franklin intentionally urged and incited
students and others present to disregard or disobey the
police orders. His purpose was to encourage others to
remain. Except for his own denial, all percipient
witnesses testified that Professor Franklin, after leaving
Moses, directly addressed his shouts to the crowd. But
even it he did not directly address the crowd, he must
have expected the likely effect of his behavior under
those circumstances to be to urge and incite others to
stay. Professor Franklin surely would not need to have
addressed each individual by name to have urged them
to stay.
The conclusion that the incitement was intentional is
reinforced by Professor Franklin's testimony that, even
knowing the results of his actions, he would not have
changed his behavior outside the Computation Center.
He said, "The only reasonable course of action that I
could see was what 1 did. And in looking back on it now
from, 1 don't know, eight or nine months, I still can't see
any other alternative."
The charge is not that Professor Franklin disobeyed
the police order himself, but that he intentionally
incited others to disobey the order. His behavior
increased the risk to others, a risk of which many were
unaware. The evidence meets the standards for
incitement that we set out earlier.
CONCLUSION
We find the evidence strongly persuasive that
Professor Franklin ' did significantly interfere with
orderly dispersal following the clearing of the
Computation Center by intentionally urging and inciting
students and other persons present to disregard or
disobey such orders to disperse, that this police order to
disperse was clearly reasonable under the circumstances,
and that Professor Franklin's conduct and speech did
substantially increase the danger of injury to other
persons.
DISSENTING OPINION
Professors Brown and Kennedy, although in accord
with much of the descriptive account of the majority
report on the events outside the Computation Center,
dissent as follows:
We place a sufficiently different interpretive weight
on the evidence at certain crucial points to make us
unable to sustain the charge.
1. The first of these centers on an element of
Professor Franklin's conduct that is central in the
testimony of virtually every witness, his concern that
faculty members remain as observers-a concern without
which many of his actions remain inexplicable. This is a
major substantive point in the conversations with Tamm
and Moses, it persuades Professor Eklof to stay on the
scene when he had decided to leave and persuades
Professor Moses in retrospect that perhaps he should
have stayed, it is a subject Professor Franklin pursues
with Professor Hastorf after the police charge, and it is
the dominant concern in Professor Franldin's later
conversation with Litterman and in a speech in front of
President Lyman's office. He asserts that he felt (a) that
the continuing presence of faculty observers might avert

a police charge, (b) that "respectable" faculty like Moses
might help him persuade the police of the right of
people to remain, and (c) that if there were a charge, the
faculty presence might minimize its brutality. He
testified that he felt a police charge would be
"inevitable" if there was a "withdrawal of the faculty
observers and other kinds of neutral people who had
made up a significant section of that crowd."
We agree with the majority report that "the presence
of faculty observers could have been expected to reduce
the risk of injury to persons." However, that fact,
coupled with Professor Franklin's own concern to keep
faculty observers on the scene, cause us to dissent from
the majority conclusion: "that he believed his actions
were basically conciliatory and aimed primarily at
lessening the likelihood of a police charge and arrest is
difficult to accept." We find the conclusion plausible
rather than difficult even though we believe that
Professor Franklin's manner of seeking this end was
unwise.
2. A second difference of interpretation involves fact
more than motivation, and we find the call a close one
either way. This concerns the crucial period between the
time Professor Franklin leaves Moses and the time he is
back in conversation with Tamm, some 40 to 60 feet
away. His own witnesses state that he was shouting
loudly during these moments, but assert, along with him,
that the comments were addressed only to Moses and
Tamm. The majority report believes that in addition he
spoke directly to others, and that, even if he had not, his
voice and demeanor were such that others would
inevitably hear him, and that he should have known that
his words and actions would influence them not to
disperse. Broholm and Blank are no longer completely
sure that Professor Franklin was directly haranguing the
crowd, although that was their on-the-spot impression.
Moses believes he was, though his assessment is
predicated on action after Professor Franklin turned his
back on him, so that the direction of the shouts is only
conjecture. Waterman believes Professor Franklin was
directly enlisting crowd support, but his timing of the
event is uncertain, and he saw only Professor Franklin's
back and left side. The identity of his audience is thus
once again conjecture. It is clear, however, that by the
time Professor Franklin was within ten feet of Tamm he
was yelling directly at him such words as, "Hey, Don,
this is ridiculous . . . In the interval he was apparently
asserting "that it was not an illegal assembly, and that
people should stay," though no witness produced
unshakeable testimony that he shouted this directly at
individuals within the crowd.
The possible reconstructions not all mutually
exclusive, are (a) that he spoke directly to Moses and
Tamm, but that he was overheard by others, some of
whom responded to his exhortations, (b) that he was
directly urging members of the crowd to stay, or (c) that
he was expressing his disgust and anger at the police
order either to the heavens or to onlookers in general,
rather than as specific instructions to members of the
crowd. There is clear evidence for the first alternative,
evidence (though less persuasive) for the second, and
plausibility for the third. The weight one puts on such
alternative explanations, and the interpretation one
makes of Professor Franklin's actions during these
moments, is dependent on a third consideration.
3. The third matter Involves an element in Professor
Franklin's conduct that, like the first, appears in the
testimony of virtually every witness: his strongly stated
conviction that the police order to disperse was illegal.

This is the second substantive point of his conversations
with both Moses and Tamm. We accept the majority
opinion that it is beyond our province or expertise to
determine whether or not the order was legal, and with
the majority "we conclude that the police order
declaring this demonstration an illegal assembly and
ordering dispersal was clearly reasonable in these
circumstances."
However, if a citizen wishes to question a police order
he believes unreasonable and unlawful, he has the right
to do so for a limited period of time. We place great
weight on this right, and believe that at least in part
Professor Franklin was trying to assert it: he believed the
order to be both unreasonable and unlawful, and so he
exercised the right of a citizen to object to it, in a brief
initial dispute with Tamm, in the attempt to enlist
Moses, and then in the second heated exchange with
Tamm. Ihe elapsed time of these three conversations
was probably no more than three or four minutes. To
Professor Franklin, standing on the grassy area where all
witnesses agree that they had seen no illegal acts, the
order to disperse may have seemed patently
unreasonable. That the Board in hindsight does not share
this assessment does not diminish the right of Professor
Franklin to have held it at the time or to have acted
upon it, lor a reasonable length of time, in the name of
the right of peaceable assembly. The fact that the mood
of the crowd immediately following the evacuation of
the Computation Center was reasonably calm and may
have caused no immediate danger to the police or the
building gives added legitimacy to the right, under such
conditions, to make a brief protest against the order, and
even to seek faculty help in so doing. That Professor
Franklin tried to enlist the aid of Professor Moses in his
exercise of this right is looked upon by no member of
the Board as culpable. It is even arguable that Professor
Franklin, if he did indeed urge "students and others" to
remain, was not engaging in culpable action, but only
reminding them of their own rights as citizens to protest,
at least briefly, an order that might be considered
unlawful or unreasonable.
4. The accumulation of the above considerations
leads us to believe (a) that Professor Franklin tried to get
other faculty members to remain on the scene in order
to reduce the likelihood of a police charge, (b) that his
continuing argument about the order to disperse was an
attempt to protest a police decision he felt to be illegal,
and one which as a citizen he had a right to protest, at
least briefly, and (c) that these two strongly held
convictions, uncontested in the testimony, led him to
loud and angry shouting, clearly directed at Moses and
Tamm, and possibly though not so clearly directed at
others, centering on the need for faculty observers to
stay, and the right of others to stay. The University's
Supplementary Written Brief states, "The issue is
whether a faculty member in a situation laden with the
risk of violent confrontation between demonstrators and
the police is acting properly when by his conduct he
increases that risk." We conclude that, even if one
accepts this as a statement of "the issue," such a
description does not adequately match the conduct
charged, and that there is not in our view strongly
persuasive evidence that his words or actions constituted
an incitement. Consequently, the charge that "Professor
Franklin did significantly interfere with orderly dispersal
by intentionally urging and inciting students and other
persons present at the Computation Center to disregard
or disobey such orders to disperse" is not one that we
can sustain.
A. CHARGES
The relevant University charge concerning the
Computation Center incident is contained in paragraph 9
of the "Statement of Charges."
9. Further, on February 10, 1971 and in connection
with the activity at the Computation Center
described in paragraph 8, students and other persons
were arrested for failure to disperse after orders had
been given to clear an area around the Computation
Center. Professor Franklin signilicantly interfered
with orderly dispersal by intentionally urging and
inciting students and other persons present at the
Computation Center to disregard or disobey such
orders to disperse.
B. FINDING OF FACTS
1. Occupation of the Computation Center. Shortly
before 1:00 p.m. on February 10, 1971, the
Computation Center building was closed on the basis of
a telephone order from Provost Miller, but the computer
was kept running. Handwritten notices were posted on
the doors of the Computation Center; doors, windows,
and gates were locked; and two campus policemen were
stationed at the front door. Provost Miller had been
informed that a group was proceeding from White Plaza
to the Computation Center. An estimated 100 to 200
demonstrators arrived at the Computation Center
shortly after 1:00 p.m. There were apparently no
previous collective decisions or explicit understandings
by the group as to what actions were to be taken or as to
whether to damage the computer. Some subgroups may
have had previous understandings; different individuals
testified as to different expectations. There were no
plans for formal picketing with picket signs as in many
"strikes," and there had been no attempt to
communicate with Computation Center workers about a
strike after the Dinkelspiel meeting of February 9.
At about 1:15 p.m., forcible entry was made into the
Computation Center; the gate was scaled and the back
door forced. About 50 demonstrators then entered
through the back door. As they moved through the
building, they opened other entrances and admitted
other demonstrators. Power to the building and to the
computer was shut off at 1:20 by pulling a master
switch located near the back door. Some 100-200 more
persons entered and milled about inside the
Computation Center. Some demonstrators, according to
officials of the Center, jimmied the door and entered the
machine room. They went to the 2301 drums, yanked
out wires, and flipped switches behind gates or doors on
two of the data storage drums. Other demonstrators in
that group went directly to the racks where tape reels
were stored and began looking through them. The
telephone lines were made inoperative. Once
demonstrators were inside the building and the doors
were thrown open, the Stanford police did not try to

stop movement in and out of the building. Some of the
demonstrators posted themselves at the doors, and to
some extent controlled entry and exit, for example,
denying entry to a photographer.
During this period, there was a continual movement
of demonstrators into and out of the Computation
Center. It is agreed that some time during the
occupation approximately $800 of physical damage was
done to the premises and contents of the Computation
Center, not counting any costs of shut-down time on the
computer. This damage was partly caused by the pulling
of the wires and damage to the 2301 unit, partly to the
premises. Two fire hoses were taken out of racks arid
valves opened, but the water had been turned off earlier
by the University. The printout of each of three printers
was removed. It is agreed that no substantial damage was
done to the computer itself. However, the shutdown,
lasting until about 8:00 p.m., made it impossible for the
Computation Center to process 700-800 student and
faculty jobs scheduled for that period. Montgomery
testified that these jobs would be run during the
succeeding two weeks.
Given the fact that the demonstrators illegally seized
the Computation Center and made impossible
continuation of its regular activities, the Board does not
consider further details on the conduct of the occupiers
important for Charge 9 against Professor Franklin. It
should be noted that the occupiers refused to obey the
requests to leave the building required by law-by Bruce
Wiggins on behalf of Stanford University and by Officers
Marron, Rosa and Tamm of the Santa Clara Sheriffs
office. However, as a context for other events, we note
briefly some undisputed facts concerning the
occupation.
Professor Franklin met his 1:15 class. Only seven of
the 150 registered students were present. He believed the
others were at the Computation Center and suggested
moving the class to the area outside the Center.
Professor Franklin did not hold his class because, he
testified, many of his students were inside the
Computation Center. It is uncontested that he remained
outside the Computation Center, talking with individuals
about a variety of topics prior to the arrival of the
police.
Bruce Wiggins, Stanford Director of Public Safety,
arrived at the Computation Center soon after its
occupation. He walked through and around the building
with Assistant Fire Chief Barr. Soon thereafter, around
2:00 p.m., he telephoned the Santa Clara Sheriffs office
and told them of the occupation.
Shortly after 2:00 p.m., C. D. Marron of the Santa
Clara Sheriffs office arrived at the Computation Center.
He too walked through the building, and then went to
Redwood Hall nearby to confer with Wiggins and others,
including Messrs. Rosenzweig and Schwartz from the

University administration, Sergeant Tamm and Captain
Rosa of the Santa Clara Sheriffs office, and an Assistant
District Attorney of Santa Clara County.
At about 3:00 p.m., it was decided that Wiggins
should return to the Computation Center and issue, in
the name of Stanford University, a declaration of
trespass, declaring the occupation a violation of Stanford
University regulations and ordering the occupants to
leave immediately. Wiggins used a bullhorn as he moved
through the building making this declaration. Wiggins
claims he was jostled, pushed and shoved; it is agreed
that his announcement was greeted by jeers and catcalls,
and that virtually no one left the building in response to
his order. He then returned to the group at Redwood
Hall.
At some point, probably after 3:00 p.m., an informal
meeting was held by the demonstrators. It was chaired
by Janet Weiss, near the door of the Computation
Center, partly inside and partly outside the building.
Although reports on this meeting are somewhat
confused, apparently there was an informal discussion as
to what to do, including whether to continue the
occupation of the Computation Center, what to do if
the police came, and whether to damage the computer.
The discussion, according to Harry Press, a University
witness, included talk about what would be the impact
on student support if the computer were wrecked. Janet
Weiss is reported to have stressed the political neutrality
of machines, urging that they not be damaged.
Apparently agreement was reached to stay in the
Computation Center until the police came, and then to
leave voluntarily without damaging the computer.
Station KZSU, misunderstanding this vote, reported that
the occupiers would damage the computer, but Janet
Weiss asked them to broadcast a retraction of that
report. There may have been other, smaller meetings of
the occupiers during the afternoon; testimony on this
question is confusing.
At about 4:00 p.m., the group in Redwood Hall
decided that Messrs. Marron, Rosa, and Tamm would go
back to the Computation Center and again try to
persuade the occupants to leave voluntarily. They did so,
asking what the occupants wanted, calling attention to
the vulnerability of the computer and the data it
contained, and to possible injury to persons in the
University and in the hospital. The responses of the
demonstrators were that the occupants wanted to get
the Gamut-H program, SRI research, and war-related
research out of the Computation Center; the precise
nature of all the demands is unclear. Marron testified
that there were scattered shouts of "Down with SRI"
and "Get SRI out." Few if any of the occupiers left. The
three officers returned to Redwood Hall.
After further discussion by the group in Redwood
Hall, the three officers again returned to the
Computation Center. The police announced to the
occupants that they had been informed that the SRI
work had been stopped at the Computation Center.
Some demonstrators replied that such word was not
good enough, and they wanted a written statement from
President Lyman. After a brief discussion, the police said
there was nothing more that could be done, and the
three officers returned again to Redwood Hall.
2. Order to Disperse and Police Arrival. Police
officers had been called and their arrival was imminent.
Just before they were expected to arrive, Marron went
out to the front steps of Redwood Hall, and, using a
bullhorn, he made a formal statement declaring the
occupation of the Center and its immediately adjacent
territory unlawful and ordering the demonstrators to
disperse, also stating that they were subject to arrest if
they did not do so. It is uncontested that he made this
announcement three times, pointing in three different
directions, with one aimed directly at the people inside
the Computation Center and the two others at the
people in the area outside the Computation Center to his
left and right. There was no response to these orders to
disperse, although Professor Franklin's witness
Litterman said he heard them.
Very soon thereafter, the police arrived and entered
the Computation Center. Lookouts for the occupiers
observed the police arrival and notified those inside, so
that the occupiers left the building rapidly just as the
police were entering from another direction. The police
made no arrests in the building, although they indicated
that they would have made arrests if the occupiers had
remained in the building. Marron entered the building
immediately after the police, continuing to declare the
assembly an unlawful one, ordering dispersal, and
threatening arrest for any who did not obey the order to
disperse. Since the Computation Center had been
cleared, he then went outside and walked clockwise
around the building continuing to give his order to
disperse. He continued his series of announcements and,
by his testimony, returned to the front of the
Computation Center about eight minutes after the
arrival of the police. A double line of police had been
formed in front of the Center. Marron repeated his
complete order at least three or four times in front of
the Computation Center, stating that the area from the
Computation Center to Jordan Way was to be cleared.
Some demonstrators did not hear or did not know the
extent of the prohibited area. Marron testified that
ordering dispersal from a wide area was common police
practice. He testified to his concern that the police
officers under his command would be vulnerable to
rock-throwing and possible injury if the demonstrators
were permitted to stay close to the police lines and the
building which had just been cleared. As long as a
confrontation between demonstrators and police
persisted, indefinite police presence would have been
necessary to protect the building and computer.
As police lines were formed in front of the
Computation Center and as Marron repeated his
announcement, some clusters of demonstrators remained
in front of the police line, perhaps six to ten feet away,
chanting "Pigs off campus" and other slogans, and
loudly questioning the legality of Marron's order to
disperse. These demonstrators formed several clusters;
they included a number of members of the
"movement." Other demonstrators, faculty observers,
students, and passersby were farther from the police line
in two grassy areas and in the park lot; they were less
active.
After leaving the Computation Center, the small
clusters of demonstrators near the police lines made no
movement to withdraw in response to Marron's repeated
order. At first the more distant persons also did not
withdraw. Professor Franklin, Marron, and other
witnesses who were near the grassy areas testified,
however, that the more distant crowd began to withdraw
as the order to disperse was repeated. Professor Franklin,
in his affidavit prepared shortly after the event, stated
that he believed "most" of the crowd was beginning to
move back; in his oral testimony at the hearing he stated
that he now believes that a smaller number was
beginning to move away-perhaps only more than half,
or fewer. Marron, Moses, and Waterman, testifying for
the University, and Professor Franklin's witness Owen
Blank in a direct report to KZSU from the scene, all
agreed that the portion of the crowd away from the
police lines was definitely moving back in response to
the repeated announcements to disperse. Most of
Professor Franklin's witnesses, primarily individuals
standing near the front portion of the grassy area nearest
the Computation Center, testified that they did not see
any significant part of the crowd moving back. This
apparent contradiction in testimony is explainable, in
part at least, by the fact that those witnesses who had
reason to be observing the rear part of the crowd saw the
movement away, while those who were focusing their
attention on the police lines and events nearby did not
see the movement of the rear portion of the crowd.
3. Professor Franklin's Role. At this stage, Professor
Franklin moved forward and stood in front of a cluster
of demonstrators who were loudly stating that the order
to disperse was illegal. Some of Professor Franklin's
close political associates were part of this cluster. They
were giving a clenched fist salute while vociferously
denouncing the police order. Professor Franklin,
according to testimony and photographs, stood quietly
in front of this active group and observed what was
occurring. He then moved closer to Tamm, who was near
the police line, and argued briefly and vigorously that
the dispersal order was illegal and he had a right to
remain as a faculty observer. Tamm disagreed on both
points, pointing out that Franklin was not on the official
list of faculty observers supplied by the President's
Office. Professor Franklin then wheeled and strode
toward Dean Lincoln Moses. Moses was some 30-50 feet
farther back, perhaps 40-60 feet from Tamm, and was
beginning to leave in response to the police order.
Professor Franklin called out, "Lincoln Moses!".
Professor Franklin shouted some words like "God damn
it, this happens every time the police charge. The faculty
observers are all gone!" He argued loudly that Moses
should not leave, that the order to disperse was
improper, and that faculty observers, like Moses, should
remain to observe possible police brutality. There is
substantial agreement on what Professor Franklin said to
Moses in this brief but loud set of statements. It is
further agreed that Professor Franklin was heard by a
nearby circle of 10 to 12 persons and by others farther
away; although he was close to Moses, Professor
Franklin was shouting his arguments. Professor Franklin
testified that he was being careful while shouting at
Moses not to use language in describing the police which
would reduce the likelihood of his persuading Moses to

stay. Professor Franklin's statements to Moses took
about a minute and a half. Franklin then headed back
toward the police line, some 40-60 feet away.
Witnesses for the University testified that Professor
Franklin was shouting loudly as soon as he took his first
steps back toward the police lines, angrily denouncing
the police order as illegal. He made his way back to
Tamm, some 50 feet distant, through the substantial
group remaining in the first grassy area. The items of
dispute are whether Professor Franklin was addressing
his shouts to the police or to others in the crowd when
he started shouting, and whether his shouts included
exhortations that people not leave.
4. Testimony that Professor Franklin Urged and
Incited the Crowd to Stay. Moses reports that at first he
was convinced by Franklin's statement that he should
stay as a laculty observer and started to follow Franklin
back toward the police line. However, he goes on,
He meanwhile continued talking. He turned his back
to me and went toward the line, talking loudly
and .. . waving his arms or gesticulating. . . . And as
he went, a group of people formed about him and
went with him. And whether he was addressing only
them or generally all who could hear I wouldn't say.
On cross-examination, Moses said,
Then as you [Franklin] went on, you appeared to me
to be encouraging as many people to come as would
come. And that is what turned me around. ... I felt
that I was just being recruited to be one more person
present. ... I took the whole crowd to be provocative
of the police.
Under further cross-examination by Professor Franklin,
Moses reiterated this testimony and his statement that
Professor Franklin was urging people around him to
disobey the police order and return. Although he
admitted it was "conceivable" that Professor Franklin's
words were solely addressed to the police, he said that
his understanding was clearly to the contrary.
Moses was asked by Professor Franklin on
cross-examination whether Professor Franklin could not
have been merely urging faculty observers to join him in
going towards the police lines. Moses responded that
Professor Franklin was not addressing his remarks to
faculty members but to the entire crowd or all within
the sound of his voice. Moses said, "You spoke to me
about faculty people. And then as you went on you
appeared to me to be encouraging as many people to
come as would come. And that is what turned me
around."
Waterman testified that before Franklin approached
Moses,
.... the crowd was definitely starting to drift back
this way ... in fact they were drifting back in
appreciable numbers. ... I definitely had the
impression that the crisis was past, that people were
leaving, and that the situation was about to calm
down.
He then testified that he observed Franklin at this point
crossing the grass in front of Redwood Hall toward the
police, although Waterman was not sure whether before
or after the Moses encounter,
. . . shouting to the crowd, telling them to come back,
challenging the right of the sheriffs men to declare it
an illegal assembly, and saying that they had a perfect
right to hold a peaceful meeting and that they should
return to do so. .. . He seemed to be shouting in
general to the bunch that were leaving and had gotten
about as far as the second grassy plot.
Broholm, reporting from the scene for KZSU,
reported (a tape recording is available) first that "the
crowd was definitely moving back"; and then that
Professor Franklin "was haranguing the crowd to stay"
and resist the order to disperse, and "was berating the
crowd for leaving." On cross-examination by Professor
Franklin, Broholm confirmed this on-the-scene report:
"After you turned away from Moses you turned back in
that direction and began yelling. And again, "You
turned around, faced back toward the police . . . and
you started yelling in that direction." It is important to
note that Broholm placed the Moses-Franklin encounter
and subsequent Franklin shouting near the edge of the
crosswalk in front of Redwood Hall, at least 60 feet
from Tamm and Marron. Under further
cross-examination, Broholm said that he now doubts the
accuracy of his on-the-scene report that Professor
Franklin was "haranguing the crowd to stay," and that
instead Professor Franklin was probably shouting at
Tamm. He did not, however, change his estimate that
Professor Franklin began shouting in an area some 60
feet from Tamm, who was separated from Professor
Franklin by a substantial number of individuals in the
first grassy area. We believe that Broholm's on-the-scene
account can be presumed more accurate than his
recollection eight months later.
Owen Blank, another KZSU announcer, also reported
from the scene (recorded on tape) that the crowd in the
grassy areas was moving away at first, and then turned
and moved back toward the police line as Professor
Franklin was shouting. As Professor Franklin's witness,
Blank attached the accuracy of the taped reports by
Broholm and Blank or, Professor Franklin's role in
reversing the crowd's dispersal, but Blank's testimony
when related to the times on the taped reports instead
confirms the on-the-scene reports by Broholm and
Blank. Although Broholm and Blank apologized to
Moses for errors in Broholm's reporting at the time,
these errors concerned Moses's alleged assent
to Professor Franklin's urgings, not Professor
Franklin's own behavior.
Professor Edward Begle testified that he saw
Professor Franklin apparently urging a group of young
people to stay at the gathering, but it is not clear
whether this was the group of people around Moses and
the details of his testimony are not confirmed by others.
The witnesses who heard Professor Franklin's words
testified that he, as he strode back towards Tamm, was
angry and shouting, repeating the same arguments as
before, that the order to disperse was illegal and the
crowd should not leave. Moses's, Waterman's and
Broholm's testimony was cited above. Professor
Franklin's witness Doering testified that "He [Professor
Franklin] walked away from Moses a couple of paces,
and I think he said some things on the way." Doering
places the Moses encounter at about the group of birth
trees furthest from the police lines, some 30-40 feet
away.
As Professor Franklin returned to confront Tamm, an
indefinite number of other persons moved along, beside,
or behind him. In moving back toward Tamm, Professor
Franklin moved through a substantial number of persons
between Moses and Tamm. These included some of
Professor Franklin's political associates (identified in
pictures) and others not identified. Thus, it seems
certain that Professor Franklin's shouts against dispersal
would be clearly heard by these persons, whether or not
they were primarily addressed to Tamm, and that
Professor Franklin must surely have known that they
would be received by at least these demonstrators

through whom he advanced, whether or not they were
heard by persons behind Moses and Fiofessor
Franklin in the second grassy area.
5. Testimony that Professor Franklin Did Not Urge
and Incite the Crowd to Stay. On the other hand,
Professor Franklin and many of his witnesses testified
that Professor Franklin spoke only to Moses when he
strode from Tamm to Moses, and that he spoke only to
Tamm when he turned from Moses back toward the
police line. They described his comments to both as not
intended to incite other people to disobey the police
order. One of his witnesses, photographer Harrison,
described both the scene and Professor Franklin's
following confrontation with Tamm as "tranquil."
Another witness, Professor Switzer, described the
atmosphere as a "picnic." But these evaluations are
specifically controverted by pictures, tapes and other
testimony. Nearly all, including Professor Charles Stein
who was near Moses, deny hearing Professor Franklin
directly address anyone other than Moses or Tamm.
Most of Professor Franklin's witnesses testified that they
did not hear, or did not remember, what Professor
Franklin was saying as he strode forward, until he was
close to Tamm (e.g., Pace, Lonsdale, Hunkeler). They
report that they heard him shout only as he neared
Tamm, and then only at Tamm. This, however, is not
inconsistent with Moses', Waterman's and Broholm's
testimony that Professor Franklin was shouting earlier
when much farther from the police. Most of Protessor
Franklin's witnesses were nearer the police line, mainly
facing the police, and hence did not observe Professor
Franklin's entire movement forward. But Doering did,
and testified that Professor Franklin spoke as soon as he
left Moses. Hunkeler did not have Professor Franklin
under constant scrutiny and could hear only a few
words.
Professor Franklin testified that he began to shout at
Tamm from a distance because he wanted to be sure that
Tamm understood why he was returning to the police
line and that his action was intended to be conciliatory
and to lessen the danger of a police charge and arrests of
the demonstrators there. But that he should have done
so at such a great distance seems highly implausible
under the circumstances, and conflicts with considerable
testimony from witnesses from both parties. Clearly,
Professor Franklin did, as he stated, address Tamm,
saying, "Don, this is ridiculous ..." as he approached
Tamm and Marron, apparently from a distance of five to
ten feet; this is confirmed by his witnesses who were
near the police line.
With one exception, Professor Franklin's own
witnesses did not support his version of events as he left
Moses. The only witness for Professor Franklin who gave
evidence contradictory to that of the University
witnesses was Downey, who testified that, although he
was not sure, Professor Franklin was not saying anything
as he left Moses and walked towards the police lines. It is
likely that Downey was confused about the timing of his
interaction with Professor Franklin. Downey testified
that he never was with Professor Franklin until after the
encounter with Moses, but pictures show Downey
standing with Professor Franklin and the group shouting
at the police at a time identified by Professor Franklin's
witnesses as prior to his words with Moses. With this
doubtful exception, Professor Franklin produced no
witness who contradicted the testimony of
Administration witnesses who observed his shouting as
he left Moses at a considerable distance from the police
lines.
Professor Franklin was apparently himself confused
as to the locus of his confrontation with Moses in
relation to the police lines, and, in his testimony, he
minimized the distance from the police lines. He
testified that he was only a few steps away from Tamm
when he turned away from Moses.
One witness for Professor Franklin, Stein, supported
this spatial image by testifying that Professor Franklin
was about 15 feet from the police lines. No other
witness for either party supported Professor Franklin on
this point; indeed, five witnesses for Professor Franklin
directly contradicted him in their testimony.
6. Franklin-Tamm Confrontation and Police Charge.
It is agreed, and supported by photographic evidence,
that after Professor Franklin approached Tamm, a
substantial number of people, approximately 30, closed
in around and behind Professor Franklin as he angrily
confronted Tamm. Professor Franklin testified that he
was aware of people moving in from both sides but he
didn't know how many newsmen were present. Some
witnesses, including Professor Franklin's witness,
Litterman, testified that the crowd threatened to engulf
the police officers and Professor Franklin. Professor
Franklin and Tamm stood face to face shouting angrily
at one another. Witnesses of both parties described the
situation as very tense. Professor Franklin was repeating
his basic arguments and Tamm was denying the validity
of both.
After a very short interval, two, perhaps more,
policemen moved rapidly from behind Tamm and
Marron to try to arrest Professor Franklin, but Professor
Franklin slipped away from them, perhaps with the help
of some of his friends. At almost exactly the same time
the police line moved forward on the demonstrators in
what is commonly called a "police charge."
We note, parenthetically, that we do not consider
Professor Franklin's acknowledged urging of Moses and
other faculty observers to stay to be objectionable under
the charge. Formally designated faculty observers were
asked by the University administration to be present,
even though some, not identified to the police, were
apparently struck during the charge. The presence of
faculty observers could have been expected to reduce
the risk of injury to persons.
7. Findings of Fact. The Board finds the evidence
strongly persuasive that: (a) the police order to disperse
was clearly reasonable, given the illegal seizure of the
Computation Center, possible serious damage to the
computer and data stored there, possible danger to
police and demonstrators outside after the building was
cleared, and the need to return the Center promptly to
normal action without police presence; (b) while some
demonstrators refused to disperse after the building was
cleared, a substantial portion of the crowd was moving
back in response to repeated police orders, prior to
Professor Franklin's intervention; (c) Professor Franklin
played a central role in reversing the movement of the
crowd to disperse and his shouts and behavior
significantly increased the likelihood that a substantial
number of those present would stay; (d) Professor
Franklin intended his shouts after leaving Moses to be
heard by, and to influence the crowd to remain at the
scene in defiance of the police order to disperse.
However, even if lie did not directly address his shouts
to the crowd, he must reasonably have expected that a
result of his shouts would be to incite members of the
crowd to disobey the dispersal order, increasing the risk
to themselves; Professor Franklin's conduct and shouts

cannot reasonably be interpreted as merely attempts to
persuade Moses and other faculty observers to stay, to
conciliate the police or the crowd, or to lessen the
danger of a police charge or arrests with their attendant
dangers to the demonstrators. We comment further on
these findings in the following section.
C. SUPPLEMENTA R Y EVIDENCE AND EINDINGS
A number of points in the testimony require special
attention in order to amplify and interpret the findings
of fact indicated above.
1. Charge of University Negligence. Professor
Franklin suggests that the University administration was
negligent in not announcing to the occupiers of the
Computation Center that work on the disputed SRI
contract had, in fact, been halted one or more days
before, because this information might have been
sufficient to induce the occupiers to leave the
Computation Center peacefully. Alternatively, he
implies that had some official of the University
explained that an investigation was under way, this
might have induced the occupiers to lave the building
voluntarily without the police having to be called.
In fact, SRI had apparently stopped using the
computer for the GAMUT-Hand its other programs
prior to February 10, but it had not informed Stanford
of any policy decision regarding GAMUT-H or other SRI
projects on the Stanford computer. The SRI accounts
had not been cancelled. Moreover, the Stanford
administration at that time believed, on the information
received from SRI, that there was no violation of
University policy; SRI had indicated to the University
administration that the research in question was not
classified and was available for publication. Thus Provost
Miller testified that he did not believe it would be proper
for the University to issue any statement pending receipt
of information on SRl's position on the whole matter.
Moreover, the Computer Facilities Committee of the
University was meeting on the afternoon of February
10, during the occupation, precisely to discuss the issues
raised by the GAMLTT-H program.
We do not agree with Professor Franklin's argument
that the University administration's refusal to negotiate
with, or report to, the Computation Center occupiers
justifies the refusal of the demonstrators to leave the
Computation Center which they were illegally
occupying. Some persons believe the University
administration would have been well advised to issue a
public statement that it was investigating the whole
situation, although we find the University
administration's position on the matter easy to
understand, given the uncertainty about SRl's position
and the fact that the relevant University committee was
in fact meeting at 2 p.m. on the afternoon of the
occupation. But even if the University officials involved
were guilty of faulty administrative judgment, this
would in no way justify the illegal occupation of the
Computation Center and its continuance in the face of
both University and police orders to disperse. Moreover,
it is important to remember that the protestors had
made no direct effort vis-a-vis the administration to halt
the GAMUT-H work beyond one unsigned leaflet,
although they had, according to their own testimony,
known of it for at least a week or two; the Computation
Center sit-in was in no sense a "last resort" step after all
legal avenues were exhausted. The demands of the
occupiers were vague, and we see no reason to believe
that they would have left the Center merely on
notification by the administration that the problem was
under active investigation.
2. Argument that Police Order to Disperse was
Unreasonable and Illegal. Professor Franklin argues that
the police order to disperse was unreasonable and
unlawful-that the crowd outside the Computation
Center was peaceful and within its rights of free
assembly as guaranteed by the First Amendment to the
Constitution. Thus, not only was he within his
constitutional rights in refusing to disperse and urging
others not to disperse, but indeed he was following his
duty as a citizen and a professor in so acting.
California law clearly gives to police the authority to
disperse illegal assemblies and sets out the legal
requirements for such orders. Only a court of law, which
we are not, could finally determine whether in fact the
police declaration of illegal assembly and the order to
disperse in this instance was legal. In our judgment, the
police order to disperse was clearly reasonable and, as we
understand the law, was probably legal as well. An illegal
seizure of the Computation Center had occurred, and
both University and police officials were understandably
concerned lest serious damage be done to the valuable
equipment housed there and to the even more valuable
data stored there. It was widely known that major
damage to computers, totalling millions of dollars, had
been done to other university computers.
The order declaring the occupation of the
Computation Center an illegal assembly and ordering
dispersal was a single order aimed at the occupiers of the
Computation Center when they were inside the building
and at those participating in the demonstration outside
the building, both before and following its evacuation.
Marron's testimony on this point is clear, and it is
confirmed by one of Professor Franklin's wftnesses. He
began giving the complete order before the arrival of the
police and continued with the same order during the
evacuation of the Computation Center and following the
evacuation when part of the demonstrators stayed close
to the Computation Center building. That this order to
evacuate the building was fully warranted can hardly be
denied. It was that same order that insisted that the
demonstrators withdraw a substantial distance from the
building being evacuated.
Moreover, we conclude that the order to disperse
back to Jordan Way outside the building was reasonable
on its own merits as well. The police knew that violence
had occurred on the Stanford campus during
police-demonstrator confrontations several times during
the past few years; the precaution of moving the crowd
back a substantial distance from the police line was
understandable, and was probably calculated to lessen
injury to both the police and the demonstrators. Thus
we conclude that the police order declaring the
demonstration an illegal assembly and ordering dispersal
was clearly reasonable in these circumstances.
Professor Franklin may have had the right as a citizen
briefly to protest the police order which he believed
unreasonable. But, especially given the strongly negative
police response to his first protest which he himself
noted, he surely did not have the right to increase the
risk of injury to others by urging them to stay and
disobey the police order.
3. Argument that Professor Franklin's Action was
Aimed at Conciliation and Reducing Danger to Those
Present. Professor Franklin argues that his action outside
the Computation Center was aimed primarily at
protecting demonstrators from injury or arrest at the
hands of the police that his argument with faculty
observers (and others) to remain and with the police
against the legality of the dispersal order was aimed at
avoiding such danger to the demonstrators. Some of his
witnesses testified that in their judgment Professor
Franklin's purpose was conciliation and avoidance of
danger to the demonstrators.
We find it plausible that Professor Franklin may have
believed that he was acting to protect the rights of his
friends and co-workers in the "movement" in some ol
his actions. It is clear that those in the small group
clustered in front of the police line as the larger group of
demonstrators moved back were largely members of the
"movement," including several of its best known
participants. It thus became increasingly likely that these
individuals would be in the forefront of a police charge
and most likely to be arrested if, in fact, a charge did
occur. That Professor Franklin should endeavor to
prevent the isolation of these individuals from the rest of
the group of demonstrators and passersby is
understandable.
But that he believed that his actions were basically
conciliatory and aimed primarily at lessening the
likelihood of a police charge and arrest is difficult to
accept. His behavior was surely encouraging other people
to remain at greatly increased risks to themselves.
Shouting loudly and angrily at either faculty observers,
the police, or others in the crowd is hardly calculated to
calm crowd or police behavior, or to lessen the
likelihood of violence. Thus, Professor Franklin's loud
shouts as he turned from Moses some 40-60 feet from
the police could hardly have been calculated to calm the
situation. He apparently addressed Tamm by name only
after he had approached within 10 feet or so of the
police; surely he would have done so sooner had his
main goal been to persuade Tamm, and he would have
not shouted to the crowd upon turning away from
Moses. Professor Franklin described Tamm during the
second confrontation as "more immediately hostile than
I had ever seen him before." Moreover, Professor
Franklin himself testified that he knew "for a certainty"
that a police charge or arrest would occur under such
conditions once the police line-up occurred and the
order to disperse was read. He testified that he knew of
no case where such a situation was not followed by a
police charge or arrests. On his own testimony, he had
these points in mind prior to his discussion with Moses
and his shouting return to confront Tamm. Several of
Professor Franklin's witnesses testified that they too
thought a police charge to be highly likely or inevitable,
and became even surer when they saw Professor Franklin
striding back to confront Tamm the second time. Given
this testimony, it is difficult to accept the argument that
Professor Franklin seriously hoped by his actions to
eliminate the possibility of either a police charge or
arrests outside the Computation Center.
It is difficult to believe that Professor Franklin's duty
as a professor encompassed using others to stay and
confront the police when he felt certain that the result
would be a police charge and arrests, with a danger of
serious personal injury (which he testified is likely
whenever a police charge occurs). He testified that he
personally was resolved not to give way to fascism and
was going to stay and confront the police no matter
what happened. He testified, as did several of his
witnesses, that dispersal would be a political defeat for
the "movement" and an important victory for the
police.
Although Professor Franklin felt certain, or almost
certain, that a police charge and arrest would ensue
soon, he did not advise any people in the demonstrator's
group, either those in the "movement" or other
students, of the danger of a police charge, possible
injury, and arrests. Professor Franklin and some of his
close political associates testified of their awareness of
the impending police action at a time when others, less
experienced, did not anticipate any trouble. Professor
Franklin testified:
"My own experience in having been in just lots and
lots of police confrontations, is that if an order is
given declaring something an illegal assembly, telling
people to disperse, once that takes place then there
are basically one of two things that are going to
happen. Either the pigs are going to charge the people
or they're going to move for a mass bust.
"1 don't think I've ever seen a declaration of an illegal
assembly -maybe I have but I certainly can't
remember-l've never seen a declaration of an illegal
assembly not followed by one of those two actions.
Now it can be seconds; it can be minutes. Sometimes
they can declare an area an illegal assembly and then
nothing happens for some period of time and they're
moving what's really happening is they're moving in
for a mass bust. . . .
"And one of the signs you look for in a police line
prior to a charge is whether—one thing is the visors.
The other thing is whether they're smoking or not. If
they're not smoking then you look upon that as, you
know, a charge could take place at any time. And of
course, one of the things that they try to do is to
make the charge unexpected. So once you've got in a
situation the charge could take place the next second
or it might not take place for some time, but
something is going to happen."
Professor Franklin had difficulty explaining his
failure to warn others. He testified:
"As far as the question of whether I talked to
demonstrators on the lawn of the computer center
about the possibility of arrests and beatings and so
forth: I just—l mean, I may have had—it's possible
that I talked to some people about something about
it. But I certainly don't remember that at all, any
more than 1 remember. ... Well, I'm sure that I
didn't urge anybody to stay and I'm sure I didn't urge
anybody to leave, if that's what-if that's what the
point of that question was."
4. Did Professor Franklin Intentionally Urge and
Incite People to Remain in Defiance of the Police Order
to Disperse? The charge states that "Professor Franklin
significantly interfered with orderly dispersal by
intentionally urging and inciting students and other
persons present at the Computation Center to disregard
or disobey such orders to disperse." The evidence seems
to us convincing that the result of Professor Franklin's
behavior was to help significantly to induce students and
other persons present at the Computation Center to
disregard or disobey such orders to disperse. But
Professor Franklin argues that he did not specifically
address any individual other than Moses and Tamm. He
said, "I wouldn't take it upon myself to do that to
people in that situation because I knew that people were
defenseless in that situation." No witness testified that
Professor Franklin directly addressed other specific
individuals, although there is considerable testimony
that he addressed the crowd in more general terms,
$

urging it to resist the allegedly illegal police order to
disperse. The question is whether these shouts and this
behavior, not addressed to specific individuals other than
Moses and Tamm, amount to intentionally urging and
inciting students and other persons to disregard the
police order.
We find the evidence strongly persuasive that
Professor Franklin intentionally urged and incited
students and others present to disregard or disobey the
police orders. His purpose was to encourage others to
remain. Except for his own denial, all percipient
witnesses testified that Professor Franklin, after leaving
Moses, directly addressed his shouts to the crowd. But
even it he did not directly address the crowd, he must
have expected the likely effect of his behavior under
those circumstances to be to urge and incite others to
stay. Professor Franklin surely would not need to have
addressed each individual by name to have urged them
to stay.
The conclusion that the incitement was intentional is
reinforced by Professor Franklin's testimony that, even
knowing the results of his actions, he would not have
changed his behavior outside the Computation Center.
He said, "The only reasonable course of action that I
could see was what 1 did. And in looking back on it now
from, 1 don't know, eight or nine months, I still can't see
any other alternative."
The charge is not that Professor Franklin disobeyed
the police order himself, but that he intentionally
incited others to disobey the order. His behavior
increased the risk to others, a risk of which many were
unaware. The evidence meets the standards for
incitement that we set out earlier.
CONCLUSION
We find the evidence strongly persuasive that
Professor Franklin ' did significantly interfere with
orderly dispersal following the clearing of the
Computation Center by intentionally urging and inciting
students and other persons present to disregard or
disobey such orders to disperse, that this police order to
disperse was clearly reasonable under the circumstances,
and that Professor Franklin's conduct and speech did
substantially increase the danger of injury to other
persons.
DISSENTING OPINION
Professors Brown and Kennedy, although in accord
with much of the descriptive account of the majority
report on the events outside the Computation Center,
dissent as follows:
We place a sufficiently different interpretive weight
on the evidence at certain crucial points to make us
unable to sustain the charge.
1. The first of these centers on an element of
Professor Franklin's conduct that is central in the
testimony of virtually every witness, his concern that
faculty members remain as observers-a concern without
which many of his actions remain inexplicable. This is a
major substantive point in the conversations with Tamm
and Moses, it persuades Professor Eklof to stay on the
scene when he had decided to leave and persuades
Professor Moses in retrospect that perhaps he should
have stayed, it is a subject Professor Franklin pursues
with Professor Hastorf after the police charge, and it is
the dominant concern in Professor Franldin's later
conversation with Litterman and in a speech in front of
President Lyman's office. He asserts that he felt (a) that
the continuing presence of faculty observers might avert

a police charge, (b) that "respectable" faculty like Moses
might help him persuade the police of the right of
people to remain, and (c) that if there were a charge, the
faculty presence might minimize its brutality. He
testified that he felt a police charge would be
"inevitable" if there was a "withdrawal of the faculty
observers and other kinds of neutral people who had
made up a significant section of that crowd."
We agree with the majority report that "the presence
of faculty observers could have been expected to reduce
the risk of injury to persons." However, that fact,
coupled with Professor Franklin's own concern to keep
faculty observers on the scene, cause us to dissent from
the majority conclusion: "that he believed his actions
were basically conciliatory and aimed primarily at
lessening the likelihood of a police charge and arrest is
difficult to accept." We find the conclusion plausible
rather than difficult even though we believe that
Professor Franklin's manner of seeking this end was
unwise.
2. A second difference of interpretation involves fact
more than motivation, and we find the call a close one
either way. This concerns the crucial period between the
time Professor Franklin leaves Moses and the time he is
back in conversation with Tamm, some 40 to 60 feet
away. His own witnesses state that he was shouting
loudly during these moments, but assert, along with him,
that the comments were addressed only to Moses and
Tamm. The majority report believes that in addition he
spoke directly to others, and that, even if he had not, his
voice and demeanor were such that others would
inevitably hear him, and that he should have known that
his words and actions would influence them not to
disperse. Broholm and Blank are no longer completely
sure that Professor Franklin was directly haranguing the
crowd, although that was their on-the-spot impression.
Moses believes he was, though his assessment is
predicated on action after Professor Franklin turned his
back on him, so that the direction of the shouts is only
conjecture. Waterman believes Professor Franklin was
directly enlisting crowd support, but his timing of the
event is uncertain, and he saw only Professor Franklin's
back and left side. The identity of his audience is thus
once again conjecture. It is clear, however, that by the
time Professor Franklin was within ten feet of Tamm he
was yelling directly at him such words as, "Hey, Don,
this is ridiculous . . . In the interval he was apparently
asserting "that it was not an illegal assembly, and that
people should stay," though no witness produced
unshakeable testimony that he shouted this directly at
individuals within the crowd.
The possible reconstructions not all mutually
exclusive, are (a) that he spoke directly to Moses and
Tamm, but that he was overheard by others, some of
whom responded to his exhortations, (b) that he was
directly urging members of the crowd to stay, or (c) that
he was expressing his disgust and anger at the police
order either to the heavens or to onlookers in general,
rather than as specific instructions to members of the
crowd. There is clear evidence for the first alternative,
evidence (though less persuasive) for the second, and
plausibility for the third. The weight one puts on such
alternative explanations, and the interpretation one
makes of Professor Franklin's actions during these
moments, is dependent on a third consideration.
3. The third matter Involves an element in Professor
Franklin's conduct that, like the first, appears in the
testimony of virtually every witness: his strongly stated
conviction that the police order to disperse was illegal.

This is the second substantive point of his conversations
with both Moses and Tamm. We accept the majority
opinion that it is beyond our province or expertise to
determine whether or not the order was legal, and with
the majority "we conclude that the police order
declaring this demonstration an illegal assembly and
ordering dispersal was clearly reasonable in these
circumstances."
However, if a citizen wishes to question a police order
he believes unreasonable and unlawful, he has the right
to do so for a limited period of time. We place great
weight on this right, and believe that at least in part
Professor Franklin was trying to assert it: he believed the
order to be both unreasonable and unlawful, and so he
exercised the right of a citizen to object to it, in a brief
initial dispute with Tamm, in the attempt to enlist
Moses, and then in the second heated exchange with
Tamm. Ihe elapsed time of these three conversations
was probably no more than three or four minutes. To
Professor Franklin, standing on the grassy area where all
witnesses agree that they had seen no illegal acts, the
order to disperse may have seemed patently
unreasonable. That the Board in hindsight does not share
this assessment does not diminish the right of Professor
Franklin to have held it at the time or to have acted
upon it, lor a reasonable length of time, in the name of
the right of peaceable assembly. The fact that the mood
of the crowd immediately following the evacuation of
the Computation Center was reasonably calm and may
have caused no immediate danger to the police or the
building gives added legitimacy to the right, under such
conditions, to make a brief protest against the order, and
even to seek faculty help in so doing. That Professor
Franklin tried to enlist the aid of Professor Moses in his
exercise of this right is looked upon by no member of
the Board as culpable. It is even arguable that Professor
Franklin, if he did indeed urge "students and others" to
remain, was not engaging in culpable action, but only
reminding them of their own rights as citizens to protest,
at least briefly, an order that might be considered
unlawful or unreasonable.
4. The accumulation of the above considerations
leads us to believe (a) that Professor Franklin tried to get
other faculty members to remain on the scene in order
to reduce the likelihood of a police charge, (b) that his
continuing argument about the order to disperse was an
attempt to protest a police decision he felt to be illegal,
and one which as a citizen he had a right to protest, at
least briefly, and (c) that these two strongly held
convictions, uncontested in the testimony, led him to
loud and angry shouting, clearly directed at Moses and
Tamm, and possibly though not so clearly directed at
others, centering on the need for faculty observers to
stay, and the right of others to stay. The University's
Supplementary Written Brief states, "The issue is
whether a faculty member in a situation laden with the
risk of violent confrontation between demonstrators and
the police is acting properly when by his conduct he
increases that risk." We conclude that, even if one
accepts this as a statement of "the issue," such a
description does not adequately match the conduct
charged, and that there is not in our view strongly
persuasive evidence that his words or actions constituted
an incitement. Consequently, the charge that "Professor
Franklin did significantly interfere with orderly dispersal
by intentionally urging and inciting students and other
persons present at the Computation Center to disregard
or disobey such orders to disperse" is not one that we
can sustain.
A. CHARGES
The relevant University charge concerning the
Computation Center incident is contained in paragraph 9
of the "Statement of Charges."
9. Further, on February 10, 1971 and in connection
with the activity at the Computation Center
described in paragraph 8, students and other persons
were arrested for failure to disperse after orders had
been given to clear an area around the Computation
Center. Professor Franklin signilicantly interfered
with orderly dispersal by intentionally urging and
inciting students and other persons present at the
Computation Center to disregard or disobey such
orders to disperse.
B. FINDING OF FACTS
1. Occupation of the Computation Center. Shortly
before 1:00 p.m. on February 10, 1971, the
Computation Center building was closed on the basis of
a telephone order from Provost Miller, but the computer
was kept running. Handwritten notices were posted on
the doors of the Computation Center; doors, windows,
and gates were locked; and two campus policemen were
stationed at the front door. Provost Miller had been
informed that a group was proceeding from White Plaza
to the Computation Center. An estimated 100 to 200
demonstrators arrived at the Computation Center
shortly after 1:00 p.m. There were apparently no
previous collective decisions or explicit understandings
by the group as to what actions were to be taken or as to
whether to damage the computer. Some subgroups may
have had previous understandings; different individuals
testified as to different expectations. There were no
plans for formal picketing with picket signs as in many
"strikes," and there had been no attempt to
communicate with Computation Center workers about a
strike after the Dinkelspiel meeting of February 9.
At about 1:15 p.m., forcible entry was made into the
Computation Center; the gate was scaled and the back
door forced. About 50 demonstrators then entered
through the back door. As they moved through the
building, they opened other entrances and admitted
other demonstrators. Power to the building and to the
computer was shut off at 1:20 by pulling a master
switch located near the back door. Some 100-200 more
persons entered and milled about inside the
Computation Center. Some demonstrators, according to
officials of the Center, jimmied the door and entered the
machine room. They went to the 2301 drums, yanked
out wires, and flipped switches behind gates or doors on
two of the data storage drums. Other demonstrators in
that group went directly to the racks where tape reels
were stored and began looking through them. The
telephone lines were made inoperative. Once
demonstrators were inside the building and the doors
were thrown open, the Stanford police did not try to

stop movement in and out of the building. Some of the
demonstrators posted themselves at the doors, and to
some extent controlled entry and exit, for example,
denying entry to a photographer.
During this period, there was a continual movement
of demonstrators into and out of the Computation
Center. It is agreed that some time during the
occupation approximately $800 of physical damage was
done to the premises and contents of the Computation
Center, not counting any costs of shut-down time on the
computer. This damage was partly caused by the pulling
of the wires and damage to the 2301 unit, partly to the
premises. Two fire hoses were taken out of racks arid
valves opened, but the water had been turned off earlier
by the University. The printout of each of three printers
was removed. It is agreed that no substantial damage was
done to the computer itself. However, the shutdown,
lasting until about 8:00 p.m., made it impossible for the
Computation Center to process 700-800 student and
faculty jobs scheduled for that period. Montgomery
testified that these jobs would be run during the
succeeding two weeks.
Given the fact that the demonstrators illegally seized
the Computation Center and made impossible
continuation of its regular activities, the Board does not
consider further details on the conduct of the occupiers
important for Charge 9 against Professor Franklin. It
should be noted that the occupiers refused to obey the
requests to leave the building required by law-by Bruce
Wiggins on behalf of Stanford University and by Officers
Marron, Rosa and Tamm of the Santa Clara Sheriffs
office. However, as a context for other events, we note
briefly some undisputed facts concerning the
occupation.
Professor Franklin met his 1:15 class. Only seven of
the 150 registered students were present. He believed the
others were at the Computation Center and suggested
moving the class to the area outside the Center.
Professor Franklin did not hold his class because, he
testified, many of his students were inside the
Computation Center. It is uncontested that he remained
outside the Computation Center, talking with individuals
about a variety of topics prior to the arrival of the
police.
Bruce Wiggins, Stanford Director of Public Safety,
arrived at the Computation Center soon after its
occupation. He walked through and around the building
with Assistant Fire Chief Barr. Soon thereafter, around
2:00 p.m., he telephoned the Santa Clara Sheriffs office
and told them of the occupation.
Shortly after 2:00 p.m., C. D. Marron of the Santa
Clara Sheriffs office arrived at the Computation Center.
He too walked through the building, and then went to
Redwood Hall nearby to confer with Wiggins and others,
including Messrs. Rosenzweig and Schwartz from the

University administration, Sergeant Tamm and Captain
Rosa of the Santa Clara Sheriffs office, and an Assistant
District Attorney of Santa Clara County.
At about 3:00 p.m., it was decided that Wiggins
should return to the Computation Center and issue, in
the name of Stanford University, a declaration of
trespass, declaring the occupation a violation of Stanford
University regulations and ordering the occupants to
leave immediately. Wiggins used a bullhorn as he moved
through the building making this declaration. Wiggins
claims he was jostled, pushed and shoved; it is agreed
that his announcement was greeted by jeers and catcalls,
and that virtually no one left the building in response to
his order. He then returned to the group at Redwood
Hall.
At some point, probably after 3:00 p.m., an informal
meeting was held by the demonstrators. It was chaired
by Janet Weiss, near the door of the Computation
Center, partly inside and partly outside the building.
Although reports on this meeting are somewhat
confused, apparently there was an informal discussion as
to what to do, including whether to continue the
occupation of the Computation Center, what to do if
the police came, and whether to damage the computer.
The discussion, according to Harry Press, a University
witness, included talk about what would be the impact
on student support if the computer were wrecked. Janet
Weiss is reported to have stressed the political neutrality
of machines, urging that they not be damaged.
Apparently agreement was reached to stay in the
Computation Center until the police came, and then to
leave voluntarily without damaging the computer.
Station KZSU, misunderstanding this vote, reported that
the occupiers would damage the computer, but Janet
Weiss asked them to broadcast a retraction of that
report. There may have been other, smaller meetings of
the occupiers during the afternoon; testimony on this
question is confusing.
At about 4:00 p.m., the group in Redwood Hall
decided that Messrs. Marron, Rosa, and Tamm would go
back to the Computation Center and again try to
persuade the occupants to leave voluntarily. They did so,
asking what the occupants wanted, calling attention to
the vulnerability of the computer and the data it
contained, and to possible injury to persons in the
University and in the hospital. The responses of the
demonstrators were that the occupants wanted to get
the Gamut-H program, SRI research, and war-related
research out of the Computation Center; the precise
nature of all the demands is unclear. Marron testified
that there were scattered shouts of "Down with SRI"
and "Get SRI out." Few if any of the occupiers left. The
three officers returned to Redwood Hall.
After further discussion by the group in Redwood
Hall, the three officers again returned to the
Computation Center. The police announced to the
occupants that they had been informed that the SRI
work had been stopped at the Computation Center.
Some demonstrators replied that such word was not
good enough, and they wanted a written statement from
President Lyman. After a brief discussion, the police said
there was nothing more that could be done, and the
three officers returned again to Redwood Hall.
2. Order to Disperse and Police Arrival. Police
officers had been called and their arrival was imminent.
Just before they were expected to arrive, Marron went
out to the front steps of Redwood Hall, and, using a
bullhorn, he made a formal statement declaring the
occupation of the Center and its immediately adjacent
territory unlawful and ordering the demonstrators to
disperse, also stating that they were subject to arrest if
they did not do so. It is uncontested that he made this
announcement three times, pointing in three different
directions, with one aimed directly at the people inside
the Computation Center and the two others at the
people in the area outside the Computation Center to his
left and right. There was no response to these orders to
disperse, although Professor Franklin's witness
Litterman said he heard them.
Very soon thereafter, the police arrived and entered
the Computation Center. Lookouts for the occupiers
observed the police arrival and notified those inside, so
that the occupiers left the building rapidly just as the
police were entering from another direction. The police
made no arrests in the building, although they indicated
that they would have made arrests if the occupiers had
remained in the building. Marron entered the building
immediately after the police, continuing to declare the
assembly an unlawful one, ordering dispersal, and
threatening arrest for any who did not obey the order to
disperse. Since the Computation Center had been
cleared, he then went outside and walked clockwise
around the building continuing to give his order to
disperse. He continued his series of announcements and,
by his testimony, returned to the front of the
Computation Center about eight minutes after the
arrival of the police. A double line of police had been
formed in front of the Center. Marron repeated his
complete order at least three or four times in front of
the Computation Center, stating that the area from the
Computation Center to Jordan Way was to be cleared.
Some demonstrators did not hear or did not know the
extent of the prohibited area. Marron testified that
ordering dispersal from a wide area was common police
practice. He testified to his concern that the police
officers under his command would be vulnerable to
rock-throwing and possible injury if the demonstrators
were permitted to stay close to the police lines and the
building which had just been cleared. As long as a
confrontation between demonstrators and police
persisted, indefinite police presence would have been
necessary to protect the building and computer.
As police lines were formed in front of the
Computation Center and as Marron repeated his
announcement, some clusters of demonstrators remained
in front of the police line, perhaps six to ten feet away,
chanting "Pigs off campus" and other slogans, and
loudly questioning the legality of Marron's order to
disperse. These demonstrators formed several clusters;
they included a number of members of the
"movement." Other demonstrators, faculty observers,
students, and passersby were farther from the police line
in two grassy areas and in the park lot; they were less
active.
After leaving the Computation Center, the small
clusters of demonstrators near the police lines made no
movement to withdraw in response to Marron's repeated
order. At first the more distant persons also did not
withdraw. Professor Franklin, Marron, and other
witnesses who were near the grassy areas testified,
however, that the more distant crowd began to withdraw
as the order to disperse was repeated. Professor Franklin,
in his affidavit prepared shortly after the event, stated
that he believed "most" of the crowd was beginning to
move back; in his oral testimony at the hearing he stated
that he now believes that a smaller number was
beginning to move away-perhaps only more than half,
or fewer. Marron, Moses, and Waterman, testifying for
the University, and Professor Franklin's witness Owen
Blank in a direct report to KZSU from the scene, all
agreed that the portion of the crowd away from the
police lines was definitely moving back in response to
the repeated announcements to disperse. Most of
Professor Franklin's witnesses, primarily individuals
standing near the front portion of the grassy area nearest
the Computation Center, testified that they did not see
any significant part of the crowd moving back. This
apparent contradiction in testimony is explainable, in
part at least, by the fact that those witnesses who had
reason to be observing the rear part of the crowd saw the
movement away, while those who were focusing their
attention on the police lines and events nearby did not
see the movement of the rear portion of the crowd.
3. Professor Franklin's Role. At this stage, Professor
Franklin moved forward and stood in front of a cluster
of demonstrators who were loudly stating that the order
to disperse was illegal. Some of Professor Franklin's
close political associates were part of this cluster. They
were giving a clenched fist salute while vociferously
denouncing the police order. Professor Franklin,
according to testimony and photographs, stood quietly
in front of this active group and observed what was
occurring. He then moved closer to Tamm, who was near
the police line, and argued briefly and vigorously that
the dispersal order was illegal and he had a right to
remain as a faculty observer. Tamm disagreed on both
points, pointing out that Franklin was not on the official
list of faculty observers supplied by the President's
Office. Professor Franklin then wheeled and strode
toward Dean Lincoln Moses. Moses was some 30-50 feet
farther back, perhaps 40-60 feet from Tamm, and was
beginning to leave in response to the police order.
Professor Franklin called out, "Lincoln Moses!".
Professor Franklin shouted some words like "God damn
it, this happens every time the police charge. The faculty
observers are all gone!" He argued loudly that Moses
should not leave, that the order to disperse was
improper, and that faculty observers, like Moses, should
remain to observe possible police brutality. There is
substantial agreement on what Professor Franklin said to
Moses in this brief but loud set of statements. It is
further agreed that Professor Franklin was heard by a
nearby circle of 10 to 12 persons and by others farther
away; although he was close to Moses, Professor
Franklin was shouting his arguments. Professor Franklin
testified that he was being careful while shouting at
Moses not to use language in describing the police which
would reduce the likelihood of his persuading Moses to

stay. Professor Franklin's statements to Moses took
about a minute and a half. Franklin then headed back
toward the police line, some 40-60 feet away.
Witnesses for the University testified that Professor
Franklin was shouting loudly as soon as he took his first
steps back toward the police lines, angrily denouncing
the police order as illegal. He made his way back to
Tamm, some 50 feet distant, through the substantial
group remaining in the first grassy area. The items of
dispute are whether Professor Franklin was addressing
his shouts to the police or to others in the crowd when
he started shouting, and whether his shouts included
exhortations that people not leave.
4. Testimony that Professor Franklin Urged and
Incited the Crowd to Stay. Moses reports that at first he
was convinced by Franklin's statement that he should
stay as a laculty observer and started to follow Franklin
back toward the police line. However, he goes on,
He meanwhile continued talking. He turned his back
to me and went toward the line, talking loudly
and .. . waving his arms or gesticulating. . . . And as
he went, a group of people formed about him and
went with him. And whether he was addressing only
them or generally all who could hear I wouldn't say.
On cross-examination, Moses said,
Then as you [Franklin] went on, you appeared to me
to be encouraging as many people to come as would
come. And that is what turned me around. ... I felt
that I was just being recruited to be one more person
present. ... I took the whole crowd to be provocative
of the police.
Under further cross-examination by Professor Franklin,
Moses reiterated this testimony and his statement that
Professor Franklin was urging people around him to
disobey the police order and return. Although he
admitted it was "conceivable" that Professor Franklin's
words were solely addressed to the police, he said that
his understanding was clearly to the contrary.
Moses was asked by Professor Franklin on
cross-examination whether Professor Franklin could not
have been merely urging faculty observers to join him in
going towards the police lines. Moses responded that
Professor Franklin was not addressing his remarks to
faculty members but to the entire crowd or all within
the sound of his voice. Moses said, "You spoke to me
about faculty people. And then as you went on you
appeared to me to be encouraging as many people to
come as would come. And that is what turned me
around."
Waterman testified that before Franklin approached
Moses,
.... the crowd was definitely starting to drift back
this way ... in fact they were drifting back in
appreciable numbers. ... I definitely had the
impression that the crisis was past, that people were
leaving, and that the situation was about to calm
down.
He then testified that he observed Franklin at this point
crossing the grass in front of Redwood Hall toward the
police, although Waterman was not sure whether before
or after the Moses encounter,
. . . shouting to the crowd, telling them to come back,
challenging the right of the sheriffs men to declare it
an illegal assembly, and saying that they had a perfect
right to hold a peaceful meeting and that they should
return to do so. .. . He seemed to be shouting in
general to the bunch that were leaving and had gotten
about as far as the second grassy plot.
Broholm, reporting from the scene for KZSU,
reported (a tape recording is available) first that "the
crowd was definitely moving back"; and then that
Professor Franklin "was haranguing the crowd to stay"
and resist the order to disperse, and "was berating the
crowd for leaving." On cross-examination by Professor
Franklin, Broholm confirmed this on-the-scene report:
"After you turned away from Moses you turned back in
that direction and began yelling. And again, "You
turned around, faced back toward the police . . . and
you started yelling in that direction." It is important to
note that Broholm placed the Moses-Franklin encounter
and subsequent Franklin shouting near the edge of the
crosswalk in front of Redwood Hall, at least 60 feet
from Tamm and Marron. Under further
cross-examination, Broholm said that he now doubts the
accuracy of his on-the-scene report that Professor
Franklin was "haranguing the crowd to stay," and that
instead Professor Franklin was probably shouting at
Tamm. He did not, however, change his estimate that
Professor Franklin began shouting in an area some 60
feet from Tamm, who was separated from Professor
Franklin by a substantial number of individuals in the
first grassy area. We believe that Broholm's on-the-scene
account can be presumed more accurate than his
recollection eight months later.
Owen Blank, another KZSU announcer, also reported
from the scene (recorded on tape) that the crowd in the
grassy areas was moving away at first, and then turned
and moved back toward the police line as Professor
Franklin was shouting. As Professor Franklin's witness,
Blank attached the accuracy of the taped reports by
Broholm and Blank or, Professor Franklin's role in
reversing the crowd's dispersal, but Blank's testimony
when related to the times on the taped reports instead
confirms the on-the-scene reports by Broholm and
Blank. Although Broholm and Blank apologized to
Moses for errors in Broholm's reporting at the time,
these errors concerned Moses's alleged assent
to Professor Franklin's urgings, not Professor
Franklin's own behavior.
Professor Edward Begle testified that he saw
Professor Franklin apparently urging a group of young
people to stay at the gathering, but it is not clear
whether this was the group of people around Moses and
the details of his testimony are not confirmed by others.
The witnesses who heard Professor Franklin's words
testified that he, as he strode back towards Tamm, was
angry and shouting, repeating the same arguments as
before, that the order to disperse was illegal and the
crowd should not leave. Moses's, Waterman's and
Broholm's testimony was cited above. Professor
Franklin's witness Doering testified that "He [Professor
Franklin] walked away from Moses a couple of paces,
and I think he said some things on the way." Doering
places the Moses encounter at about the group of birth
trees furthest from the police lines, some 30-40 feet
away.
As Professor Franklin returned to confront Tamm, an
indefinite number of other persons moved along, beside,
or behind him. In moving back toward Tamm, Professor
Franklin moved through a substantial number of persons
between Moses and Tamm. These included some of
Professor Franklin's political associates (identified in
pictures) and others not identified. Thus, it seems
certain that Professor Franklin's shouts against dispersal
would be clearly heard by these persons, whether or not
they were primarily addressed to Tamm, and that
Professor Franklin must surely have known that they
would be received by at least these demonstrators

through whom he advanced, whether or not they were
heard by persons behind Moses and Fiofessor
Franklin in the second grassy area.
5. Testimony that Professor Franklin Did Not Urge
and Incite the Crowd to Stay. On the other hand,
Professor Franklin and many of his witnesses testified
that Professor Franklin spoke only to Moses when he
strode from Tamm to Moses, and that he spoke only to
Tamm when he turned from Moses back toward the
police line. They described his comments to both as not
intended to incite other people to disobey the police
order. One of his witnesses, photographer Harrison,
described both the scene and Professor Franklin's
following confrontation with Tamm as "tranquil."
Another witness, Professor Switzer, described the
atmosphere as a "picnic." But these evaluations are
specifically controverted by pictures, tapes and other
testimony. Nearly all, including Professor Charles Stein
who was near Moses, deny hearing Professor Franklin
directly address anyone other than Moses or Tamm.
Most of Professor Franklin's witnesses testified that they
did not hear, or did not remember, what Professor
Franklin was saying as he strode forward, until he was
close to Tamm (e.g., Pace, Lonsdale, Hunkeler). They
report that they heard him shout only as he neared
Tamm, and then only at Tamm. This, however, is not
inconsistent with Moses', Waterman's and Broholm's
testimony that Professor Franklin was shouting earlier
when much farther from the police. Most of Protessor
Franklin's witnesses were nearer the police line, mainly
facing the police, and hence did not observe Professor
Franklin's entire movement forward. But Doering did,
and testified that Professor Franklin spoke as soon as he
left Moses. Hunkeler did not have Professor Franklin
under constant scrutiny and could hear only a few
words.
Professor Franklin testified that he began to shout at
Tamm from a distance because he wanted to be sure that
Tamm understood why he was returning to the police
line and that his action was intended to be conciliatory
and to lessen the danger of a police charge and arrests of
the demonstrators there. But that he should have done
so at such a great distance seems highly implausible
under the circumstances, and conflicts with considerable
testimony from witnesses from both parties. Clearly,
Professor Franklin did, as he stated, address Tamm,
saying, "Don, this is ridiculous ..." as he approached
Tamm and Marron, apparently from a distance of five to
ten feet; this is confirmed by his witnesses who were
near the police line.
With one exception, Professor Franklin's own
witnesses did not support his version of events as he left
Moses. The only witness for Professor Franklin who gave
evidence contradictory to that of the University
witnesses was Downey, who testified that, although he
was not sure, Professor Franklin was not saying anything
as he left Moses and walked towards the police lines. It is
likely that Downey was confused about the timing of his
interaction with Professor Franklin. Downey testified
that he never was with Professor Franklin until after the
encounter with Moses, but pictures show Downey
standing with Professor Franklin and the group shouting
at the police at a time identified by Professor Franklin's
witnesses as prior to his words with Moses. With this
doubtful exception, Professor Franklin produced no
witness who contradicted the testimony of
Administration witnesses who observed his shouting as
he left Moses at a considerable distance from the police
lines.
Professor Franklin was apparently himself confused
as to the locus of his confrontation with Moses in
relation to the police lines, and, in his testimony, he
minimized the distance from the police lines. He
testified that he was only a few steps away from Tamm
when he turned away from Moses.
One witness for Professor Franklin, Stein, supported
this spatial image by testifying that Professor Franklin
was about 15 feet from the police lines. No other
witness for either party supported Professor Franklin on
this point; indeed, five witnesses for Professor Franklin
directly contradicted him in their testimony.
6. Franklin-Tamm Confrontation and Police Charge.
It is agreed, and supported by photographic evidence,
that after Professor Franklin approached Tamm, a
substantial number of people, approximately 30, closed
in around and behind Professor Franklin as he angrily
confronted Tamm. Professor Franklin testified that he
was aware of people moving in from both sides but he
didn't know how many newsmen were present. Some
witnesses, including Professor Franklin's witness,
Litterman, testified that the crowd threatened to engulf
the police officers and Professor Franklin. Professor
Franklin and Tamm stood face to face shouting angrily
at one another. Witnesses of both parties described the
situation as very tense. Professor Franklin was repeating
his basic arguments and Tamm was denying the validity
of both.
After a very short interval, two, perhaps more,
policemen moved rapidly from behind Tamm and
Marron to try to arrest Professor Franklin, but Professor
Franklin slipped away from them, perhaps with the help
of some of his friends. At almost exactly the same time
the police line moved forward on the demonstrators in
what is commonly called a "police charge."
We note, parenthetically, that we do not consider
Professor Franklin's acknowledged urging of Moses and
other faculty observers to stay to be objectionable under
the charge. Formally designated faculty observers were
asked by the University administration to be present,
even though some, not identified to the police, were
apparently struck during the charge. The presence of
faculty observers could have been expected to reduce
the risk of injury to persons.
7. Findings of Fact. The Board finds the evidence
strongly persuasive that: (a) the police order to disperse
was clearly reasonable, given the illegal seizure of the
Computation Center, possible serious damage to the
computer and data stored there, possible danger to
police and demonstrators outside after the building was
cleared, and the need to return the Center promptly to
normal action without police presence; (b) while some
demonstrators refused to disperse after the building was
cleared, a substantial portion of the crowd was moving
back in response to repeated police orders, prior to
Professor Franklin's intervention; (c) Professor Franklin
played a central role in reversing the movement of the
crowd to disperse and his shouts and behavior
significantly increased the likelihood that a substantial
number of those present would stay; (d) Professor
Franklin intended his shouts after leaving Moses to be
heard by, and to influence the crowd to remain at the
scene in defiance of the police order to disperse.
However, even if lie did not directly address his shouts
to the crowd, he must reasonably have expected that a
result of his shouts would be to incite members of the
crowd to disobey the dispersal order, increasing the risk
to themselves; Professor Franklin's conduct and shouts

cannot reasonably be interpreted as merely attempts to
persuade Moses and other faculty observers to stay, to
conciliate the police or the crowd, or to lessen the
danger of a police charge or arrests with their attendant
dangers to the demonstrators. We comment further on
these findings in the following section.
C. SUPPLEMENTA R Y EVIDENCE AND EINDINGS
A number of points in the testimony require special
attention in order to amplify and interpret the findings
of fact indicated above.
1. Charge of University Negligence. Professor
Franklin suggests that the University administration was
negligent in not announcing to the occupiers of the
Computation Center that work on the disputed SRI
contract had, in fact, been halted one or more days
before, because this information might have been
sufficient to induce the occupiers to leave the
Computation Center peacefully. Alternatively, he
implies that had some official of the University
explained that an investigation was under way, this
might have induced the occupiers to lave the building
voluntarily without the police having to be called.
In fact, SRI had apparently stopped using the
computer for the GAMUT-Hand its other programs
prior to February 10, but it had not informed Stanford
of any policy decision regarding GAMUT-H or other SRI
projects on the Stanford computer. The SRI accounts
had not been cancelled. Moreover, the Stanford
administration at that time believed, on the information
received from SRI, that there was no violation of
University policy; SRI had indicated to the University
administration that the research in question was not
classified and was available for publication. Thus Provost
Miller testified that he did not believe it would be proper
for the University to issue any statement pending receipt
of information on SRl's position on the whole matter.
Moreover, the Computer Facilities Committee of the
University was meeting on the afternoon of February
10, during the occupation, precisely to discuss the issues
raised by the GAMLTT-H program.
We do not agree with Professor Franklin's argument
that the University administration's refusal to negotiate
with, or report to, the Computation Center occupiers
justifies the refusal of the demonstrators to leave the
Computation Center which they were illegally
occupying. Some persons believe the University
administration would have been well advised to issue a
public statement that it was investigating the whole
situation, although we find the University
administration's position on the matter easy to
understand, given the uncertainty about SRl's position
and the fact that the relevant University committee was
in fact meeting at 2 p.m. on the afternoon of the
occupation. But even if the University officials involved
were guilty of faulty administrative judgment, this
would in no way justify the illegal occupation of the
Computation Center and its continuance in the face of
both University and police orders to disperse. Moreover,
it is important to remember that the protestors had
made no direct effort vis-a-vis the administration to halt
the GAMUT-H work beyond one unsigned leaflet,
although they had, according to their own testimony,
known of it for at least a week or two; the Computation
Center sit-in was in no sense a "last resort" step after all
legal avenues were exhausted. The demands of the
occupiers were vague, and we see no reason to believe
that they would have left the Center merely on
notification by the administration that the problem was
under active investigation.
2. Argument that Police Order to Disperse was
Unreasonable and Illegal. Professor Franklin argues that
the police order to disperse was unreasonable and
unlawful-that the crowd outside the Computation
Center was peaceful and within its rights of free
assembly as guaranteed by the First Amendment to the
Constitution. Thus, not only was he within his
constitutional rights in refusing to disperse and urging
others not to disperse, but indeed he was following his
duty as a citizen and a professor in so acting.
California law clearly gives to police the authority to
disperse illegal assemblies and sets out the legal
requirements for such orders. Only a court of law, which
we are not, could finally determine whether in fact the
police declaration of illegal assembly and the order to
disperse in this instance was legal. In our judgment, the
police order to disperse was clearly reasonable and, as we
understand the law, was probably legal as well. An illegal
seizure of the Computation Center had occurred, and
both University and police officials were understandably
concerned lest serious damage be done to the valuable
equipment housed there and to the even more valuable
data stored there. It was widely known that major
damage to computers, totalling millions of dollars, had
been done to other university computers.
The order declaring the occupation of the
Computation Center an illegal assembly and ordering
dispersal was a single order aimed at the occupiers of the
Computation Center when they were inside the building
and at those participating in the demonstration outside
the building, both before and following its evacuation.
Marron's testimony on this point is clear, and it is
confirmed by one of Professor Franklin's wftnesses. He
began giving the complete order before the arrival of the
police and continued with the same order during the
evacuation of the Computation Center and following the
evacuation when part of the demonstrators stayed close
to the Computation Center building. That this order to
evacuate the building was fully warranted can hardly be
denied. It was that same order that insisted that the
demonstrators withdraw a substantial distance from the
building being evacuated.
Moreover, we conclude that the order to disperse
back to Jordan Way outside the building was reasonable
on its own merits as well. The police knew that violence
had occurred on the Stanford campus during
police-demonstrator confrontations several times during
the past few years; the precaution of moving the crowd
back a substantial distance from the police line was
understandable, and was probably calculated to lessen
injury to both the police and the demonstrators. Thus
we conclude that the police order declaring the
demonstration an illegal assembly and ordering dispersal
was clearly reasonable in these circumstances.
Professor Franklin may have had the right as a citizen
briefly to protest the police order which he believed
unreasonable. But, especially given the strongly negative
police response to his first protest which he himself
noted, he surely did not have the right to increase the
risk of injury to others by urging them to stay and
disobey the police order.
3. Argument that Professor Franklin's Action was
Aimed at Conciliation and Reducing Danger to Those
Present. Professor Franklin argues that his action outside
the Computation Center was aimed primarily at
protecting demonstrators from injury or arrest at the
hands of the police that his argument with faculty
observers (and others) to remain and with the police
against the legality of the dispersal order was aimed at
avoiding such danger to the demonstrators. Some of his
witnesses testified that in their judgment Professor
Franklin's purpose was conciliation and avoidance of
danger to the demonstrators.
We find it plausible that Professor Franklin may have
believed that he was acting to protect the rights of his
friends and co-workers in the "movement" in some ol
his actions. It is clear that those in the small group
clustered in front of the police line as the larger group of
demonstrators moved back were largely members of the
"movement," including several of its best known
participants. It thus became increasingly likely that these
individuals would be in the forefront of a police charge
and most likely to be arrested if, in fact, a charge did
occur. That Professor Franklin should endeavor to
prevent the isolation of these individuals from the rest of
the group of demonstrators and passersby is
understandable.
But that he believed that his actions were basically
conciliatory and aimed primarily at lessening the
likelihood of a police charge and arrest is difficult to
accept. His behavior was surely encouraging other people
to remain at greatly increased risks to themselves.
Shouting loudly and angrily at either faculty observers,
the police, or others in the crowd is hardly calculated to
calm crowd or police behavior, or to lessen the
likelihood of violence. Thus, Professor Franklin's loud
shouts as he turned from Moses some 40-60 feet from
the police could hardly have been calculated to calm the
situation. He apparently addressed Tamm by name only
after he had approached within 10 feet or so of the
police; surely he would have done so sooner had his
main goal been to persuade Tamm, and he would have
not shouted to the crowd upon turning away from
Moses. Professor Franklin described Tamm during the
second confrontation as "more immediately hostile than
I had ever seen him before." Moreover, Professor
Franklin himself testified that he knew "for a certainty"
that a police charge or arrest would occur under such
conditions once the police line-up occurred and the
order to disperse was read. He testified that he knew of
no case where such a situation was not followed by a
police charge or arrests. On his own testimony, he had
these points in mind prior to his discussion with Moses
and his shouting return to confront Tamm. Several of
Professor Franklin's witnesses testified that they too
thought a police charge to be highly likely or inevitable,
and became even surer when they saw Professor Franklin
striding back to confront Tamm the second time. Given
this testimony, it is difficult to accept the argument that
Professor Franklin seriously hoped by his actions to
eliminate the possibility of either a police charge or
arrests outside the Computation Center.
It is difficult to believe that Professor Franklin's duty
as a professor encompassed using others to stay and
confront the police when he felt certain that the result
would be a police charge and arrests, with a danger of
serious personal injury (which he testified is likely
whenever a police charge occurs). He testified that he
personally was resolved not to give way to fascism and
was going to stay and confront the police no matter
what happened. He testified, as did several of his
witnesses, that dispersal would be a political defeat for
the "movement" and an important victory for the
police.
Although Professor Franklin felt certain, or almost
certain, that a police charge and arrest would ensue
soon, he did not advise any people in the demonstrator's
group, either those in the "movement" or other
students, of the danger of a police charge, possible
injury, and arrests. Professor Franklin and some of his
close political associates testified of their awareness of
the impending police action at a time when others, less
experienced, did not anticipate any trouble. Professor
Franklin testified:
"My own experience in having been in just lots and
lots of police confrontations, is that if an order is
given declaring something an illegal assembly, telling
people to disperse, once that takes place then there
are basically one of two things that are going to
happen. Either the pigs are going to charge the people
or they're going to move for a mass bust.
"1 don't think I've ever seen a declaration of an illegal
assembly -maybe I have but I certainly can't
remember-l've never seen a declaration of an illegal
assembly not followed by one of those two actions.
Now it can be seconds; it can be minutes. Sometimes
they can declare an area an illegal assembly and then
nothing happens for some period of time and they're
moving what's really happening is they're moving in
for a mass bust. . . .
"And one of the signs you look for in a police line
prior to a charge is whether—one thing is the visors.
The other thing is whether they're smoking or not. If
they're not smoking then you look upon that as, you
know, a charge could take place at any time. And of
course, one of the things that they try to do is to
make the charge unexpected. So once you've got in a
situation the charge could take place the next second
or it might not take place for some time, but
something is going to happen."
Professor Franklin had difficulty explaining his
failure to warn others. He testified:
"As far as the question of whether I talked to
demonstrators on the lawn of the computer center
about the possibility of arrests and beatings and so
forth: I just—l mean, I may have had—it's possible
that I talked to some people about something about
it. But I certainly don't remember that at all, any
more than 1 remember. ... Well, I'm sure that I
didn't urge anybody to stay and I'm sure I didn't urge
anybody to leave, if that's what-if that's what the
point of that question was."
4. Did Professor Franklin Intentionally Urge and
Incite People to Remain in Defiance of the Police Order
to Disperse? The charge states that "Professor Franklin
significantly interfered with orderly dispersal by
intentionally urging and inciting students and other
persons present at the Computation Center to disregard
or disobey such orders to disperse." The evidence seems
to us convincing that the result of Professor Franklin's
behavior was to help significantly to induce students and
other persons present at the Computation Center to
disregard or disobey such orders to disperse. But
Professor Franklin argues that he did not specifically
address any individual other than Moses and Tamm. He
said, "I wouldn't take it upon myself to do that to
people in that situation because I knew that people were
defenseless in that situation." No witness testified that
Professor Franklin directly addressed other specific
individuals, although there is considerable testimony
that he addressed the crowd in more general terms,
$

urging it to resist the allegedly illegal police order to
disperse. The question is whether these shouts and this
behavior, not addressed to specific individuals other than
Moses and Tamm, amount to intentionally urging and
inciting students and other persons to disregard the
police order.
We find the evidence strongly persuasive that
Professor Franklin intentionally urged and incited
students and others present to disregard or disobey the
police orders. His purpose was to encourage others to
remain. Except for his own denial, all percipient
witnesses testified that Professor Franklin, after leaving
Moses, directly addressed his shouts to the crowd. But
even it he did not directly address the crowd, he must
have expected the likely effect of his behavior under
those circumstances to be to urge and incite others to
stay. Professor Franklin surely would not need to have
addressed each individual by name to have urged them
to stay.
The conclusion that the incitement was intentional is
reinforced by Professor Franklin's testimony that, even
knowing the results of his actions, he would not have
changed his behavior outside the Computation Center.
He said, "The only reasonable course of action that I
could see was what 1 did. And in looking back on it now
from, 1 don't know, eight or nine months, I still can't see
any other alternative."
The charge is not that Professor Franklin disobeyed
the police order himself, but that he intentionally
incited others to disobey the order. His behavior
increased the risk to others, a risk of which many were
unaware. The evidence meets the standards for
incitement that we set out earlier.
CONCLUSION
We find the evidence strongly persuasive that
Professor Franklin ' did significantly interfere with
orderly dispersal following the clearing of the
Computation Center by intentionally urging and inciting
students and other persons present to disregard or
disobey such orders to disperse, that this police order to
disperse was clearly reasonable under the circumstances,
and that Professor Franklin's conduct and speech did
substantially increase the danger of injury to other
persons.
DISSENTING OPINION
Professors Brown and Kennedy, although in accord
with much of the descriptive account of the majority
report on the events outside the Computation Center,
dissent as follows:
We place a sufficiently different interpretive weight
on the evidence at certain crucial points to make us
unable to sustain the charge.
1. The first of these centers on an element of
Professor Franklin's conduct that is central in the
testimony of virtually every witness, his concern that
faculty members remain as observers-a concern without
which many of his actions remain inexplicable. This is a
major substantive point in the conversations with Tamm
and Moses, it persuades Professor Eklof to stay on the
scene when he had decided to leave and persuades
Professor Moses in retrospect that perhaps he should
have stayed, it is a subject Professor Franklin pursues
with Professor Hastorf after the police charge, and it is
the dominant concern in Professor Franldin's later
conversation with Litterman and in a speech in front of
President Lyman's office. He asserts that he felt (a) that
the continuing presence of faculty observers might avert

a police charge, (b) that "respectable" faculty like Moses
might help him persuade the police of the right of
people to remain, and (c) that if there were a charge, the
faculty presence might minimize its brutality. He
testified that he felt a police charge would be
"inevitable" if there was a "withdrawal of the faculty
observers and other kinds of neutral people who had
made up a significant section of that crowd."
We agree with the majority report that "the presence
of faculty observers could have been expected to reduce
the risk of injury to persons." However, that fact,
coupled with Professor Franklin's own concern to keep
faculty observers on the scene, cause us to dissent from
the majority conclusion: "that he believed his actions
were basically conciliatory and aimed primarily at
lessening the likelihood of a police charge and arrest is
difficult to accept." We find the conclusion plausible
rather than difficult even though we believe that
Professor Franklin's manner of seeking this end was
unwise.
2. A second difference of interpretation involves fact
more than motivation, and we find the call a close one
either way. This concerns the crucial period between the
time Professor Franklin leaves Moses and the time he is
back in conversation with Tamm, some 40 to 60 feet
away. His own witnesses state that he was shouting
loudly during these moments, but assert, along with him,
that the comments were addressed only to Moses and
Tamm. The majority report believes that in addition he
spoke directly to others, and that, even if he had not, his
voice and demeanor were such that others would
inevitably hear him, and that he should have known that
his words and actions would influence them not to
disperse. Broholm and Blank are no longer completely
sure that Professor Franklin was directly haranguing the
crowd, although that was their on-the-spot impression.
Moses believes he was, though his assessment is
predicated on action after Professor Franklin turned his
back on him, so that the direction of the shouts is only
conjecture. Waterman believes Professor Franklin was
directly enlisting crowd support, but his timing of the
event is uncertain, and he saw only Professor Franklin's
back and left side. The identity of his audience is thus
once again conjecture. It is clear, however, that by the
time Professor Franklin was within ten feet of Tamm he
was yelling directly at him such words as, "Hey, Don,
this is ridiculous . . . In the interval he was apparently
asserting "that it was not an illegal assembly, and that
people should stay," though no witness produced
unshakeable testimony that he shouted this directly at
individuals within the crowd.
The possible reconstructions not all mutually
exclusive, are (a) that he spoke directly to Moses and
Tamm, but that he was overheard by others, some of
whom responded to his exhortations, (b) that he was
directly urging members of the crowd to stay, or (c) that
he was expressing his disgust and anger at the police
order either to the heavens or to onlookers in general,
rather than as specific instructions to members of the
crowd. There is clear evidence for the first alternative,
evidence (though less persuasive) for the second, and
plausibility for the third. The weight one puts on such
alternative explanations, and the interpretation one
makes of Professor Franklin's actions during these
moments, is dependent on a third consideration.
3. The third matter Involves an element in Professor
Franklin's conduct that, like the first, appears in the
testimony of virtually every witness: his strongly stated
conviction that the police order to disperse was illegal.

This is the second substantive point of his conversations
with both Moses and Tamm. We accept the majority
opinion that it is beyond our province or expertise to
determine whether or not the order was legal, and with
the majority "we conclude that the police order
declaring this demonstration an illegal assembly and
ordering dispersal was clearly reasonable in these
circumstances."
However, if a citizen wishes to question a police order
he believes unreasonable and unlawful, he has the right
to do so for a limited period of time. We place great
weight on this right, and believe that at least in part
Professor Franklin was trying to assert it: he believed the
order to be both unreasonable and unlawful, and so he
exercised the right of a citizen to object to it, in a brief
initial dispute with Tamm, in the attempt to enlist
Moses, and then in the second heated exchange with
Tamm. Ihe elapsed time of these three conversations
was probably no more than three or four minutes. To
Professor Franklin, standing on the grassy area where all
witnesses agree that they had seen no illegal acts, the
order to disperse may have seemed patently
unreasonable. That the Board in hindsight does not share
this assessment does not diminish the right of Professor
Franklin to have held it at the time or to have acted
upon it, lor a reasonable length of time, in the name of
the right of peaceable assembly. The fact that the mood
of the crowd immediately following the evacuation of
the Computation Center was reasonably calm and may
have caused no immediate danger to the police or the
building gives added legitimacy to the right, under such
conditions, to make a brief protest against the order, and
even to seek faculty help in so doing. That Professor
Franklin tried to enlist the aid of Professor Moses in his
exercise of this right is looked upon by no member of
the Board as culpable. It is even arguable that Professor
Franklin, if he did indeed urge "students and others" to
remain, was not engaging in culpable action, but only
reminding them of their own rights as citizens to protest,
at least briefly, an order that might be considered
unlawful or unreasonable.
4. The accumulation of the above considerations
leads us to believe (a) that Professor Franklin tried to get
other faculty members to remain on the scene in order
to reduce the likelihood of a police charge, (b) that his
continuing argument about the order to disperse was an
attempt to protest a police decision he felt to be illegal,
and one which as a citizen he had a right to protest, at
least briefly, and (c) that these two strongly held
convictions, uncontested in the testimony, led him to
loud and angry shouting, clearly directed at Moses and
Tamm, and possibly though not so clearly directed at
others, centering on the need for faculty observers to
stay, and the right of others to stay. The University's
Supplementary Written Brief states, "The issue is
whether a faculty member in a situation laden with the
risk of violent confrontation between demonstrators and
the police is acting properly when by his conduct he
increases that risk." We conclude that, even if one
accepts this as a statement of "the issue," such a
description does not adequately match the conduct
charged, and that there is not in our view strongly
persuasive evidence that his words or actions constituted
an incitement. Consequently, the charge that "Professor
Franklin did significantly interfere with orderly dispersal
by intentionally urging and inciting students and other
persons present at the Computation Center to disregard
or disobey such orders to disperse" is not one that we
can sustain.
A. CHARGES
The relevant University charge concerning the
Computation Center incident is contained in paragraph 9
of the "Statement of Charges."
9. Further, on February 10, 1971 and in connection
with the activity at the Computation Center
described in paragraph 8, students and other persons
were arrested for failure to disperse after orders had
been given to clear an area around the Computation
Center. Professor Franklin signilicantly interfered
with orderly dispersal by intentionally urging and
inciting students and other persons present at the
Computation Center to disregard or disobey such
orders to disperse.
B. FINDING OF FACTS
1. Occupation of the Computation Center. Shortly
before 1:00 p.m. on February 10, 1971, the
Computation Center building was closed on the basis of
a telephone order from Provost Miller, but the computer
was kept running. Handwritten notices were posted on
the doors of the Computation Center; doors, windows,
and gates were locked; and two campus policemen were
stationed at the front door. Provost Miller had been
informed that a group was proceeding from White Plaza
to the Computation Center. An estimated 100 to 200
demonstrators arrived at the Computation Center
shortly after 1:00 p.m. There were apparently no
previous collective decisions or explicit understandings
by the group as to what actions were to be taken or as to
whether to damage the computer. Some subgroups may
have had previous understandings; different individuals
testified as to different expectations. There were no
plans for formal picketing with picket signs as in many
"strikes," and there had been no attempt to
communicate with Computation Center workers about a
strike after the Dinkelspiel meeting of February 9.
At about 1:15 p.m., forcible entry was made into the
Computation Center; the gate was scaled and the back
door forced. About 50 demonstrators then entered
through the back door. As they moved through the
building, they opened other entrances and admitted
other demonstrators. Power to the building and to the
computer was shut off at 1:20 by pulling a master
switch located near the back door. Some 100-200 more
persons entered and milled about inside the
Computation Center. Some demonstrators, according to
officials of the Center, jimmied the door and entered the
machine room. They went to the 2301 drums, yanked
out wires, and flipped switches behind gates or doors on
two of the data storage drums. Other demonstrators in
that group went directly to the racks where tape reels
were stored and began looking through them. The
telephone lines were made inoperative. Once
demonstrators were inside the building and the doors
were thrown open, the Stanford police did not try to

stop movement in and out of the building. Some of the
demonstrators posted themselves at the doors, and to
some extent controlled entry and exit, for example,
denying entry to a photographer.
During this period, there was a continual movement
of demonstrators into and out of the Computation
Center. It is agreed that some time during the
occupation approximately $800 of physical damage was
done to the premises and contents of the Computation
Center, not counting any costs of shut-down time on the
computer. This damage was partly caused by the pulling
of the wires and damage to the 2301 unit, partly to the
premises. Two fire hoses were taken out of racks arid
valves opened, but the water had been turned off earlier
by the University. The printout of each of three printers
was removed. It is agreed that no substantial damage was
done to the computer itself. However, the shutdown,
lasting until about 8:00 p.m., made it impossible for the
Computation Center to process 700-800 student and
faculty jobs scheduled for that period. Montgomery
testified that these jobs would be run during the
succeeding two weeks.
Given the fact that the demonstrators illegally seized
the Computation Center and made impossible
continuation of its regular activities, the Board does not
consider further details on the conduct of the occupiers
important for Charge 9 against Professor Franklin. It
should be noted that the occupiers refused to obey the
requests to leave the building required by law-by Bruce
Wiggins on behalf of Stanford University and by Officers
Marron, Rosa and Tamm of the Santa Clara Sheriffs
office. However, as a context for other events, we note
briefly some undisputed facts concerning the
occupation.
Professor Franklin met his 1:15 class. Only seven of
the 150 registered students were present. He believed the
others were at the Computation Center and suggested
moving the class to the area outside the Center.
Professor Franklin did not hold his class because, he
testified, many of his students were inside the
Computation Center. It is uncontested that he remained
outside the Computation Center, talking with individuals
about a variety of topics prior to the arrival of the
police.
Bruce Wiggins, Stanford Director of Public Safety,
arrived at the Computation Center soon after its
occupation. He walked through and around the building
with Assistant Fire Chief Barr. Soon thereafter, around
2:00 p.m., he telephoned the Santa Clara Sheriffs office
and told them of the occupation.
Shortly after 2:00 p.m., C. D. Marron of the Santa
Clara Sheriffs office arrived at the Computation Center.
He too walked through the building, and then went to
Redwood Hall nearby to confer with Wiggins and others,
including Messrs. Rosenzweig and Schwartz from the

University administration, Sergeant Tamm and Captain
Rosa of the Santa Clara Sheriffs office, and an Assistant
District Attorney of Santa Clara County.
At about 3:00 p.m., it was decided that Wiggins
should return to the Computation Center and issue, in
the name of Stanford University, a declaration of
trespass, declaring the occupation a violation of Stanford
University regulations and ordering the occupants to
leave immediately. Wiggins used a bullhorn as he moved
through the building making this declaration. Wiggins
claims he was jostled, pushed and shoved; it is agreed
that his announcement was greeted by jeers and catcalls,
and that virtually no one left the building in response to
his order. He then returned to the group at Redwood
Hall.
At some point, probably after 3:00 p.m., an informal
meeting was held by the demonstrators. It was chaired
by Janet Weiss, near the door of the Computation
Center, partly inside and partly outside the building.
Although reports on this meeting are somewhat
confused, apparently there was an informal discussion as
to what to do, including whether to continue the
occupation of the Computation Center, what to do if
the police came, and whether to damage the computer.
The discussion, according to Harry Press, a University
witness, included talk about what would be the impact
on student support if the computer were wrecked. Janet
Weiss is reported to have stressed the political neutrality
of machines, urging that they not be damaged.
Apparently agreement was reached to stay in the
Computation Center until the police came, and then to
leave voluntarily without damaging the computer.
Station KZSU, misunderstanding this vote, reported that
the occupiers would damage the computer, but Janet
Weiss asked them to broadcast a retraction of that
report. There may have been other, smaller meetings of
the occupiers during the afternoon; testimony on this
question is confusing.
At about 4:00 p.m., the group in Redwood Hall
decided that Messrs. Marron, Rosa, and Tamm would go
back to the Computation Center and again try to
persuade the occupants to leave voluntarily. They did so,
asking what the occupants wanted, calling attention to
the vulnerability of the computer and the data it
contained, and to possible injury to persons in the
University and in the hospital. The responses of the
demonstrators were that the occupants wanted to get
the Gamut-H program, SRI research, and war-related
research out of the Computation Center; the precise
nature of all the demands is unclear. Marron testified
that there were scattered shouts of "Down with SRI"
and "Get SRI out." Few if any of the occupiers left. The
three officers returned to Redwood Hall.
After further discussion by the group in Redwood
Hall, the three officers again returned to the
Computation Center. The police announced to the
occupants that they had been informed that the SRI
work had been stopped at the Computation Center.
Some demonstrators replied that such word was not
good enough, and they wanted a written statement from
President Lyman. After a brief discussion, the police said
there was nothing more that could be done, and the
three officers returned again to Redwood Hall.
2. Order to Disperse and Police Arrival. Police
officers had been called and their arrival was imminent.
Just before they were expected to arrive, Marron went
out to the front steps of Redwood Hall, and, using a
bullhorn, he made a formal statement declaring the
occupation of the Center and its immediately adjacent
territory unlawful and ordering the demonstrators to
disperse, also stating that they were subject to arrest if
they did not do so. It is uncontested that he made this
announcement three times, pointing in three different
directions, with one aimed directly at the people inside
the Computation Center and the two others at the
people in the area outside the Computation Center to his
left and right. There was no response to these orders to
disperse, although Professor Franklin's witness
Litterman said he heard them.
Very soon thereafter, the police arrived and entered
the Computation Center. Lookouts for the occupiers
observed the police arrival and notified those inside, so
that the occupiers left the building rapidly just as the
police were entering from another direction. The police
made no arrests in the building, although they indicated
that they would have made arrests if the occupiers had
remained in the building. Marron entered the building
immediately after the police, continuing to declare the
assembly an unlawful one, ordering dispersal, and
threatening arrest for any who did not obey the order to
disperse. Since the Computation Center had been
cleared, he then went outside and walked clockwise
around the building continuing to give his order to
disperse. He continued his series of announcements and,
by his testimony, returned to the front of the
Computation Center about eight minutes after the
arrival of the police. A double line of police had been
formed in front of the Center. Marron repeated his
complete order at least three or four times in front of
the Computation Center, stating that the area from the
Computation Center to Jordan Way was to be cleared.
Some demonstrators did not hear or did not know the
extent of the prohibited area. Marron testified that
ordering dispersal from a wide area was common police
practice. He testified to his concern that the police
officers under his command would be vulnerable to
rock-throwing and possible injury if the demonstrators
were permitted to stay close to the police lines and the
building which had just been cleared. As long as a
confrontation between demonstrators and police
persisted, indefinite police presence would have been
necessary to protect the building and computer.
As police lines were formed in front of the
Computation Center and as Marron repeated his
announcement, some clusters of demonstrators remained
in front of the police line, perhaps six to ten feet away,
chanting "Pigs off campus" and other slogans, and
loudly questioning the legality of Marron's order to
disperse. These demonstrators formed several clusters;
they included a number of members of the
"movement." Other demonstrators, faculty observers,
students, and passersby were farther from the police line
in two grassy areas and in the park lot; they were less
active.
After leaving the Computation Center, the small
clusters of demonstrators near the police lines made no
movement to withdraw in response to Marron's repeated
order. At first the more distant persons also did not
withdraw. Professor Franklin, Marron, and other
witnesses who were near the grassy areas testified,
however, that the more distant crowd began to withdraw
as the order to disperse was repeated. Professor Franklin,
in his affidavit prepared shortly after the event, stated
that he believed "most" of the crowd was beginning to
move back; in his oral testimony at the hearing he stated
that he now believes that a smaller number was
beginning to move away-perhaps only more than half,
or fewer. Marron, Moses, and Waterman, testifying for
the University, and Professor Franklin's witness Owen
Blank in a direct report to KZSU from the scene, all
agreed that the portion of the crowd away from the
police lines was definitely moving back in response to
the repeated announcements to disperse. Most of
Professor Franklin's witnesses, primarily individuals
standing near the front portion of the grassy area nearest
the Computation Center, testified that they did not see
any significant part of the crowd moving back. This
apparent contradiction in testimony is explainable, in
part at least, by the fact that those witnesses who had
reason to be observing the rear part of the crowd saw the
movement away, while those who were focusing their
attention on the police lines and events nearby did not
see the movement of the rear portion of the crowd.
3. Professor Franklin's Role. At this stage, Professor
Franklin moved forward and stood in front of a cluster
of demonstrators who were loudly stating that the order
to disperse was illegal. Some of Professor Franklin's
close political associates were part of this cluster. They
were giving a clenched fist salute while vociferously
denouncing the police order. Professor Franklin,
according to testimony and photographs, stood quietly
in front of this active group and observed what was
occurring. He then moved closer to Tamm, who was near
the police line, and argued briefly and vigorously that
the dispersal order was illegal and he had a right to
remain as a faculty observer. Tamm disagreed on both
points, pointing out that Franklin was not on the official
list of faculty observers supplied by the President's
Office. Professor Franklin then wheeled and strode
toward Dean Lincoln Moses. Moses was some 30-50 feet
farther back, perhaps 40-60 feet from Tamm, and was
beginning to leave in response to the police order.
Professor Franklin called out, "Lincoln Moses!".
Professor Franklin shouted some words like "God damn
it, this happens every time the police charge. The faculty
observers are all gone!" He argued loudly that Moses
should not leave, that the order to disperse was
improper, and that faculty observers, like Moses, should
remain to observe possible police brutality. There is
substantial agreement on what Professor Franklin said to
Moses in this brief but loud set of statements. It is
further agreed that Professor Franklin was heard by a
nearby circle of 10 to 12 persons and by others farther
away; although he was close to Moses, Professor
Franklin was shouting his arguments. Professor Franklin
testified that he was being careful while shouting at
Moses not to use language in describing the police which
would reduce the likelihood of his persuading Moses to

stay. Professor Franklin's statements to Moses took
about a minute and a half. Franklin then headed back
toward the police line, some 40-60 feet away.
Witnesses for the University testified that Professor
Franklin was shouting loudly as soon as he took his first
steps back toward the police lines, angrily denouncing
the police order as illegal. He made his way back to
Tamm, some 50 feet distant, through the substantial
group remaining in the first grassy area. The items of
dispute are whether Professor Franklin was addressing
his shouts to the police or to others in the crowd when
he started shouting, and whether his shouts included
exhortations that people not leave.
4. Testimony that Professor Franklin Urged and
Incited the Crowd to Stay. Moses reports that at first he
was convinced by Franklin's statement that he should
stay as a laculty observer and started to follow Franklin
back toward the police line. However, he goes on,
He meanwhile continued talking. He turned his back
to me and went toward the line, talking loudly
and .. . waving his arms or gesticulating. . . . And as
he went, a group of people formed about him and
went with him. And whether he was addressing only
them or generally all who could hear I wouldn't say.
On cross-examination, Moses said,
Then as you [Franklin] went on, you appeared to me
to be encouraging as many people to come as would
come. And that is what turned me around. ... I felt
that I was just being recruited to be one more person
present. ... I took the whole crowd to be provocative
of the police.
Under further cross-examination by Professor Franklin,
Moses reiterated this testimony and his statement that
Professor Franklin was urging people around him to
disobey the police order and return. Although he
admitted it was "conceivable" that Professor Franklin's
words were solely addressed to the police, he said that
his understanding was clearly to the contrary.
Moses was asked by Professor Franklin on
cross-examination whether Professor Franklin could not
have been merely urging faculty observers to join him in
going towards the police lines. Moses responded that
Professor Franklin was not addressing his remarks to
faculty members but to the entire crowd or all within
the sound of his voice. Moses said, "You spoke to me
about faculty people. And then as you went on you
appeared to me to be encouraging as many people to
come as would come. And that is what turned me
around."
Waterman testified that before Franklin approached
Moses,
.... the crowd was definitely starting to drift back
this way ... in fact they were drifting back in
appreciable numbers. ... I definitely had the
impression that the crisis was past, that people were
leaving, and that the situation was about to calm
down.
He then testified that he observed Franklin at this point
crossing the grass in front of Redwood Hall toward the
police, although Waterman was not sure whether before
or after the Moses encounter,
. . . shouting to the crowd, telling them to come back,
challenging the right of the sheriffs men to declare it
an illegal assembly, and saying that they had a perfect
right to hold a peaceful meeting and that they should
return to do so. .. . He seemed to be shouting in
general to the bunch that were leaving and had gotten
about as far as the second grassy plot.
Broholm, reporting from the scene for KZSU,
reported (a tape recording is available) first that "the
crowd was definitely moving back"; and then that
Professor Franklin "was haranguing the crowd to stay"
and resist the order to disperse, and "was berating the
crowd for leaving." On cross-examination by Professor
Franklin, Broholm confirmed this on-the-scene report:
"After you turned away from Moses you turned back in
that direction and began yelling. And again, "You
turned around, faced back toward the police . . . and
you started yelling in that direction." It is important to
note that Broholm placed the Moses-Franklin encounter
and subsequent Franklin shouting near the edge of the
crosswalk in front of Redwood Hall, at least 60 feet
from Tamm and Marron. Under further
cross-examination, Broholm said that he now doubts the
accuracy of his on-the-scene report that Professor
Franklin was "haranguing the crowd to stay," and that
instead Professor Franklin was probably shouting at
Tamm. He did not, however, change his estimate that
Professor Franklin began shouting in an area some 60
feet from Tamm, who was separated from Professor
Franklin by a substantial number of individuals in the
first grassy area. We believe that Broholm's on-the-scene
account can be presumed more accurate than his
recollection eight months later.
Owen Blank, another KZSU announcer, also reported
from the scene (recorded on tape) that the crowd in the
grassy areas was moving away at first, and then turned
and moved back toward the police line as Professor
Franklin was shouting. As Professor Franklin's witness,
Blank attached the accuracy of the taped reports by
Broholm and Blank or, Professor Franklin's role in
reversing the crowd's dispersal, but Blank's testimony
when related to the times on the taped reports instead
confirms the on-the-scene reports by Broholm and
Blank. Although Broholm and Blank apologized to
Moses for errors in Broholm's reporting at the time,
these errors concerned Moses's alleged assent
to Professor Franklin's urgings, not Professor
Franklin's own behavior.
Professor Edward Begle testified that he saw
Professor Franklin apparently urging a group of young
people to stay at the gathering, but it is not clear
whether this was the group of people around Moses and
the details of his testimony are not confirmed by others.
The witnesses who heard Professor Franklin's words
testified that he, as he strode back towards Tamm, was
angry and shouting, repeating the same arguments as
before, that the order to disperse was illegal and the
crowd should not leave. Moses's, Waterman's and
Broholm's testimony was cited above. Professor
Franklin's witness Doering testified that "He [Professor
Franklin] walked away from Moses a couple of paces,
and I think he said some things on the way." Doering
places the Moses encounter at about the group of birth
trees furthest from the police lines, some 30-40 feet
away.
As Professor Franklin returned to confront Tamm, an
indefinite number of other persons moved along, beside,
or behind him. In moving back toward Tamm, Professor
Franklin moved through a substantial number of persons
between Moses and Tamm. These included some of
Professor Franklin's political associates (identified in
pictures) and others not identified. Thus, it seems
certain that Professor Franklin's shouts against dispersal
would be clearly heard by these persons, whether or not
they were primarily addressed to Tamm, and that
Professor Franklin must surely have known that they
would be received by at least these demonstrators

through whom he advanced, whether or not they were
heard by persons behind Moses and Fiofessor
Franklin in the second grassy area.
5. Testimony that Professor Franklin Did Not Urge
and Incite the Crowd to Stay. On the other hand,
Professor Franklin and many of his witnesses testified
that Professor Franklin spoke only to Moses when he
strode from Tamm to Moses, and that he spoke only to
Tamm when he turned from Moses back toward the
police line. They described his comments to both as not
intended to incite other people to disobey the police
order. One of his witnesses, photographer Harrison,
described both the scene and Professor Franklin's
following confrontation with Tamm as "tranquil."
Another witness, Professor Switzer, described the
atmosphere as a "picnic." But these evaluations are
specifically controverted by pictures, tapes and other
testimony. Nearly all, including Professor Charles Stein
who was near Moses, deny hearing Professor Franklin
directly address anyone other than Moses or Tamm.
Most of Professor Franklin's witnesses testified that they
did not hear, or did not remember, what Professor
Franklin was saying as he strode forward, until he was
close to Tamm (e.g., Pace, Lonsdale, Hunkeler). They
report that they heard him shout only as he neared
Tamm, and then only at Tamm. This, however, is not
inconsistent with Moses', Waterman's and Broholm's
testimony that Professor Franklin was shouting earlier
when much farther from the police. Most of Protessor
Franklin's witnesses were nearer the police line, mainly
facing the police, and hence did not observe Professor
Franklin's entire movement forward. But Doering did,
and testified that Professor Franklin spoke as soon as he
left Moses. Hunkeler did not have Professor Franklin
under constant scrutiny and could hear only a few
words.
Professor Franklin testified that he began to shout at
Tamm from a distance because he wanted to be sure that
Tamm understood why he was returning to the police
line and that his action was intended to be conciliatory
and to lessen the danger of a police charge and arrests of
the demonstrators there. But that he should have done
so at such a great distance seems highly implausible
under the circumstances, and conflicts with considerable
testimony from witnesses from both parties. Clearly,
Professor Franklin did, as he stated, address Tamm,
saying, "Don, this is ridiculous ..." as he approached
Tamm and Marron, apparently from a distance of five to
ten feet; this is confirmed by his witnesses who were
near the police line.
With one exception, Professor Franklin's own
witnesses did not support his version of events as he left
Moses. The only witness for Professor Franklin who gave
evidence contradictory to that of the University
witnesses was Downey, who testified that, although he
was not sure, Professor Franklin was not saying anything
as he left Moses and walked towards the police lines. It is
likely that Downey was confused about the timing of his
interaction with Professor Franklin. Downey testified
that he never was with Professor Franklin until after the
encounter with Moses, but pictures show Downey
standing with Professor Franklin and the group shouting
at the police at a time identified by Professor Franklin's
witnesses as prior to his words with Moses. With this
doubtful exception, Professor Franklin produced no
witness who contradicted the testimony of
Administration witnesses who observed his shouting as
he left Moses at a considerable distance from the police
lines.
Professor Franklin was apparently himself confused
as to the locus of his confrontation with Moses in
relation to the police lines, and, in his testimony, he
minimized the distance from the police lines. He
testified that he was only a few steps away from Tamm
when he turned away from Moses.
One witness for Professor Franklin, Stein, supported
this spatial image by testifying that Professor Franklin
was about 15 feet from the police lines. No other
witness for either party supported Professor Franklin on
this point; indeed, five witnesses for Professor Franklin
directly contradicted him in their testimony.
6. Franklin-Tamm Confrontation and Police Charge.
It is agreed, and supported by photographic evidence,
that after Professor Franklin approached Tamm, a
substantial number of people, approximately 30, closed
in around and behind Professor Franklin as he angrily
confronted Tamm. Professor Franklin testified that he
was aware of people moving in from both sides but he
didn't know how many newsmen were present. Some
witnesses, including Professor Franklin's witness,
Litterman, testified that the crowd threatened to engulf
the police officers and Professor Franklin. Professor
Franklin and Tamm stood face to face shouting angrily
at one another. Witnesses of both parties described the
situation as very tense. Professor Franklin was repeating
his basic arguments and Tamm was denying the validity
of both.
After a very short interval, two, perhaps more,
policemen moved rapidly from behind Tamm and
Marron to try to arrest Professor Franklin, but Professor
Franklin slipped away from them, perhaps with the help
of some of his friends. At almost exactly the same time
the police line moved forward on the demonstrators in
what is commonly called a "police charge."
We note, parenthetically, that we do not consider
Professor Franklin's acknowledged urging of Moses and
other faculty observers to stay to be objectionable under
the charge. Formally designated faculty observers were
asked by the University administration to be present,
even though some, not identified to the police, were
apparently struck during the charge. The presence of
faculty observers could have been expected to reduce
the risk of injury to persons.
7. Findings of Fact. The Board finds the evidence
strongly persuasive that: (a) the police order to disperse
was clearly reasonable, given the illegal seizure of the
Computation Center, possible serious damage to the
computer and data stored there, possible danger to
police and demonstrators outside after the building was
cleared, and the need to return the Center promptly to
normal action without police presence; (b) while some
demonstrators refused to disperse after the building was
cleared, a substantial portion of the crowd was moving
back in response to repeated police orders, prior to
Professor Franklin's intervention; (c) Professor Franklin
played a central role in reversing the movement of the
crowd to disperse and his shouts and behavior
significantly increased the likelihood that a substantial
number of those present would stay; (d) Professor
Franklin intended his shouts after leaving Moses to be
heard by, and to influence the crowd to remain at the
scene in defiance of the police order to disperse.
However, even if lie did not directly address his shouts
to the crowd, he must reasonably have expected that a
result of his shouts would be to incite members of the
crowd to disobey the dispersal order, increasing the risk
to themselves; Professor Franklin's conduct and shouts

cannot reasonably be interpreted as merely attempts to
persuade Moses and other faculty observers to stay, to
conciliate the police or the crowd, or to lessen the
danger of a police charge or arrests with their attendant
dangers to the demonstrators. We comment further on
these findings in the following section.
C. SUPPLEMENTA R Y EVIDENCE AND EINDINGS
A number of points in the testimony require special
attention in order to amplify and interpret the findings
of fact indicated above.
1. Charge of University Negligence. Professor
Franklin suggests that the University administration was
negligent in not announcing to the occupiers of the
Computation Center that work on the disputed SRI
contract had, in fact, been halted one or more days
before, because this information might have been
sufficient to induce the occupiers to leave the
Computation Center peacefully. Alternatively, he
implies that had some official of the University
explained that an investigation was under way, this
might have induced the occupiers to lave the building
voluntarily without the police having to be called.
In fact, SRI had apparently stopped using the
computer for the GAMUT-Hand its other programs
prior to February 10, but it had not informed Stanford
of any policy decision regarding GAMUT-H or other SRI
projects on the Stanford computer. The SRI accounts
had not been cancelled. Moreover, the Stanford
administration at that time believed, on the information
received from SRI, that there was no violation of
University policy; SRI had indicated to the University
administration that the research in question was not
classified and was available for publication. Thus Provost
Miller testified that he did not believe it would be proper
for the University to issue any statement pending receipt
of information on SRl's position on the whole matter.
Moreover, the Computer Facilities Committee of the
University was meeting on the afternoon of February
10, during the occupation, precisely to discuss the issues
raised by the GAMLTT-H program.
We do not agree with Professor Franklin's argument
that the University administration's refusal to negotiate
with, or report to, the Computation Center occupiers
justifies the refusal of the demonstrators to leave the
Computation Center which they were illegally
occupying. Some persons believe the University
administration would have been well advised to issue a
public statement that it was investigating the whole
situation, although we find the University
administration's position on the matter easy to
understand, given the uncertainty about SRl's position
and the fact that the relevant University committee was
in fact meeting at 2 p.m. on the afternoon of the
occupation. But even if the University officials involved
were guilty of faulty administrative judgment, this
would in no way justify the illegal occupation of the
Computation Center and its continuance in the face of
both University and police orders to disperse. Moreover,
it is important to remember that the protestors had
made no direct effort vis-a-vis the administration to halt
the GAMUT-H work beyond one unsigned leaflet,
although they had, according to their own testimony,
known of it for at least a week or two; the Computation
Center sit-in was in no sense a "last resort" step after all
legal avenues were exhausted. The demands of the
occupiers were vague, and we see no reason to believe
that they would have left the Center merely on
notification by the administration that the problem was
under active investigation.
2. Argument that Police Order to Disperse was
Unreasonable and Illegal. Professor Franklin argues that
the police order to disperse was unreasonable and
unlawful-that the crowd outside the Computation
Center was peaceful and within its rights of free
assembly as guaranteed by the First Amendment to the
Constitution. Thus, not only was he within his
constitutional rights in refusing to disperse and urging
others not to disperse, but indeed he was following his
duty as a citizen and a professor in so acting.
California law clearly gives to police the authority to
disperse illegal assemblies and sets out the legal
requirements for such orders. Only a court of law, which
we are not, could finally determine whether in fact the
police declaration of illegal assembly and the order to
disperse in this instance was legal. In our judgment, the
police order to disperse was clearly reasonable and, as we
understand the law, was probably legal as well. An illegal
seizure of the Computation Center had occurred, and
both University and police officials were understandably
concerned lest serious damage be done to the valuable
equipment housed there and to the even more valuable
data stored there. It was widely known that major
damage to computers, totalling millions of dollars, had
been done to other university computers.
The order declaring the occupation of the
Computation Center an illegal assembly and ordering
dispersal was a single order aimed at the occupiers of the
Computation Center when they were inside the building
and at those participating in the demonstration outside
the building, both before and following its evacuation.
Marron's testimony on this point is clear, and it is
confirmed by one of Professor Franklin's wftnesses. He
began giving the complete order before the arrival of the
police and continued with the same order during the
evacuation of the Computation Center and following the
evacuation when part of the demonstrators stayed close
to the Computation Center building. That this order to
evacuate the building was fully warranted can hardly be
denied. It was that same order that insisted that the
demonstrators withdraw a substantial distance from the
building being evacuated.
Moreover, we conclude that the order to disperse
back to Jordan Way outside the building was reasonable
on its own merits as well. The police knew that violence
had occurred on the Stanford campus during
police-demonstrator confrontations several times during
the past few years; the precaution of moving the crowd
back a substantial distance from the police line was
understandable, and was probably calculated to lessen
injury to both the police and the demonstrators. Thus
we conclude that the police order declaring the
demonstration an illegal assembly and ordering dispersal
was clearly reasonable in these circumstances.
Professor Franklin may have had the right as a citizen
briefly to protest the police order which he believed
unreasonable. But, especially given the strongly negative
police response to his first protest which he himself
noted, he surely did not have the right to increase the
risk of injury to others by urging them to stay and
disobey the police order.
3. Argument that Professor Franklin's Action was
Aimed at Conciliation and Reducing Danger to Those
Present. Professor Franklin argues that his action outside
the Computation Center was aimed primarily at
protecting demonstrators from injury or arrest at the
hands of the police that his argument with faculty
observers (and others) to remain and with the police
against the legality of the dispersal order was aimed at
avoiding such danger to the demonstrators. Some of his
witnesses testified that in their judgment Professor
Franklin's purpose was conciliation and avoidance of
danger to the demonstrators.
We find it plausible that Professor Franklin may have
believed that he was acting to protect the rights of his
friends and co-workers in the "movement" in some ol
his actions. It is clear that those in the small group
clustered in front of the police line as the larger group of
demonstrators moved back were largely members of the
"movement," including several of its best known
participants. It thus became increasingly likely that these
individuals would be in the forefront of a police charge
and most likely to be arrested if, in fact, a charge did
occur. That Professor Franklin should endeavor to
prevent the isolation of these individuals from the rest of
the group of demonstrators and passersby is
understandable.
But that he believed that his actions were basically
conciliatory and aimed primarily at lessening the
likelihood of a police charge and arrest is difficult to
accept. His behavior was surely encouraging other people
to remain at greatly increased risks to themselves.
Shouting loudly and angrily at either faculty observers,
the police, or others in the crowd is hardly calculated to
calm crowd or police behavior, or to lessen the
likelihood of violence. Thus, Professor Franklin's loud
shouts as he turned from Moses some 40-60 feet from
the police could hardly have been calculated to calm the
situation. He apparently addressed Tamm by name only
after he had approached within 10 feet or so of the
police; surely he would have done so sooner had his
main goal been to persuade Tamm, and he would have
not shouted to the crowd upon turning away from
Moses. Professor Franklin described Tamm during the
second confrontation as "more immediately hostile than
I had ever seen him before." Moreover, Professor
Franklin himself testified that he knew "for a certainty"
that a police charge or arrest would occur under such
conditions once the police line-up occurred and the
order to disperse was read. He testified that he knew of
no case where such a situation was not followed by a
police charge or arrests. On his own testimony, he had
these points in mind prior to his discussion with Moses
and his shouting return to confront Tamm. Several of
Professor Franklin's witnesses testified that they too
thought a police charge to be highly likely or inevitable,
and became even surer when they saw Professor Franklin
striding back to confront Tamm the second time. Given
this testimony, it is difficult to accept the argument that
Professor Franklin seriously hoped by his actions to
eliminate the possibility of either a police charge or
arrests outside the Computation Center.
It is difficult to believe that Professor Franklin's duty
as a professor encompassed using others to stay and
confront the police when he felt certain that the result
would be a police charge and arrests, with a danger of
serious personal injury (which he testified is likely
whenever a police charge occurs). He testified that he
personally was resolved not to give way to fascism and
was going to stay and confront the police no matter
what happened. He testified, as did several of his
witnesses, that dispersal would be a political defeat for
the "movement" and an important victory for the
police.
Although Professor Franklin felt certain, or almost
certain, that a police charge and arrest would ensue
soon, he did not advise any people in the demonstrator's
group, either those in the "movement" or other
students, of the danger of a police charge, possible
injury, and arrests. Professor Franklin and some of his
close political associates testified of their awareness of
the impending police action at a time when others, less
experienced, did not anticipate any trouble. Professor
Franklin testified:
"My own experience in having been in just lots and
lots of police confrontations, is that if an order is
given declaring something an illegal assembly, telling
people to disperse, once that takes place then there
are basically one of two things that are going to
happen. Either the pigs are going to charge the people
or they're going to move for a mass bust.
"1 don't think I've ever seen a declaration of an illegal
assembly -maybe I have but I certainly can't
remember-l've never seen a declaration of an illegal
assembly not followed by one of those two actions.
Now it can be seconds; it can be minutes. Sometimes
they can declare an area an illegal assembly and then
nothing happens for some period of time and they're
moving what's really happening is they're moving in
for a mass bust. . . .
"And one of the signs you look for in a police line
prior to a charge is whether—one thing is the visors.
The other thing is whether they're smoking or not. If
they're not smoking then you look upon that as, you
know, a charge could take place at any time. And of
course, one of the things that they try to do is to
make the charge unexpected. So once you've got in a
situation the charge could take place the next second
or it might not take place for some time, but
something is going to happen."
Professor Franklin had difficulty explaining his
failure to warn others. He testified:
"As far as the question of whether I talked to
demonstrators on the lawn of the computer center
about the possibility of arrests and beatings and so
forth: I just—l mean, I may have had—it's possible
that I talked to some people about something about
it. But I certainly don't remember that at all, any
more than 1 remember. ... Well, I'm sure that I
didn't urge anybody to stay and I'm sure I didn't urge
anybody to leave, if that's what-if that's what the
point of that question was."
4. Did Professor Franklin Intentionally Urge and
Incite People to Remain in Defiance of the Police Order
to Disperse? The charge states that "Professor Franklin
significantly interfered with orderly dispersal by
intentionally urging and inciting students and other
persons present at the Computation Center to disregard
or disobey such orders to disperse." The evidence seems
to us convincing that the result of Professor Franklin's
behavior was to help significantly to induce students and
other persons present at the Computation Center to
disregard or disobey such orders to disperse. But
Professor Franklin argues that he did not specifically
address any individual other than Moses and Tamm. He
said, "I wouldn't take it upon myself to do that to
people in that situation because I knew that people were
defenseless in that situation." No witness testified that
Professor Franklin directly addressed other specific
individuals, although there is considerable testimony
that he addressed the crowd in more general terms,
$

urging it to resist the allegedly illegal police order to
disperse. The question is whether these shouts and this
behavior, not addressed to specific individuals other than
Moses and Tamm, amount to intentionally urging and
inciting students and other persons to disregard the
police order.
We find the evidence strongly persuasive that
Professor Franklin intentionally urged and incited
students and others present to disregard or disobey the
police orders. His purpose was to encourage others to
remain. Except for his own denial, all percipient
witnesses testified that Professor Franklin, after leaving
Moses, directly addressed his shouts to the crowd. But
even it he did not directly address the crowd, he must
have expected the likely effect of his behavior under
those circumstances to be to urge and incite others to
stay. Professor Franklin surely would not need to have
addressed each individual by name to have urged them
to stay.
The conclusion that the incitement was intentional is
reinforced by Professor Franklin's testimony that, even
knowing the results of his actions, he would not have
changed his behavior outside the Computation Center.
He said, "The only reasonable course of action that I
could see was what 1 did. And in looking back on it now
from, 1 don't know, eight or nine months, I still can't see
any other alternative."
The charge is not that Professor Franklin disobeyed
the police order himself, but that he intentionally
incited others to disobey the order. His behavior
increased the risk to others, a risk of which many were
unaware. The evidence meets the standards for
incitement that we set out earlier.
CONCLUSION
We find the evidence strongly persuasive that
Professor Franklin ' did significantly interfere with
orderly dispersal following the clearing of the
Computation Center by intentionally urging and inciting
students and other persons present to disregard or
disobey such orders to disperse, that this police order to
disperse was clearly reasonable under the circumstances,
and that Professor Franklin's conduct and speech did
substantially increase the danger of injury to other
persons.
DISSENTING OPINION
Professors Brown and Kennedy, although in accord
with much of the descriptive account of the majority
report on the events outside the Computation Center,
dissent as follows:
We place a sufficiently different interpretive weight
on the evidence at certain crucial points to make us
unable to sustain the charge.
1. The first of these centers on an element of
Professor Franklin's conduct that is central in the
testimony of virtually every witness, his concern that
faculty members remain as observers-a concern without
which many of his actions remain inexplicable. This is a
major substantive point in the conversations with Tamm
and Moses, it persuades Professor Eklof to stay on the
scene when he had decided to leave and persuades
Professor Moses in retrospect that perhaps he should
have stayed, it is a subject Professor Franklin pursues
with Professor Hastorf after the police charge, and it is
the dominant concern in Professor Franldin's later
conversation with Litterman and in a speech in front of
President Lyman's office. He asserts that he felt (a) that
the continuing presence of faculty observers might avert

a police charge, (b) that "respectable" faculty like Moses
might help him persuade the police of the right of
people to remain, and (c) that if there were a charge, the
faculty presence might minimize its brutality. He
testified that he felt a police charge would be
"inevitable" if there was a "withdrawal of the faculty
observers and other kinds of neutral people who had
made up a significant section of that crowd."
We agree with the majority report that "the presence
of faculty observers could have been expected to reduce
the risk of injury to persons." However, that fact,
coupled with Professor Franklin's own concern to keep
faculty observers on the scene, cause us to dissent from
the majority conclusion: "that he believed his actions
were basically conciliatory and aimed primarily at
lessening the likelihood of a police charge and arrest is
difficult to accept." We find the conclusion plausible
rather than difficult even though we believe that
Professor Franklin's manner of seeking this end was
unwise.
2. A second difference of interpretation involves fact
more than motivation, and we find the call a close one
either way. This concerns the crucial period between the
time Professor Franklin leaves Moses and the time he is
back in conversation with Tamm, some 40 to 60 feet
away. His own witnesses state that he was shouting
loudly during these moments, but assert, along with him,
that the comments were addressed only to Moses and
Tamm. The majority report believes that in addition he
spoke directly to others, and that, even if he had not, his
voice and demeanor were such that others would
inevitably hear him, and that he should have known that
his words and actions would influence them not to
disperse. Broholm and Blank are no longer completely
sure that Professor Franklin was directly haranguing the
crowd, although that was their on-the-spot impression.
Moses believes he was, though his assessment is
predicated on action after Professor Franklin turned his
back on him, so that the direction of the shouts is only
conjecture. Waterman believes Professor Franklin was
directly enlisting crowd support, but his timing of the
event is uncertain, and he saw only Professor Franklin's
back and left side. The identity of his audience is thus
once again conjecture. It is clear, however, that by the
time Professor Franklin was within ten feet of Tamm he
was yelling directly at him such words as, "Hey, Don,
this is ridiculous . . . In the interval he was apparently
asserting "that it was not an illegal assembly, and that
people should stay," though no witness produced
unshakeable testimony that he shouted this directly at
individuals within the crowd.
The possible reconstructions not all mutually
exclusive, are (a) that he spoke directly to Moses and
Tamm, but that he was overheard by others, some of
whom responded to his exhortations, (b) that he was
directly urging members of the crowd to stay, or (c) that
he was expressing his disgust and anger at the police
order either to the heavens or to onlookers in general,
rather than as specific instructions to members of the
crowd. There is clear evidence for the first alternative,
evidence (though less persuasive) for the second, and
plausibility for the third. The weight one puts on such
alternative explanations, and the interpretation one
makes of Professor Franklin's actions during these
moments, is dependent on a third consideration.
3. The third matter Involves an element in Professor
Franklin's conduct that, like the first, appears in the
testimony of virtually every witness: his strongly stated
conviction that the police order to disperse was illegal.

This is the second substantive point of his conversations
with both Moses and Tamm. We accept the majority
opinion that it is beyond our province or expertise to
determine whether or not the order was legal, and with
the majority "we conclude that the police order
declaring this demonstration an illegal assembly and
ordering dispersal was clearly reasonable in these
circumstances."
However, if a citizen wishes to question a police order
he believes unreasonable and unlawful, he has the right
to do so for a limited period of time. We place great
weight on this right, and believe that at least in part
Professor Franklin was trying to assert it: he believed the
order to be both unreasonable and unlawful, and so he
exercised the right of a citizen to object to it, in a brief
initial dispute with Tamm, in the attempt to enlist
Moses, and then in the second heated exchange with
Tamm. Ihe elapsed time of these three conversations
was probably no more than three or four minutes. To
Professor Franklin, standing on the grassy area where all
witnesses agree that they had seen no illegal acts, the
order to disperse may have seemed patently
unreasonable. That the Board in hindsight does not share
this assessment does not diminish the right of Professor
Franklin to have held it at the time or to have acted
upon it, lor a reasonable length of time, in the name of
the right of peaceable assembly. The fact that the mood
of the crowd immediately following the evacuation of
the Computation Center was reasonably calm and may
have caused no immediate danger to the police or the
building gives added legitimacy to the right, under such
conditions, to make a brief protest against the order, and
even to seek faculty help in so doing. That Professor
Franklin tried to enlist the aid of Professor Moses in his
exercise of this right is looked upon by no member of
the Board as culpable. It is even arguable that Professor
Franklin, if he did indeed urge "students and others" to
remain, was not engaging in culpable action, but only
reminding them of their own rights as citizens to protest,
at least briefly, an order that might be considered
unlawful or unreasonable.
4. The accumulation of the above considerations
leads us to believe (a) that Professor Franklin tried to get
other faculty members to remain on the scene in order
to reduce the likelihood of a police charge, (b) that his
continuing argument about the order to disperse was an
attempt to protest a police decision he felt to be illegal,
and one which as a citizen he had a right to protest, at
least briefly, and (c) that these two strongly held
convictions, uncontested in the testimony, led him to
loud and angry shouting, clearly directed at Moses and
Tamm, and possibly though not so clearly directed at
others, centering on the need for faculty observers to
stay, and the right of others to stay. The University's
Supplementary Written Brief states, "The issue is
whether a faculty member in a situation laden with the
risk of violent confrontation between demonstrators and
the police is acting properly when by his conduct he
increases that risk." We conclude that, even if one
accepts this as a statement of "the issue," such a
description does not adequately match the conduct
charged, and that there is not in our view strongly
persuasive evidence that his words or actions constituted
an incitement. Consequently, the charge that "Professor
Franklin did significantly interfere with orderly dispersal
by intentionally urging and inciting students and other
persons present at the Computation Center to disregard
or disobey such orders to disperse" is not one that we
can sustain.
A. CHARGES
The relevant University charge concerning the
Computation Center incident is contained in paragraph 9
of the "Statement of Charges."
9. Further, on February 10, 1971 and in connection
with the activity at the Computation Center
described in paragraph 8, students and other persons
were arrested for failure to disperse after orders had
been given to clear an area around the Computation
Center. Professor Franklin signilicantly interfered
with orderly dispersal by intentionally urging and
inciting students and other persons present at the
Computation Center to disregard or disobey such
orders to disperse.
B. FINDING OF FACTS
1. Occupation of the Computation Center. Shortly
before 1:00 p.m. on February 10, 1971, the
Computation Center building was closed on the basis of
a telephone order from Provost Miller, but the computer
was kept running. Handwritten notices were posted on
the doors of the Computation Center; doors, windows,
and gates were locked; and two campus policemen were
stationed at the front door. Provost Miller had been
informed that a group was proceeding from White Plaza
to the Computation Center. An estimated 100 to 200
demonstrators arrived at the Computation Center
shortly after 1:00 p.m. There were apparently no
previous collective decisions or explicit understandings
by the group as to what actions were to be taken or as to
whether to damage the computer. Some subgroups may
have had previous understandings; different individuals
testified as to different expectations. There were no
plans for formal picketing with picket signs as in many
"strikes," and there had been no attempt to
communicate with Computation Center workers about a
strike after the Dinkelspiel meeting of February 9.
At about 1:15 p.m., forcible entry was made into the
Computation Center; the gate was scaled and the back
door forced. About 50 demonstrators then entered
through the back door. As they moved through the
building, they opened other entrances and admitted
other demonstrators. Power to the building and to the
computer was shut off at 1:20 by pulling a master
switch located near the back door. Some 100-200 more
persons entered and milled about inside the
Computation Center. Some demonstrators, according to
officials of the Center, jimmied the door and entered the
machine room. They went to the 2301 drums, yanked
out wires, and flipped switches behind gates or doors on
two of the data storage drums. Other demonstrators in
that group went directly to the racks where tape reels
were stored and began looking through them. The
telephone lines were made inoperative. Once
demonstrators were inside the building and the doors
were thrown open, the Stanford police did not try to

stop movement in and out of the building. Some of the
demonstrators posted themselves at the doors, and to
some extent controlled entry and exit, for example,
denying entry to a photographer.
During this period, there was a continual movement
of demonstrators into and out of the Computation
Center. It is agreed that some time during the
occupation approximately $800 of physical damage was
done to the premises and contents of the Computation
Center, not counting any costs of shut-down time on the
computer. This damage was partly caused by the pulling
of the wires and damage to the 2301 unit, partly to the
premises. Two fire hoses were taken out of racks arid
valves opened, but the water had been turned off earlier
by the University. The printout of each of three printers
was removed. It is agreed that no substantial damage was
done to the computer itself. However, the shutdown,
lasting until about 8:00 p.m., made it impossible for the
Computation Center to process 700-800 student and
faculty jobs scheduled for that period. Montgomery
testified that these jobs would be run during the
succeeding two weeks.
Given the fact that the demonstrators illegally seized
the Computation Center and made impossible
continuation of its regular activities, the Board does not
consider further details on the conduct of the occupiers
important for Charge 9 against Professor Franklin. It
should be noted that the occupiers refused to obey the
requests to leave the building required by law-by Bruce
Wiggins on behalf of Stanford University and by Officers
Marron, Rosa and Tamm of the Santa Clara Sheriffs
office. However, as a context for other events, we note
briefly some undisputed facts concerning the
occupation.
Professor Franklin met his 1:15 class. Only seven of
the 150 registered students were present. He believed the
others were at the Computation Center and suggested
moving the class to the area outside the Center.
Professor Franklin did not hold his class because, he
testified, many of his students were inside the
Computation Center. It is uncontested that he remained
outside the Computation Center, talking with individuals
about a variety of topics prior to the arrival of the
police.
Bruce Wiggins, Stanford Director of Public Safety,
arrived at the Computation Center soon after its
occupation. He walked through and around the building
with Assistant Fire Chief Barr. Soon thereafter, around
2:00 p.m., he telephoned the Santa Clara Sheriffs office
and told them of the occupation.
Shortly after 2:00 p.m., C. D. Marron of the Santa
Clara Sheriffs office arrived at the Computation Center.
He too walked through the building, and then went to
Redwood Hall nearby to confer with Wiggins and others,
including Messrs. Rosenzweig and Schwartz from the

University administration, Sergeant Tamm and Captain
Rosa of the Santa Clara Sheriffs office, and an Assistant
District Attorney of Santa Clara County.
At about 3:00 p.m., it was decided that Wiggins
should return to the Computation Center and issue, in
the name of Stanford University, a declaration of
trespass, declaring the occupation a violation of Stanford
University regulations and ordering the occupants to
leave immediately. Wiggins used a bullhorn as he moved
through the building making this declaration. Wiggins
claims he was jostled, pushed and shoved; it is agreed
that his announcement was greeted by jeers and catcalls,
and that virtually no one left the building in response to
his order. He then returned to the group at Redwood
Hall.
At some point, probably after 3:00 p.m., an informal
meeting was held by the demonstrators. It was chaired
by Janet Weiss, near the door of the Computation
Center, partly inside and partly outside the building.
Although reports on this meeting are somewhat
confused, apparently there was an informal discussion as
to what to do, including whether to continue the
occupation of the Computation Center, what to do if
the police came, and whether to damage the computer.
The discussion, according to Harry Press, a University
witness, included talk about what would be the impact
on student support if the computer were wrecked. Janet
Weiss is reported to have stressed the political neutrality
of machines, urging that they not be damaged.
Apparently agreement was reached to stay in the
Computation Center until the police came, and then to
leave voluntarily without damaging the computer.
Station KZSU, misunderstanding this vote, reported that
the occupiers would damage the computer, but Janet
Weiss asked them to broadcast a retraction of that
report. There may have been other, smaller meetings of
the occupiers during the afternoon; testimony on this
question is confusing.
At about 4:00 p.m., the group in Redwood Hall
decided that Messrs. Marron, Rosa, and Tamm would go
back to the Computation Center and again try to
persuade the occupants to leave voluntarily. They did so,
asking what the occupants wanted, calling attention to
the vulnerability of the computer and the data it
contained, and to possible injury to persons in the
University and in the hospital. The responses of the
demonstrators were that the occupants wanted to get
the Gamut-H program, SRI research, and war-related
research out of the Computation Center; the precise
nature of all the demands is unclear. Marron testified
that there were scattered shouts of "Down with SRI"
and "Get SRI out." Few if any of the occupiers left. The
three officers returned to Redwood Hall.
After further discussion by the group in Redwood
Hall, the three officers again returned to the
Computation Center. The police announced to the
occupants that they had been informed that the SRI
work had been stopped at the Computation Center.
Some demonstrators replied that such word was not
good enough, and they wanted a written statement from
President Lyman. After a brief discussion, the police said
there was nothing more that could be done, and the
three officers returned again to Redwood Hall.
2. Order to Disperse and Police Arrival. Police
officers had been called and their arrival was imminent.
Just before they were expected to arrive, Marron went
out to the front steps of Redwood Hall, and, using a
bullhorn, he made a formal statement declaring the
occupation of the Center and its immediately adjacent
territory unlawful and ordering the demonstrators to
disperse, also stating that they were subject to arrest if
they did not do so. It is uncontested that he made this
announcement three times, pointing in three different
directions, with one aimed directly at the people inside
the Computation Center and the two others at the
people in the area outside the Computation Center to his
left and right. There was no response to these orders to
disperse, although Professor Franklin's witness
Litterman said he heard them.
Very soon thereafter, the police arrived and entered
the Computation Center. Lookouts for the occupiers
observed the police arrival and notified those inside, so
that the occupiers left the building rapidly just as the
police were entering from another direction. The police
made no arrests in the building, although they indicated
that they would have made arrests if the occupiers had
remained in the building. Marron entered the building
immediately after the police, continuing to declare the
assembly an unlawful one, ordering dispersal, and
threatening arrest for any who did not obey the order to
disperse. Since the Computation Center had been
cleared, he then went outside and walked clockwise
around the building continuing to give his order to
disperse. He continued his series of announcements and,
by his testimony, returned to the front of the
Computation Center about eight minutes after the
arrival of the police. A double line of police had been
formed in front of the Center. Marron repeated his
complete order at least three or four times in front of
the Computation Center, stating that the area from the
Computation Center to Jordan Way was to be cleared.
Some demonstrators did not hear or did not know the
extent of the prohibited area. Marron testified that
ordering dispersal from a wide area was common police
practice. He testified to his concern that the police
officers under his command would be vulnerable to
rock-throwing and possible injury if the demonstrators
were permitted to stay close to the police lines and the
building which had just been cleared. As long as a
confrontation between demonstrators and police
persisted, indefinite police presence would have been
necessary to protect the building and computer.
As police lines were formed in front of the
Computation Center and as Marron repeated his
announcement, some clusters of demonstrators remained
in front of the police line, perhaps six to ten feet away,
chanting "Pigs off campus" and other slogans, and
loudly questioning the legality of Marron's order to
disperse. These demonstrators formed several clusters;
they included a number of members of the
"movement." Other demonstrators, faculty observers,
students, and passersby were farther from the police line
in two grassy areas and in the park lot; they were less
active.
After leaving the Computation Center, the small
clusters of demonstrators near the police lines made no
movement to withdraw in response to Marron's repeated
order. At first the more distant persons also did not
withdraw. Professor Franklin, Marron, and other
witnesses who were near the grassy areas testified,
however, that the more distant crowd began to withdraw
as the order to disperse was repeated. Professor Franklin,
in his affidavit prepared shortly after the event, stated
that he believed "most" of the crowd was beginning to
move back; in his oral testimony at the hearing he stated
that he now believes that a smaller number was
beginning to move away-perhaps only more than half,
or fewer. Marron, Moses, and Waterman, testifying for
the University, and Professor Franklin's witness Owen
Blank in a direct report to KZSU from the scene, all
agreed that the portion of the crowd away from the
police lines was definitely moving back in response to
the repeated announcements to disperse. Most of
Professor Franklin's witnesses, primarily individuals
standing near the front portion of the grassy area nearest
the Computation Center, testified that they did not see
any significant part of the crowd moving back. This
apparent contradiction in testimony is explainable, in
part at least, by the fact that those witnesses who had
reason to be observing the rear part of the crowd saw the
movement away, while those who were focusing their
attention on the police lines and events nearby did not
see the movement of the rear portion of the crowd.
3. Professor Franklin's Role. At this stage, Professor
Franklin moved forward and stood in front of a cluster
of demonstrators who were loudly stating that the order
to disperse was illegal. Some of Professor Franklin's
close political associates were part of this cluster. They
were giving a clenched fist salute while vociferously
denouncing the police order. Professor Franklin,
according to testimony and photographs, stood quietly
in front of this active group and observed what was
occurring. He then moved closer to Tamm, who was near
the police line, and argued briefly and vigorously that
the dispersal order was illegal and he had a right to
remain as a faculty observer. Tamm disagreed on both
points, pointing out that Franklin was not on the official
list of faculty observers supplied by the President's
Office. Professor Franklin then wheeled and strode
toward Dean Lincoln Moses. Moses was some 30-50 feet
farther back, perhaps 40-60 feet from Tamm, and was
beginning to leave in response to the police order.
Professor Franklin called out, "Lincoln Moses!".
Professor Franklin shouted some words like "God damn
it, this happens every time the police charge. The faculty
observers are all gone!" He argued loudly that Moses
should not leave, that the order to disperse was
improper, and that faculty observers, like Moses, should
remain to observe possible police brutality. There is
substantial agreement on what Professor Franklin said to
Moses in this brief but loud set of statements. It is
further agreed that Professor Franklin was heard by a
nearby circle of 10 to 12 persons and by others farther
away; although he was close to Moses, Professor
Franklin was shouting his arguments. Professor Franklin
testified that he was being careful while shouting at
Moses not to use language in describing the police which
would reduce the likelihood of his persuading Moses to

stay. Professor Franklin's statements to Moses took
about a minute and a half. Franklin then headed back
toward the police line, some 40-60 feet away.
Witnesses for the University testified that Professor
Franklin was shouting loudly as soon as he took his first
steps back toward the police lines, angrily denouncing
the police order as illegal. He made his way back to
Tamm, some 50 feet distant, through the substantial
group remaining in the first grassy area. The items of
dispute are whether Professor Franklin was addressing
his shouts to the police or to others in the crowd when
he started shouting, and whether his shouts included
exhortations that people not leave.
4. Testimony that Professor Franklin Urged and
Incited the Crowd to Stay. Moses reports that at first he
was convinced by Franklin's statement that he should
stay as a laculty observer and started to follow Franklin
back toward the police line. However, he goes on,
He meanwhile continued talking. He turned his back
to me and went toward the line, talking loudly
and .. . waving his arms or gesticulating. . . . And as
he went, a group of people formed about him and
went with him. And whether he was addressing only
them or generally all who could hear I wouldn't say.
On cross-examination, Moses said,
Then as you [Franklin] went on, you appeared to me
to be encouraging as many people to come as would
come. And that is what turned me around. ... I felt
that I was just being recruited to be one more person
present. ... I took the whole crowd to be provocative
of the police.
Under further cross-examination by Professor Franklin,
Moses reiterated this testimony and his statement that
Professor Franklin was urging people around him to
disobey the police order and return. Although he
admitted it was "conceivable" that Professor Franklin's
words were solely addressed to the police, he said that
his understanding was clearly to the contrary.
Moses was asked by Professor Franklin on
cross-examination whether Professor Franklin could not
have been merely urging faculty observers to join him in
going towards the police lines. Moses responded that
Professor Franklin was not addressing his remarks to
faculty members but to the entire crowd or all within
the sound of his voice. Moses said, "You spoke to me
about faculty people. And then as you went on you
appeared to me to be encouraging as many people to
come as would come. And that is what turned me
around."
Waterman testified that before Franklin approached
Moses,
.... the crowd was definitely starting to drift back
this way ... in fact they were drifting back in
appreciable numbers. ... I definitely had the
impression that the crisis was past, that people were
leaving, and that the situation was about to calm
down.
He then testified that he observed Franklin at this point
crossing the grass in front of Redwood Hall toward the
police, although Waterman was not sure whether before
or after the Moses encounter,
. . . shouting to the crowd, telling them to come back,
challenging the right of the sheriffs men to declare it
an illegal assembly, and saying that they had a perfect
right to hold a peaceful meeting and that they should
return to do so. .. . He seemed to be shouting in
general to the bunch that were leaving and had gotten
about as far as the second grassy plot.
Broholm, reporting from the scene for KZSU,
reported (a tape recording is available) first that "the
crowd was definitely moving back"; and then that
Professor Franklin "was haranguing the crowd to stay"
and resist the order to disperse, and "was berating the
crowd for leaving." On cross-examination by Professor
Franklin, Broholm confirmed this on-the-scene report:
"After you turned away from Moses you turned back in
that direction and began yelling. And again, "You
turned around, faced back toward the police . . . and
you started yelling in that direction." It is important to
note that Broholm placed the Moses-Franklin encounter
and subsequent Franklin shouting near the edge of the
crosswalk in front of Redwood Hall, at least 60 feet
from Tamm and Marron. Under further
cross-examination, Broholm said that he now doubts the
accuracy of his on-the-scene report that Professor
Franklin was "haranguing the crowd to stay," and that
instead Professor Franklin was probably shouting at
Tamm. He did not, however, change his estimate that
Professor Franklin began shouting in an area some 60
feet from Tamm, who was separated from Professor
Franklin by a substantial number of individuals in the
first grassy area. We believe that Broholm's on-the-scene
account can be presumed more accurate than his
recollection eight months later.
Owen Blank, another KZSU announcer, also reported
from the scene (recorded on tape) that the crowd in the
grassy areas was moving away at first, and then turned
and moved back toward the police line as Professor
Franklin was shouting. As Professor Franklin's witness,
Blank attached the accuracy of the taped reports by
Broholm and Blank or, Professor Franklin's role in
reversing the crowd's dispersal, but Blank's testimony
when related to the times on the taped reports instead
confirms the on-the-scene reports by Broholm and
Blank. Although Broholm and Blank apologized to
Moses for errors in Broholm's reporting at the time,
these errors concerned Moses's alleged assent
to Professor Franklin's urgings, not Professor
Franklin's own behavior.
Professor Edward Begle testified that he saw
Professor Franklin apparently urging a group of young
people to stay at the gathering, but it is not clear
whether this was the group of people around Moses and
the details of his testimony are not confirmed by others.
The witnesses who heard Professor Franklin's words
testified that he, as he strode back towards Tamm, was
angry and shouting, repeating the same arguments as
before, that the order to disperse was illegal and the
crowd should not leave. Moses's, Waterman's and
Broholm's testimony was cited above. Professor
Franklin's witness Doering testified that "He [Professor
Franklin] walked away from Moses a couple of paces,
and I think he said some things on the way." Doering
places the Moses encounter at about the group of birth
trees furthest from the police lines, some 30-40 feet
away.
As Professor Franklin returned to confront Tamm, an
indefinite number of other persons moved along, beside,
or behind him. In moving back toward Tamm, Professor
Franklin moved through a substantial number of persons
between Moses and Tamm. These included some of
Professor Franklin's political associates (identified in
pictures) and others not identified. Thus, it seems
certain that Professor Franklin's shouts against dispersal
would be clearly heard by these persons, whether or not
they were primarily addressed to Tamm, and that
Professor Franklin must surely have known that they
would be received by at least these demonstrators

through whom he advanced, whether or not they were
heard by persons behind Moses and Fiofessor
Franklin in the second grassy area.
5. Testimony that Professor Franklin Did Not Urge
and Incite the Crowd to Stay. On the other hand,
Professor Franklin and many of his witnesses testified
that Professor Franklin spoke only to Moses when he
strode from Tamm to Moses, and that he spoke only to
Tamm when he turned from Moses back toward the
police line. They described his comments to both as not
intended to incite other people to disobey the police
order. One of his witnesses, photographer Harrison,
described both the scene and Professor Franklin's
following confrontation with Tamm as "tranquil."
Another witness, Professor Switzer, described the
atmosphere as a "picnic." But these evaluations are
specifically controverted by pictures, tapes and other
testimony. Nearly all, including Professor Charles Stein
who was near Moses, deny hearing Professor Franklin
directly address anyone other than Moses or Tamm.
Most of Professor Franklin's witnesses testified that they
did not hear, or did not remember, what Professor
Franklin was saying as he strode forward, until he was
close to Tamm (e.g., Pace, Lonsdale, Hunkeler). They
report that they heard him shout only as he neared
Tamm, and then only at Tamm. This, however, is not
inconsistent with Moses', Waterman's and Broholm's
testimony that Professor Franklin was shouting earlier
when much farther from the police. Most of Protessor
Franklin's witnesses were nearer the police line, mainly
facing the police, and hence did not observe Professor
Franklin's entire movement forward. But Doering did,
and testified that Professor Franklin spoke as soon as he
left Moses. Hunkeler did not have Professor Franklin
under constant scrutiny and could hear only a few
words.
Professor Franklin testified that he began to shout at
Tamm from a distance because he wanted to be sure that
Tamm understood why he was returning to the police
line and that his action was intended to be conciliatory
and to lessen the danger of a police charge and arrests of
the demonstrators there. But that he should have done
so at such a great distance seems highly implausible
under the circumstances, and conflicts with considerable
testimony from witnesses from both parties. Clearly,
Professor Franklin did, as he stated, address Tamm,
saying, "Don, this is ridiculous ..." as he approached
Tamm and Marron, apparently from a distance of five to
ten feet; this is confirmed by his witnesses who were
near the police line.
With one exception, Professor Franklin's own
witnesses did not support his version of events as he left
Moses. The only witness for Professor Franklin who gave
evidence contradictory to that of the University
witnesses was Downey, who testified that, although he
was not sure, Professor Franklin was not saying anything
as he left Moses and walked towards the police lines. It is
likely that Downey was confused about the timing of his
interaction with Professor Franklin. Downey testified
that he never was with Professor Franklin until after the
encounter with Moses, but pictures show Downey
standing with Professor Franklin and the group shouting
at the police at a time identified by Professor Franklin's
witnesses as prior to his words with Moses. With this
doubtful exception, Professor Franklin produced no
witness who contradicted the testimony of
Administration witnesses who observed his shouting as
he left Moses at a considerable distance from the police
lines.
Professor Franklin was apparently himself confused
as to the locus of his confrontation with Moses in
relation to the police lines, and, in his testimony, he
minimized the distance from the police lines. He
testified that he was only a few steps away from Tamm
when he turned away from Moses.
One witness for Professor Franklin, Stein, supported
this spatial image by testifying that Professor Franklin
was about 15 feet from the police lines. No other
witness for either party supported Professor Franklin on
this point; indeed, five witnesses for Professor Franklin
directly contradicted him in their testimony.
6. Franklin-Tamm Confrontation and Police Charge.
It is agreed, and supported by photographic evidence,
that after Professor Franklin approached Tamm, a
substantial number of people, approximately 30, closed
in around and behind Professor Franklin as he angrily
confronted Tamm. Professor Franklin testified that he
was aware of people moving in from both sides but he
didn't know how many newsmen were present. Some
witnesses, including Professor Franklin's witness,
Litterman, testified that the crowd threatened to engulf
the police officers and Professor Franklin. Professor
Franklin and Tamm stood face to face shouting angrily
at one another. Witnesses of both parties described the
situation as very tense. Professor Franklin was repeating
his basic arguments and Tamm was denying the validity
of both.
After a very short interval, two, perhaps more,
policemen moved rapidly from behind Tamm and
Marron to try to arrest Professor Franklin, but Professor
Franklin slipped away from them, perhaps with the help
of some of his friends. At almost exactly the same time
the police line moved forward on the demonstrators in
what is commonly called a "police charge."
We note, parenthetically, that we do not consider
Professor Franklin's acknowledged urging of Moses and
other faculty observers to stay to be objectionable under
the charge. Formally designated faculty observers were
asked by the University administration to be present,
even though some, not identified to the police, were
apparently struck during the charge. The presence of
faculty observers could have been expected to reduce
the risk of injury to persons.
7. Findings of Fact. The Board finds the evidence
strongly persuasive that: (a) the police order to disperse
was clearly reasonable, given the illegal seizure of the
Computation Center, possible serious damage to the
computer and data stored there, possible danger to
police and demonstrators outside after the building was
cleared, and the need to return the Center promptly to
normal action without police presence; (b) while some
demonstrators refused to disperse after the building was
cleared, a substantial portion of the crowd was moving
back in response to repeated police orders, prior to
Professor Franklin's intervention; (c) Professor Franklin
played a central role in reversing the movement of the
crowd to disperse and his shouts and behavior
significantly increased the likelihood that a substantial
number of those present would stay; (d) Professor
Franklin intended his shouts after leaving Moses to be
heard by, and to influence the crowd to remain at the
scene in defiance of the police order to disperse.
However, even if lie did not directly address his shouts
to the crowd, he must reasonably have expected that a
result of his shouts would be to incite members of the
crowd to disobey the dispersal order, increasing the risk
to themselves; Professor Franklin's conduct and shouts

cannot reasonably be interpreted as merely attempts to
persuade Moses and other faculty observers to stay, to
conciliate the police or the crowd, or to lessen the
danger of a police charge or arrests with their attendant
dangers to the demonstrators. We comment further on
these findings in the following section.
C. SUPPLEMENTA R Y EVIDENCE AND EINDINGS
A number of points in the testimony require special
attention in order to amplify and interpret the findings
of fact indicated above.
1. Charge of University Negligence. Professor
Franklin suggests that the University administration was
negligent in not announcing to the occupiers of the
Computation Center that work on the disputed SRI
contract had, in fact, been halted one or more days
before, because this information might have been
sufficient to induce the occupiers to leave the
Computation Center peacefully. Alternatively, he
implies that had some official of the University
explained that an investigation was under way, this
might have induced the occupiers to lave the building
voluntarily without the police having to be called.
In fact, SRI had apparently stopped using the
computer for the GAMUT-Hand its other programs
prior to February 10, but it had not informed Stanford
of any policy decision regarding GAMUT-H or other SRI
projects on the Stanford computer. The SRI accounts
had not been cancelled. Moreover, the Stanford
administration at that time believed, on the information
received from SRI, that there was no violation of
University policy; SRI had indicated to the University
administration that the research in question was not
classified and was available for publication. Thus Provost
Miller testified that he did not believe it would be proper
for the University to issue any statement pending receipt
of information on SRl's position on the whole matter.
Moreover, the Computer Facilities Committee of the
University was meeting on the afternoon of February
10, during the occupation, precisely to discuss the issues
raised by the GAMLTT-H program.
We do not agree with Professor Franklin's argument
that the University administration's refusal to negotiate
with, or report to, the Computation Center occupiers
justifies the refusal of the demonstrators to leave the
Computation Center which they were illegally
occupying. Some persons believe the University
administration would have been well advised to issue a
public statement that it was investigating the whole
situation, although we find the University
administration's position on the matter easy to
understand, given the uncertainty about SRl's position
and the fact that the relevant University committee was
in fact meeting at 2 p.m. on the afternoon of the
occupation. But even if the University officials involved
were guilty of faulty administrative judgment, this
would in no way justify the illegal occupation of the
Computation Center and its continuance in the face of
both University and police orders to disperse. Moreover,
it is important to remember that the protestors had
made no direct effort vis-a-vis the administration to halt
the GAMUT-H work beyond one unsigned leaflet,
although they had, according to their own testimony,
known of it for at least a week or two; the Computation
Center sit-in was in no sense a "last resort" step after all
legal avenues were exhausted. The demands of the
occupiers were vague, and we see no reason to believe
that they would have left the Center merely on
notification by the administration that the problem was
under active investigation.
2. Argument that Police Order to Disperse was
Unreasonable and Illegal. Professor Franklin argues that
the police order to disperse was unreasonable and
unlawful-that the crowd outside the Computation
Center was peaceful and within its rights of free
assembly as guaranteed by the First Amendment to the
Constitution. Thus, not only was he within his
constitutional rights in refusing to disperse and urging
others not to disperse, but indeed he was following his
duty as a citizen and a professor in so acting.
California law clearly gives to police the authority to
disperse illegal assemblies and sets out the legal
requirements for such orders. Only a court of law, which
we are not, could finally determine whether in fact the
police declaration of illegal assembly and the order to
disperse in this instance was legal. In our judgment, the
police order to disperse was clearly reasonable and, as we
understand the law, was probably legal as well. An illegal
seizure of the Computation Center had occurred, and
both University and police officials were understandably
concerned lest serious damage be done to the valuable
equipment housed there and to the even more valuable
data stored there. It was widely known that major
damage to computers, totalling millions of dollars, had
been done to other university computers.
The order declaring the occupation of the
Computation Center an illegal assembly and ordering
dispersal was a single order aimed at the occupiers of the
Computation Center when they were inside the building
and at those participating in the demonstration outside
the building, both before and following its evacuation.
Marron's testimony on this point is clear, and it is
confirmed by one of Professor Franklin's wftnesses. He
began giving the complete order before the arrival of the
police and continued with the same order during the
evacuation of the Computation Center and following the
evacuation when part of the demonstrators stayed close
to the Computation Center building. That this order to
evacuate the building was fully warranted can hardly be
denied. It was that same order that insisted that the
demonstrators withdraw a substantial distance from the
building being evacuated.
Moreover, we conclude that the order to disperse
back to Jordan Way outside the building was reasonable
on its own merits as well. The police knew that violence
had occurred on the Stanford campus during
police-demonstrator confrontations several times during
the past few years; the precaution of moving the crowd
back a substantial distance from the police line was
understandable, and was probably calculated to lessen
injury to both the police and the demonstrators. Thus
we conclude that the police order declaring the
demonstration an illegal assembly and ordering dispersal
was clearly reasonable in these circumstances.
Professor Franklin may have had the right as a citizen
briefly to protest the police order which he believed
unreasonable. But, especially given the strongly negative
police response to his first protest which he himself
noted, he surely did not have the right to increase the
risk of injury to others by urging them to stay and
disobey the police order.
3. Argument that Professor Franklin's Action was
Aimed at Conciliation and Reducing Danger to Those
Present. Professor Franklin argues that his action outside
the Computation Center was aimed primarily at
protecting demonstrators from injury or arrest at the
hands of the police that his argument with faculty
observers (and others) to remain and with the police
against the legality of the dispersal order was aimed at
avoiding such danger to the demonstrators. Some of his
witnesses testified that in their judgment Professor
Franklin's purpose was conciliation and avoidance of
danger to the demonstrators.
We find it plausible that Professor Franklin may have
believed that he was acting to protect the rights of his
friends and co-workers in the "movement" in some ol
his actions. It is clear that those in the small group
clustered in front of the police line as the larger group of
demonstrators moved back were largely members of the
"movement," including several of its best known
participants. It thus became increasingly likely that these
individuals would be in the forefront of a police charge
and most likely to be arrested if, in fact, a charge did
occur. That Professor Franklin should endeavor to
prevent the isolation of these individuals from the rest of
the group of demonstrators and passersby is
understandable.
But that he believed that his actions were basically
conciliatory and aimed primarily at lessening the
likelihood of a police charge and arrest is difficult to
accept. His behavior was surely encouraging other people
to remain at greatly increased risks to themselves.
Shouting loudly and angrily at either faculty observers,
the police, or others in the crowd is hardly calculated to
calm crowd or police behavior, or to lessen the
likelihood of violence. Thus, Professor Franklin's loud
shouts as he turned from Moses some 40-60 feet from
the police could hardly have been calculated to calm the
situation. He apparently addressed Tamm by name only
after he had approached within 10 feet or so of the
police; surely he would have done so sooner had his
main goal been to persuade Tamm, and he would have
not shouted to the crowd upon turning away from
Moses. Professor Franklin described Tamm during the
second confrontation as "more immediately hostile than
I had ever seen him before." Moreover, Professor
Franklin himself testified that he knew "for a certainty"
that a police charge or arrest would occur under such
conditions once the police line-up occurred and the
order to disperse was read. He testified that he knew of
no case where such a situation was not followed by a
police charge or arrests. On his own testimony, he had
these points in mind prior to his discussion with Moses
and his shouting return to confront Tamm. Several of
Professor Franklin's witnesses testified that they too
thought a police charge to be highly likely or inevitable,
and became even surer when they saw Professor Franklin
striding back to confront Tamm the second time. Given
this testimony, it is difficult to accept the argument that
Professor Franklin seriously hoped by his actions to
eliminate the possibility of either a police charge or
arrests outside the Computation Center.
It is difficult to believe that Professor Franklin's duty
as a professor encompassed using others to stay and
confront the police when he felt certain that the result
would be a police charge and arrests, with a danger of
serious personal injury (which he testified is likely
whenever a police charge occurs). He testified that he
personally was resolved not to give way to fascism and
was going to stay and confront the police no matter
what happened. He testified, as did several of his
witnesses, that dispersal would be a political defeat for
the "movement" and an important victory for the
police.
Although Professor Franklin felt certain, or almost
certain, that a police charge and arrest would ensue
soon, he did not advise any people in the demonstrator's
group, either those in the "movement" or other
students, of the danger of a police charge, possible
injury, and arrests. Professor Franklin and some of his
close political associates testified of their awareness of
the impending police action at a time when others, less
experienced, did not anticipate any trouble. Professor
Franklin testified:
"My own experience in having been in just lots and
lots of police confrontations, is that if an order is
given declaring something an illegal assembly, telling
people to disperse, once that takes place then there
are basically one of two things that are going to
happen. Either the pigs are going to charge the people
or they're going to move for a mass bust.
"1 don't think I've ever seen a declaration of an illegal
assembly -maybe I have but I certainly can't
remember-l've never seen a declaration of an illegal
assembly not followed by one of those two actions.
Now it can be seconds; it can be minutes. Sometimes
they can declare an area an illegal assembly and then
nothing happens for some period of time and they're
moving what's really happening is they're moving in
for a mass bust. . . .
"And one of the signs you look for in a police line
prior to a charge is whether—one thing is the visors.
The other thing is whether they're smoking or not. If
they're not smoking then you look upon that as, you
know, a charge could take place at any time. And of
course, one of the things that they try to do is to
make the charge unexpected. So once you've got in a
situation the charge could take place the next second
or it might not take place for some time, but
something is going to happen."
Professor Franklin had difficulty explaining his
failure to warn others. He testified:
"As far as the question of whether I talked to
demonstrators on the lawn of the computer center
about the possibility of arrests and beatings and so
forth: I just—l mean, I may have had—it's possible
that I talked to some people about something about
it. But I certainly don't remember that at all, any
more than 1 remember. ... Well, I'm sure that I
didn't urge anybody to stay and I'm sure I didn't urge
anybody to leave, if that's what-if that's what the
point of that question was."
4. Did Professor Franklin Intentionally Urge and
Incite People to Remain in Defiance of the Police Order
to Disperse? The charge states that "Professor Franklin
significantly interfered with orderly dispersal by
intentionally urging and inciting students and other
persons present at the Computation Center to disregard
or disobey such orders to disperse." The evidence seems
to us convincing that the result of Professor Franklin's
behavior was to help significantly to induce students and
other persons present at the Computation Center to
disregard or disobey such orders to disperse. But
Professor Franklin argues that he did not specifically
address any individual other than Moses and Tamm. He
said, "I wouldn't take it upon myself to do that to
people in that situation because I knew that people were
defenseless in that situation." No witness testified that
Professor Franklin directly addressed other specific
individuals, although there is considerable testimony
that he addressed the crowd in more general terms,
$

urging it to resist the allegedly illegal police order to
disperse. The question is whether these shouts and this
behavior, not addressed to specific individuals other than
Moses and Tamm, amount to intentionally urging and
inciting students and other persons to disregard the
police order.
We find the evidence strongly persuasive that
Professor Franklin intentionally urged and incited
students and others present to disregard or disobey the
police orders. His purpose was to encourage others to
remain. Except for his own denial, all percipient
witnesses testified that Professor Franklin, after leaving
Moses, directly addressed his shouts to the crowd. But
even it he did not directly address the crowd, he must
have expected the likely effect of his behavior under
those circumstances to be to urge and incite others to
stay. Professor Franklin surely would not need to have
addressed each individual by name to have urged them
to stay.
The conclusion that the incitement was intentional is
reinforced by Professor Franklin's testimony that, even
knowing the results of his actions, he would not have
changed his behavior outside the Computation Center.
He said, "The only reasonable course of action that I
could see was what 1 did. And in looking back on it now
from, 1 don't know, eight or nine months, I still can't see
any other alternative."
The charge is not that Professor Franklin disobeyed
the police order himself, but that he intentionally
incited others to disobey the order. His behavior
increased the risk to others, a risk of which many were
unaware. The evidence meets the standards for
incitement that we set out earlier.
CONCLUSION
We find the evidence strongly persuasive that
Professor Franklin ' did significantly interfere with
orderly dispersal following the clearing of the
Computation Center by intentionally urging and inciting
students and other persons present to disregard or
disobey such orders to disperse, that this police order to
disperse was clearly reasonable under the circumstances,
and that Professor Franklin's conduct and speech did
substantially increase the danger of injury to other
persons.
DISSENTING OPINION
Professors Brown and Kennedy, although in accord
with much of the descriptive account of the majority
report on the events outside the Computation Center,
dissent as follows:
We place a sufficiently different interpretive weight
on the evidence at certain crucial points to make us
unable to sustain the charge.
1. The first of these centers on an element of
Professor Franklin's conduct that is central in the
testimony of virtually every witness, his concern that
faculty members remain as observers-a concern without
which many of his actions remain inexplicable. This is a
major substantive point in the conversations with Tamm
and Moses, it persuades Professor Eklof to stay on the
scene when he had decided to leave and persuades
Professor Moses in retrospect that perhaps he should
have stayed, it is a subject Professor Franklin pursues
with Professor Hastorf after the police charge, and it is
the dominant concern in Professor Franldin's later
conversation with Litterman and in a speech in front of
President Lyman's office. He asserts that he felt (a) that
the continuing presence of faculty observers might avert

a police charge, (b) that "respectable" faculty like Moses
might help him persuade the police of the right of
people to remain, and (c) that if there were a charge, the
faculty presence might minimize its brutality. He
testified that he felt a police charge would be
"inevitable" if there was a "withdrawal of the faculty
observers and other kinds of neutral people who had
made up a significant section of that crowd."
We agree with the majority report that "the presence
of faculty observers could have been expected to reduce
the risk of injury to persons." However, that fact,
coupled with Professor Franklin's own concern to keep
faculty observers on the scene, cause us to dissent from
the majority conclusion: "that he believed his actions
were basically conciliatory and aimed primarily at
lessening the likelihood of a police charge and arrest is
difficult to accept." We find the conclusion plausible
rather than difficult even though we believe that
Professor Franklin's manner of seeking this end was
unwise.
2. A second difference of interpretation involves fact
more than motivation, and we find the call a close one
either way. This concerns the crucial period between the
time Professor Franklin leaves Moses and the time he is
back in conversation with Tamm, some 40 to 60 feet
away. His own witnesses state that he was shouting
loudly during these moments, but assert, along with him,
that the comments were addressed only to Moses and
Tamm. The majority report believes that in addition he
spoke directly to others, and that, even if he had not, his
voice and demeanor were such that others would
inevitably hear him, and that he should have known that
his words and actions would influence them not to
disperse. Broholm and Blank are no longer completely
sure that Professor Franklin was directly haranguing the
crowd, although that was their on-the-spot impression.
Moses believes he was, though his assessment is
predicated on action after Professor Franklin turned his
back on him, so that the direction of the shouts is only
conjecture. Waterman believes Professor Franklin was
directly enlisting crowd support, but his timing of the
event is uncertain, and he saw only Professor Franklin's
back and left side. The identity of his audience is thus
once again conjecture. It is clear, however, that by the
time Professor Franklin was within ten feet of Tamm he
was yelling directly at him such words as, "Hey, Don,
this is ridiculous . . . In the interval he was apparently
asserting "that it was not an illegal assembly, and that
people should stay," though no witness produced
unshakeable testimony that he shouted this directly at
individuals within the crowd.
The possible reconstructions not all mutually
exclusive, are (a) that he spoke directly to Moses and
Tamm, but that he was overheard by others, some of
whom responded to his exhortations, (b) that he was
directly urging members of the crowd to stay, or (c) that
he was expressing his disgust and anger at the police
order either to the heavens or to onlookers in general,
rather than as specific instructions to members of the
crowd. There is clear evidence for the first alternative,
evidence (though less persuasive) for the second, and
plausibility for the third. The weight one puts on such
alternative explanations, and the interpretation one
makes of Professor Franklin's actions during these
moments, is dependent on a third consideration.
3. The third matter Involves an element in Professor
Franklin's conduct that, like the first, appears in the
testimony of virtually every witness: his strongly stated
conviction that the police order to disperse was illegal.

This is the second substantive point of his conversations
with both Moses and Tamm. We accept the majority
opinion that it is beyond our province or expertise to
determine whether or not the order was legal, and with
the majority "we conclude that the police order
declaring this demonstration an illegal assembly and
ordering dispersal was clearly reasonable in these
circumstances."
However, if a citizen wishes to question a police order
he believes unreasonable and unlawful, he has the right
to do so for a limited period of time. We place great
weight on this right, and believe that at least in part
Professor Franklin was trying to assert it: he believed the
order to be both unreasonable and unlawful, and so he
exercised the right of a citizen to object to it, in a brief
initial dispute with Tamm, in the attempt to enlist
Moses, and then in the second heated exchange with
Tamm. Ihe elapsed time of these three conversations
was probably no more than three or four minutes. To
Professor Franklin, standing on the grassy area where all
witnesses agree that they had seen no illegal acts, the
order to disperse may have seemed patently
unreasonable. That the Board in hindsight does not share
this assessment does not diminish the right of Professor
Franklin to have held it at the time or to have acted
upon it, lor a reasonable length of time, in the name of
the right of peaceable assembly. The fact that the mood
of the crowd immediately following the evacuation of
the Computation Center was reasonably calm and may
have caused no immediate danger to the police or the
building gives added legitimacy to the right, under such
conditions, to make a brief protest against the order, and
even to seek faculty help in so doing. That Professor
Franklin tried to enlist the aid of Professor Moses in his
exercise of this right is looked upon by no member of
the Board as culpable. It is even arguable that Professor
Franklin, if he did indeed urge "students and others" to
remain, was not engaging in culpable action, but only
reminding them of their own rights as citizens to protest,
at least briefly, an order that might be considered
unlawful or unreasonable.
4. The accumulation of the above considerations
leads us to believe (a) that Professor Franklin tried to get
other faculty members to remain on the scene in order
to reduce the likelihood of a police charge, (b) that his
continuing argument about the order to disperse was an
attempt to protest a police decision he felt to be illegal,
and one which as a citizen he had a right to protest, at
least briefly, and (c) that these two strongly held
convictions, uncontested in the testimony, led him to
loud and angry shouting, clearly directed at Moses and
Tamm, and possibly though not so clearly directed at
others, centering on the need for faculty observers to
stay, and the right of others to stay. The University's
Supplementary Written Brief states, "The issue is
whether a faculty member in a situation laden with the
risk of violent confrontation between demonstrators and
the police is acting properly when by his conduct he
increases that risk." We conclude that, even if one
accepts this as a statement of "the issue," such a
description does not adequately match the conduct
charged, and that there is not in our view strongly
persuasive evidence that his words or actions constituted
an incitement. Consequently, the charge that "Professor
Franklin did significantly interfere with orderly dispersal
by intentionally urging and inciting students and other
persons present at the Computation Center to disregard
or disobey such orders to disperse" is not one that we
can sustain.
A. CHARGES
The relevant University charge concerning the
Computation Center incident is contained in paragraph 9
of the "Statement of Charges."
9. Further, on February 10, 1971 and in connection
with the activity at the Computation Center
described in paragraph 8, students and other persons
were arrested for failure to disperse after orders had
been given to clear an area around the Computation
Center. Professor Franklin signilicantly interfered
with orderly dispersal by intentionally urging and
inciting students and other persons present at the
Computation Center to disregard or disobey such
orders to disperse.
B. FINDING OF FACTS
1. Occupation of the Computation Center. Shortly
before 1:00 p.m. on February 10, 1971, the
Computation Center building was closed on the basis of
a telephone order from Provost Miller, but the computer
was kept running. Handwritten notices were posted on
the doors of the Computation Center; doors, windows,
and gates were locked; and two campus policemen were
stationed at the front door. Provost Miller had been
informed that a group was proceeding from White Plaza
to the Computation Center. An estimated 100 to 200
demonstrators arrived at the Computation Center
shortly after 1:00 p.m. There were apparently no
previous collective decisions or explicit understandings
by the group as to what actions were to be taken or as to
whether to damage the computer. Some subgroups may
have had previous understandings; different individuals
testified as to different expectations. There were no
plans for formal picketing with picket signs as in many
"strikes," and there had been no attempt to
communicate with Computation Center workers about a
strike after the Dinkelspiel meeting of February 9.
At about 1:15 p.m., forcible entry was made into the
Computation Center; the gate was scaled and the back
door forced. About 50 demonstrators then entered
through the back door. As they moved through the
building, they opened other entrances and admitted
other demonstrators. Power to the building and to the
computer was shut off at 1:20 by pulling a master
switch located near the back door. Some 100-200 more
persons entered and milled about inside the
Computation Center. Some demonstrators, according to
officials of the Center, jimmied the door and entered the
machine room. They went to the 2301 drums, yanked
out wires, and flipped switches behind gates or doors on
two of the data storage drums. Other demonstrators in
that group went directly to the racks where tape reels
were stored and began looking through them. The
telephone lines were made inoperative. Once
demonstrators were inside the building and the doors
were thrown open, the Stanford police did not try to

stop movement in and out of the building. Some of the
demonstrators posted themselves at the doors, and to
some extent controlled entry and exit, for example,
denying entry to a photographer.
During this period, there was a continual movement
of demonstrators into and out of the Computation
Center. It is agreed that some time during the
occupation approximately $800 of physical damage was
done to the premises and contents of the Computation
Center, not counting any costs of shut-down time on the
computer. This damage was partly caused by the pulling
of the wires and damage to the 2301 unit, partly to the
premises. Two fire hoses were taken out of racks arid
valves opened, but the water had been turned off earlier
by the University. The printout of each of three printers
was removed. It is agreed that no substantial damage was
done to the computer itself. However, the shutdown,
lasting until about 8:00 p.m., made it impossible for the
Computation Center to process 700-800 student and
faculty jobs scheduled for that period. Montgomery
testified that these jobs would be run during the
succeeding two weeks.
Given the fact that the demonstrators illegally seized
the Computation Center and made impossible
continuation of its regular activities, the Board does not
consider further details on the conduct of the occupiers
important for Charge 9 against Professor Franklin. It
should be noted that the occupiers refused to obey the
requests to leave the building required by law-by Bruce
Wiggins on behalf of Stanford University and by Officers
Marron, Rosa and Tamm of the Santa Clara Sheriffs
office. However, as a context for other events, we note
briefly some undisputed facts concerning the
occupation.
Professor Franklin met his 1:15 class. Only seven of
the 150 registered students were present. He believed the
others were at the Computation Center and suggested
moving the class to the area outside the Center.
Professor Franklin did not hold his class because, he
testified, many of his students were inside the
Computation Center. It is uncontested that he remained
outside the Computation Center, talking with individuals
about a variety of topics prior to the arrival of the
police.
Bruce Wiggins, Stanford Director of Public Safety,
arrived at the Computation Center soon after its
occupation. He walked through and around the building
with Assistant Fire Chief Barr. Soon thereafter, around
2:00 p.m., he telephoned the Santa Clara Sheriffs office
and told them of the occupation.
Shortly after 2:00 p.m., C. D. Marron of the Santa
Clara Sheriffs office arrived at the Computation Center.
He too walked through the building, and then went to
Redwood Hall nearby to confer with Wiggins and others,
including Messrs. Rosenzweig and Schwartz from the

University administration, Sergeant Tamm and Captain
Rosa of the Santa Clara Sheriffs office, and an Assistant
District Attorney of Santa Clara County.
At about 3:00 p.m., it was decided that Wiggins
should return to the Computation Center and issue, in
the name of Stanford University, a declaration of
trespass, declaring the occupation a violation of Stanford
University regulations and ordering the occupants to
leave immediately. Wiggins used a bullhorn as he moved
through the building making this declaration. Wiggins
claims he was jostled, pushed and shoved; it is agreed
that his announcement was greeted by jeers and catcalls,
and that virtually no one left the building in response to
his order. He then returned to the group at Redwood
Hall.
At some point, probably after 3:00 p.m., an informal
meeting was held by the demonstrators. It was chaired
by Janet Weiss, near the door of the Computation
Center, partly inside and partly outside the building.
Although reports on this meeting are somewhat
confused, apparently there was an informal discussion as
to what to do, including whether to continue the
occupation of the Computation Center, what to do if
the police came, and whether to damage the computer.
The discussion, according to Harry Press, a University
witness, included talk about what would be the impact
on student support if the computer were wrecked. Janet
Weiss is reported to have stressed the political neutrality
of machines, urging that they not be damaged.
Apparently agreement was reached to stay in the
Computation Center until the police came, and then to
leave voluntarily without damaging the computer.
Station KZSU, misunderstanding this vote, reported that
the occupiers would damage the computer, but Janet
Weiss asked them to broadcast a retraction of that
report. There may have been other, smaller meetings of
the occupiers during the afternoon; testimony on this
question is confusing.
At about 4:00 p.m., the group in Redwood Hall
decided that Messrs. Marron, Rosa, and Tamm would go
back to the Computation Center and again try to
persuade the occupants to leave voluntarily. They did so,
asking what the occupants wanted, calling attention to
the vulnerability of the computer and the data it
contained, and to possible injury to persons in the
University and in the hospital. The responses of the
demonstrators were that the occupants wanted to get
the Gamut-H program, SRI research, and war-related
research out of the Computation Center; the precise
nature of all the demands is unclear. Marron testified
that there were scattered shouts of "Down with SRI"
and "Get SRI out." Few if any of the occupiers left. The
three officers returned to Redwood Hall.
After further discussion by the group in Redwood
Hall, the three officers again returned to the
Computation Center. The police announced to the
occupants that they had been informed that the SRI
work had been stopped at the Computation Center.
Some demonstrators replied that such word was not
good enough, and they wanted a written statement from
President Lyman. After a brief discussion, the police said
there was nothing more that could be done, and the
three officers returned again to Redwood Hall.
2. Order to Disperse and Police Arrival. Police
officers had been called and their arrival was imminent.
Just before they were expected to arrive, Marron went
out to the front steps of Redwood Hall, and, using a
bullhorn, he made a formal statement declaring the
occupation of the Center and its immediately adjacent
territory unlawful and ordering the demonstrators to
disperse, also stating that they were subject to arrest if
they did not do so. It is uncontested that he made this
announcement three times, pointing in three different
directions, with one aimed directly at the people inside
the Computation Center and the two others at the
people in the area outside the Computation Center to his
left and right. There was no response to these orders to
disperse, although Professor Franklin's witness
Litterman said he heard them.
Very soon thereafter, the police arrived and entered
the Computation Center. Lookouts for the occupiers
observed the police arrival and notified those inside, so
that the occupiers left the building rapidly just as the
police were entering from another direction. The police
made no arrests in the building, although they indicated
that they would have made arrests if the occupiers had
remained in the building. Marron entered the building
immediately after the police, continuing to declare the
assembly an unlawful one, ordering dispersal, and
threatening arrest for any who did not obey the order to
disperse. Since the Computation Center had been
cleared, he then went outside and walked clockwise
around the building continuing to give his order to
disperse. He continued his series of announcements and,
by his testimony, returned to the front of the
Computation Center about eight minutes after the
arrival of the police. A double line of police had been
formed in front of the Center. Marron repeated his
complete order at least three or four times in front of
the Computation Center, stating that the area from the
Computation Center to Jordan Way was to be cleared.
Some demonstrators did not hear or did not know the
extent of the prohibited area. Marron testified that
ordering dispersal from a wide area was common police
practice. He testified to his concern that the police
officers under his command would be vulnerable to
rock-throwing and possible injury if the demonstrators
were permitted to stay close to the police lines and the
building which had just been cleared. As long as a
confrontation between demonstrators and police
persisted, indefinite police presence would have been
necessary to protect the building and computer.
As police lines were formed in front of the
Computation Center and as Marron repeated his
announcement, some clusters of demonstrators remained
in front of the police line, perhaps six to ten feet away,
chanting "Pigs off campus" and other slogans, and
loudly questioning the legality of Marron's order to
disperse. These demonstrators formed several clusters;
they included a number of members of the
"movement." Other demonstrators, faculty observers,
students, and passersby were farther from the police line
in two grassy areas and in the park lot; they were less
active.
After leaving the Computation Center, the small
clusters of demonstrators near the police lines made no
movement to withdraw in response to Marron's repeated
order. At first the more distant persons also did not
withdraw. Professor Franklin, Marron, and other
witnesses who were near the grassy areas testified,
however, that the more distant crowd began to withdraw
as the order to disperse was repeated. Professor Franklin,
in his affidavit prepared shortly after the event, stated
that he believed "most" of the crowd was beginning to
move back; in his oral testimony at the hearing he stated
that he now believes that a smaller number was
beginning to move away-perhaps only more than half,
or fewer. Marron, Moses, and Waterman, testifying for
the University, and Professor Franklin's witness Owen
Blank in a direct report to KZSU from the scene, all
agreed that the portion of the crowd away from the
police lines was definitely moving back in response to
the repeated announcements to disperse. Most of
Professor Franklin's witnesses, primarily individuals
standing near the front portion of the grassy area nearest
the Computation Center, testified that they did not see
any significant part of the crowd moving back. This
apparent contradiction in testimony is explainable, in
part at least, by the fact that those witnesses who had
reason to be observing the rear part of the crowd saw the
movement away, while those who were focusing their
attention on the police lines and events nearby did not
see the movement of the rear portion of the crowd.
3. Professor Franklin's Role. At this stage, Professor
Franklin moved forward and stood in front of a cluster
of demonstrators who were loudly stating that the order
to disperse was illegal. Some of Professor Franklin's
close political associates were part of this cluster. They
were giving a clenched fist salute while vociferously
denouncing the police order. Professor Franklin,
according to testimony and photographs, stood quietly
in front of this active group and observed what was
occurring. He then moved closer to Tamm, who was near
the police line, and argued briefly and vigorously that
the dispersal order was illegal and he had a right to
remain as a faculty observer. Tamm disagreed on both
points, pointing out that Franklin was not on the official
list of faculty observers supplied by the President's
Office. Professor Franklin then wheeled and strode
toward Dean Lincoln Moses. Moses was some 30-50 feet
farther back, perhaps 40-60 feet from Tamm, and was
beginning to leave in response to the police order.
Professor Franklin called out, "Lincoln Moses!".
Professor Franklin shouted some words like "God damn
it, this happens every time the police charge. The faculty
observers are all gone!" He argued loudly that Moses
should not leave, that the order to disperse was
improper, and that faculty observers, like Moses, should
remain to observe possible police brutality. There is
substantial agreement on what Professor Franklin said to
Moses in this brief but loud set of statements. It is
further agreed that Professor Franklin was heard by a
nearby circle of 10 to 12 persons and by others farther
away; although he was close to Moses, Professor
Franklin was shouting his arguments. Professor Franklin
testified that he was being careful while shouting at
Moses not to use language in describing the police which
would reduce the likelihood of his persuading Moses to

stay. Professor Franklin's statements to Moses took
about a minute and a half. Franklin then headed back
toward the police line, some 40-60 feet away.
Witnesses for the University testified that Professor
Franklin was shouting loudly as soon as he took his first
steps back toward the police lines, angrily denouncing
the police order as illegal. He made his way back to
Tamm, some 50 feet distant, through the substantial
group remaining in the first grassy area. The items of
dispute are whether Professor Franklin was addressing
his shouts to the police or to others in the crowd when
he started shouting, and whether his shouts included
exhortations that people not leave.
4. Testimony that Professor Franklin Urged and
Incited the Crowd to Stay. Moses reports that at first he
was convinced by Franklin's statement that he should
stay as a laculty observer and started to follow Franklin
back toward the police line. However, he goes on,
He meanwhile continued talking. He turned his back
to me and went toward the line, talking loudly
and .. . waving his arms or gesticulating. . . . And as
he went, a group of people formed about him and
went with him. And whether he was addressing only
them or generally all who could hear I wouldn't say.
On cross-examination, Moses said,
Then as you [Franklin] went on, you appeared to me
to be encouraging as many people to come as would
come. And that is what turned me around. ... I felt
that I was just being recruited to be one more person
present. ... I took the whole crowd to be provocative
of the police.
Under further cross-examination by Professor Franklin,
Moses reiterated this testimony and his statement that
Professor Franklin was urging people around him to
disobey the police order and return. Although he
admitted it was "conceivable" that Professor Franklin's
words were solely addressed to the police, he said that
his understanding was clearly to the contrary.
Moses was asked by Professor Franklin on
cross-examination whether Professor Franklin could not
have been merely urging faculty observers to join him in
going towards the police lines. Moses responded that
Professor Franklin was not addressing his remarks to
faculty members but to the entire crowd or all within
the sound of his voice. Moses said, "You spoke to me
about faculty people. And then as you went on you
appeared to me to be encouraging as many people to
come as would come. And that is what turned me
around."
Waterman testified that before Franklin approached
Moses,
.... the crowd was definitely starting to drift back
this way ... in fact they were drifting back in
appreciable numbers. ... I definitely had the
impression that the crisis was past, that people were
leaving, and that the situation was about to calm
down.
He then testified that he observed Franklin at this point
crossing the grass in front of Redwood Hall toward the
police, although Waterman was not sure whether before
or after the Moses encounter,
. . . shouting to the crowd, telling them to come back,
challenging the right of the sheriffs men to declare it
an illegal assembly, and saying that they had a perfect
right to hold a peaceful meeting and that they should
return to do so. .. . He seemed to be shouting in
general to the bunch that were leaving and had gotten
about as far as the second grassy plot.
Broholm, reporting from the scene for KZSU,
reported (a tape recording is available) first that "the
crowd was definitely moving back"; and then that
Professor Franklin "was haranguing the crowd to stay"
and resist the order to disperse, and "was berating the
crowd for leaving." On cross-examination by Professor
Franklin, Broholm confirmed this on-the-scene report:
"After you turned away from Moses you turned back in
that direction and began yelling. And again, "You
turned around, faced back toward the police . . . and
you started yelling in that direction." It is important to
note that Broholm placed the Moses-Franklin encounter
and subsequent Franklin shouting near the edge of the
crosswalk in front of Redwood Hall, at least 60 feet
from Tamm and Marron. Under further
cross-examination, Broholm said that he now doubts the
accuracy of his on-the-scene report that Professor
Franklin was "haranguing the crowd to stay," and that
instead Professor Franklin was probably shouting at
Tamm. He did not, however, change his estimate that
Professor Franklin began shouting in an area some 60
feet from Tamm, who was separated from Professor
Franklin by a substantial number of individuals in the
first grassy area. We believe that Broholm's on-the-scene
account can be presumed more accurate than his
recollection eight months later.
Owen Blank, another KZSU announcer, also reported
from the scene (recorded on tape) that the crowd in the
grassy areas was moving away at first, and then turned
and moved back toward the police line as Professor
Franklin was shouting. As Professor Franklin's witness,
Blank attached the accuracy of the taped reports by
Broholm and Blank or, Professor Franklin's role in
reversing the crowd's dispersal, but Blank's testimony
when related to the times on the taped reports instead
confirms the on-the-scene reports by Broholm and
Blank. Although Broholm and Blank apologized to
Moses for errors in Broholm's reporting at the time,
these errors concerned Moses's alleged assent
to Professor Franklin's urgings, not Professor
Franklin's own behavior.
Professor Edward Begle testified that he saw
Professor Franklin apparently urging a group of young
people to stay at the gathering, but it is not clear
whether this was the group of people around Moses and
the details of his testimony are not confirmed by others.
The witnesses who heard Professor Franklin's words
testified that he, as he strode back towards Tamm, was
angry and shouting, repeating the same arguments as
before, that the order to disperse was illegal and the
crowd should not leave. Moses's, Waterman's and
Broholm's testimony was cited above. Professor
Franklin's witness Doering testified that "He [Professor
Franklin] walked away from Moses a couple of paces,
and I think he said some things on the way." Doering
places the Moses encounter at about the group of birth
trees furthest from the police lines, some 30-40 feet
away.
As Professor Franklin returned to confront Tamm, an
indefinite number of other persons moved along, beside,
or behind him. In moving back toward Tamm, Professor
Franklin moved through a substantial number of persons
between Moses and Tamm. These included some of
Professor Franklin's political associates (identified in
pictures) and others not identified. Thus, it seems
certain that Professor Franklin's shouts against dispersal
would be clearly heard by these persons, whether or not
they were primarily addressed to Tamm, and that
Professor Franklin must surely have known that they
would be received by at least these demonstrators

through whom he advanced, whether or not they were
heard by persons behind Moses and Fiofessor
Franklin in the second grassy area.
5. Testimony that Professor Franklin Did Not Urge
and Incite the Crowd to Stay. On the other hand,
Professor Franklin and many of his witnesses testified
that Professor Franklin spoke only to Moses when he
strode from Tamm to Moses, and that he spoke only to
Tamm when he turned from Moses back toward the
police line. They described his comments to both as not
intended to incite other people to disobey the police
order. One of his witnesses, photographer Harrison,
described both the scene and Professor Franklin's
following confrontation with Tamm as "tranquil."
Another witness, Professor Switzer, described the
atmosphere as a "picnic." But these evaluations are
specifically controverted by pictures, tapes and other
testimony. Nearly all, including Professor Charles Stein
who was near Moses, deny hearing Professor Franklin
directly address anyone other than Moses or Tamm.
Most of Professor Franklin's witnesses testified that they
did not hear, or did not remember, what Professor
Franklin was saying as he strode forward, until he was
close to Tamm (e.g., Pace, Lonsdale, Hunkeler). They
report that they heard him shout only as he neared
Tamm, and then only at Tamm. This, however, is not
inconsistent with Moses', Waterman's and Broholm's
testimony that Professor Franklin was shouting earlier
when much farther from the police. Most of Protessor
Franklin's witnesses were nearer the police line, mainly
facing the police, and hence did not observe Professor
Franklin's entire movement forward. But Doering did,
and testified that Professor Franklin spoke as soon as he
left Moses. Hunkeler did not have Professor Franklin
under constant scrutiny and could hear only a few
words.
Professor Franklin testified that he began to shout at
Tamm from a distance because he wanted to be sure that
Tamm understood why he was returning to the police
line and that his action was intended to be conciliatory
and to lessen the danger of a police charge and arrests of
the demonstrators there. But that he should have done
so at such a great distance seems highly implausible
under the circumstances, and conflicts with considerable
testimony from witnesses from both parties. Clearly,
Professor Franklin did, as he stated, address Tamm,
saying, "Don, this is ridiculous ..." as he approached
Tamm and Marron, apparently from a distance of five to
ten feet; this is confirmed by his witnesses who were
near the police line.
With one exception, Professor Franklin's own
witnesses did not support his version of events as he left
Moses. The only witness for Professor Franklin who gave
evidence contradictory to that of the University
witnesses was Downey, who testified that, although he
was not sure, Professor Franklin was not saying anything
as he left Moses and walked towards the police lines. It is
likely that Downey was confused about the timing of his
interaction with Professor Franklin. Downey testified
that he never was with Professor Franklin until after the
encounter with Moses, but pictures show Downey
standing with Professor Franklin and the group shouting
at the police at a time identified by Professor Franklin's
witnesses as prior to his words with Moses. With this
doubtful exception, Professor Franklin produced no
witness who contradicted the testimony of
Administration witnesses who observed his shouting as
he left Moses at a considerable distance from the police
lines.
Professor Franklin was apparently himself confused
as to the locus of his confrontation with Moses in
relation to the police lines, and, in his testimony, he
minimized the distance from the police lines. He
testified that he was only a few steps away from Tamm
when he turned away from Moses.
One witness for Professor Franklin, Stein, supported
this spatial image by testifying that Professor Franklin
was about 15 feet from the police lines. No other
witness for either party supported Professor Franklin on
this point; indeed, five witnesses for Professor Franklin
directly contradicted him in their testimony.
6. Franklin-Tamm Confrontation and Police Charge.
It is agreed, and supported by photographic evidence,
that after Professor Franklin approached Tamm, a
substantial number of people, approximately 30, closed
in around and behind Professor Franklin as he angrily
confronted Tamm. Professor Franklin testified that he
was aware of people moving in from both sides but he
didn't know how many newsmen were present. Some
witnesses, including Professor Franklin's witness,
Litterman, testified that the crowd threatened to engulf
the police officers and Professor Franklin. Professor
Franklin and Tamm stood face to face shouting angrily
at one another. Witnesses of both parties described the
situation as very tense. Professor Franklin was repeating
his basic arguments and Tamm was denying the validity
of both.
After a very short interval, two, perhaps more,
policemen moved rapidly from behind Tamm and
Marron to try to arrest Professor Franklin, but Professor
Franklin slipped away from them, perhaps with the help
of some of his friends. At almost exactly the same time
the police line moved forward on the demonstrators in
what is commonly called a "police charge."
We note, parenthetically, that we do not consider
Professor Franklin's acknowledged urging of Moses and
other faculty observers to stay to be objectionable under
the charge. Formally designated faculty observers were
asked by the University administration to be present,
even though some, not identified to the police, were
apparently struck during the charge. The presence of
faculty observers could have been expected to reduce
the risk of injury to persons.
7. Findings of Fact. The Board finds the evidence
strongly persuasive that: (a) the police order to disperse
was clearly reasonable, given the illegal seizure of the
Computation Center, possible serious damage to the
computer and data stored there, possible danger to
police and demonstrators outside after the building was
cleared, and the need to return the Center promptly to
normal action without police presence; (b) while some
demonstrators refused to disperse after the building was
cleared, a substantial portion of the crowd was moving
back in response to repeated police orders, prior to
Professor Franklin's intervention; (c) Professor Franklin
played a central role in reversing the movement of the
crowd to disperse and his shouts and behavior
significantly increased the likelihood that a substantial
number of those present would stay; (d) Professor
Franklin intended his shouts after leaving Moses to be
heard by, and to influence the crowd to remain at the
scene in defiance of the police order to disperse.
However, even if lie did not directly address his shouts
to the crowd, he must reasonably have expected that a
result of his shouts would be to incite members of the
crowd to disobey the dispersal order, increasing the risk
to themselves; Professor Franklin's conduct and shouts

cannot reasonably be interpreted as merely attempts to
persuade Moses and other faculty observers to stay, to
conciliate the police or the crowd, or to lessen the
danger of a police charge or arrests with their attendant
dangers to the demonstrators. We comment further on
these findings in the following section.
C. SUPPLEMENTA R Y EVIDENCE AND EINDINGS
A number of points in the testimony require special
attention in order to amplify and interpret the findings
of fact indicated above.
1. Charge of University Negligence. Professor
Franklin suggests that the University administration was
negligent in not announcing to the occupiers of the
Computation Center that work on the disputed SRI
contract had, in fact, been halted one or more days
before, because this information might have been
sufficient to induce the occupiers to leave the
Computation Center peacefully. Alternatively, he
implies that had some official of the University
explained that an investigation was under way, this
might have induced the occupiers to lave the building
voluntarily without the police having to be called.
In fact, SRI had apparently stopped using the
computer for the GAMUT-Hand its other programs
prior to February 10, but it had not informed Stanford
of any policy decision regarding GAMUT-H or other SRI
projects on the Stanford computer. The SRI accounts
had not been cancelled. Moreover, the Stanford
administration at that time believed, on the information
received from SRI, that there was no violation of
University policy; SRI had indicated to the University
administration that the research in question was not
classified and was available for publication. Thus Provost
Miller testified that he did not believe it would be proper
for the University to issue any statement pending receipt
of information on SRl's position on the whole matter.
Moreover, the Computer Facilities Committee of the
University was meeting on the afternoon of February
10, during the occupation, precisely to discuss the issues
raised by the GAMLTT-H program.
We do not agree with Professor Franklin's argument
that the University administration's refusal to negotiate
with, or report to, the Computation Center occupiers
justifies the refusal of the demonstrators to leave the
Computation Center which they were illegally
occupying. Some persons believe the University
administration would have been well advised to issue a
public statement that it was investigating the whole
situation, although we find the University
administration's position on the matter easy to
understand, given the uncertainty about SRl's position
and the fact that the relevant University committee was
in fact meeting at 2 p.m. on the afternoon of the
occupation. But even if the University officials involved
were guilty of faulty administrative judgment, this
would in no way justify the illegal occupation of the
Computation Center and its continuance in the face of
both University and police orders to disperse. Moreover,
it is important to remember that the protestors had
made no direct effort vis-a-vis the administration to halt
the GAMUT-H work beyond one unsigned leaflet,
although they had, according to their own testimony,
known of it for at least a week or two; the Computation
Center sit-in was in no sense a "last resort" step after all
legal avenues were exhausted. The demands of the
occupiers were vague, and we see no reason to believe
that they would have left the Center merely on
notification by the administration that the problem was
under active investigation.
2. Argument that Police Order to Disperse was
Unreasonable and Illegal. Professor Franklin argues that
the police order to disperse was unreasonable and
unlawful-that the crowd outside the Computation
Center was peaceful and within its rights of free
assembly as guaranteed by the First Amendment to the
Constitution. Thus, not only was he within his
constitutional rights in refusing to disperse and urging
others not to disperse, but indeed he was following his
duty as a citizen and a professor in so acting.
California law clearly gives to police the authority to
disperse illegal assemblies and sets out the legal
requirements for such orders. Only a court of law, which
we are not, could finally determine whether in fact the
police declaration of illegal assembly and the order to
disperse in this instance was legal. In our judgment, the
police order to disperse was clearly reasonable and, as we
understand the law, was probably legal as well. An illegal
seizure of the Computation Center had occurred, and
both University and police officials were understandably
concerned lest serious damage be done to the valuable
equipment housed there and to the even more valuable
data stored there. It was widely known that major
damage to computers, totalling millions of dollars, had
been done to other university computers.
The order declaring the occupation of the
Computation Center an illegal assembly and ordering
dispersal was a single order aimed at the occupiers of the
Computation Center when they were inside the building
and at those participating in the demonstration outside
the building, both before and following its evacuation.
Marron's testimony on this point is clear, and it is
confirmed by one of Professor Franklin's wftnesses. He
began giving the complete order before the arrival of the
police and continued with the same order during the
evacuation of the Computation Center and following the
evacuation when part of the demonstrators stayed close
to the Computation Center building. That this order to
evacuate the building was fully warranted can hardly be
denied. It was that same order that insisted that the
demonstrators withdraw a substantial distance from the
building being evacuated.
Moreover, we conclude that the order to disperse
back to Jordan Way outside the building was reasonable
on its own merits as well. The police knew that violence
had occurred on the Stanford campus during
police-demonstrator confrontations several times during
the past few years; the precaution of moving the crowd
back a substantial distance from the police line was
understandable, and was probably calculated to lessen
injury to both the police and the demonstrators. Thus
we conclude that the police order declaring the
demonstration an illegal assembly and ordering dispersal
was clearly reasonable in these circumstances.
Professor Franklin may have had the right as a citizen
briefly to protest the police order which he believed
unreasonable. But, especially given the strongly negative
police response to his first protest which he himself
noted, he surely did not have the right to increase the
risk of injury to others by urging them to stay and
disobey the police order.
3. Argument that Professor Franklin's Action was
Aimed at Conciliation and Reducing Danger to Those
Present. Professor Franklin argues that his action outside
the Computation Center was aimed primarily at
protecting demonstrators from injury or arrest at the
hands of the police that his argument with faculty
observers (and others) to remain and with the police
against the legality of the dispersal order was aimed at
avoiding such danger to the demonstrators. Some of his
witnesses testified that in their judgment Professor
Franklin's purpose was conciliation and avoidance of
danger to the demonstrators.
We find it plausible that Professor Franklin may have
believed that he was acting to protect the rights of his
friends and co-workers in the "movement" in some ol
his actions. It is clear that those in the small group
clustered in front of the police line as the larger group of
demonstrators moved back were largely members of the
"movement," including several of its best known
participants. It thus became increasingly likely that these
individuals would be in the forefront of a police charge
and most likely to be arrested if, in fact, a charge did
occur. That Professor Franklin should endeavor to
prevent the isolation of these individuals from the rest of
the group of demonstrators and passersby is
understandable.
But that he believed that his actions were basically
conciliatory and aimed primarily at lessening the
likelihood of a police charge and arrest is difficult to
accept. His behavior was surely encouraging other people
to remain at greatly increased risks to themselves.
Shouting loudly and angrily at either faculty observers,
the police, or others in the crowd is hardly calculated to
calm crowd or police behavior, or to lessen the
likelihood of violence. Thus, Professor Franklin's loud
shouts as he turned from Moses some 40-60 feet from
the police could hardly have been calculated to calm the
situation. He apparently addressed Tamm by name only
after he had approached within 10 feet or so of the
police; surely he would have done so sooner had his
main goal been to persuade Tamm, and he would have
not shouted to the crowd upon turning away from
Moses. Professor Franklin described Tamm during the
second confrontation as "more immediately hostile than
I had ever seen him before." Moreover, Professor
Franklin himself testified that he knew "for a certainty"
that a police charge or arrest would occur under such
conditions once the police line-up occurred and the
order to disperse was read. He testified that he knew of
no case where such a situation was not followed by a
police charge or arrests. On his own testimony, he had
these points in mind prior to his discussion with Moses
and his shouting return to confront Tamm. Several of
Professor Franklin's witnesses testified that they too
thought a police charge to be highly likely or inevitable,
and became even surer when they saw Professor Franklin
striding back to confront Tamm the second time. Given
this testimony, it is difficult to accept the argument that
Professor Franklin seriously hoped by his actions to
eliminate the possibility of either a police charge or
arrests outside the Computation Center.
It is difficult to believe that Professor Franklin's duty
as a professor encompassed using others to stay and
confront the police when he felt certain that the result
would be a police charge and arrests, with a danger of
serious personal injury (which he testified is likely
whenever a police charge occurs). He testified that he
personally was resolved not to give way to fascism and
was going to stay and confront the police no matter
what happened. He testified, as did several of his
witnesses, that dispersal would be a political defeat for
the "movement" and an important victory for the
police.
Although Professor Franklin felt certain, or almost
certain, that a police charge and arrest would ensue
soon, he did not advise any people in the demonstrator's
group, either those in the "movement" or other
students, of the danger of a police charge, possible
injury, and arrests. Professor Franklin and some of his
close political associates testified of their awareness of
the impending police action at a time when others, less
experienced, did not anticipate any trouble. Professor
Franklin testified:
"My own experience in having been in just lots and
lots of police confrontations, is that if an order is
given declaring something an illegal assembly, telling
people to disperse, once that takes place then there
are basically one of two things that are going to
happen. Either the pigs are going to charge the people
or they're going to move for a mass bust.
"1 don't think I've ever seen a declaration of an illegal
assembly -maybe I have but I certainly can't
remember-l've never seen a declaration of an illegal
assembly not followed by one of those two actions.
Now it can be seconds; it can be minutes. Sometimes
they can declare an area an illegal assembly and then
nothing happens for some period of time and they're
moving what's really happening is they're moving in
for a mass bust. . . .
"And one of the signs you look for in a police line
prior to a charge is whether—one thing is the visors.
The other thing is whether they're smoking or not. If
they're not smoking then you look upon that as, you
know, a charge could take place at any time. And of
course, one of the things that they try to do is to
make the charge unexpected. So once you've got in a
situation the charge could take place the next second
or it might not take place for some time, but
something is going to happen."
Professor Franklin had difficulty explaining his
failure to warn others. He testified:
"As far as the question of whether I talked to
demonstrators on the lawn of the computer center
about the possibility of arrests and beatings and so
forth: I just—l mean, I may have had—it's possible
that I talked to some people about something about
it. But I certainly don't remember that at all, any
more than 1 remember. ... Well, I'm sure that I
didn't urge anybody to stay and I'm sure I didn't urge
anybody to leave, if that's what-if that's what the
point of that question was."
4. Did Professor Franklin Intentionally Urge and
Incite People to Remain in Defiance of the Police Order
to Disperse? The charge states that "Professor Franklin
significantly interfered with orderly dispersal by
intentionally urging and inciting students and other
persons present at the Computation Center to disregard
or disobey such orders to disperse." The evidence seems
to us convincing that the result of Professor Franklin's
behavior was to help significantly to induce students and
other persons present at the Computation Center to
disregard or disobey such orders to disperse. But
Professor Franklin argues that he did not specifically
address any individual other than Moses and Tamm. He
said, "I wouldn't take it upon myself to do that to
people in that situation because I knew that people were
defenseless in that situation." No witness testified that
Professor Franklin directly addressed other specific
individuals, although there is considerable testimony
that he addressed the crowd in more general terms,
$

urging it to resist the allegedly illegal police order to
disperse. The question is whether these shouts and this
behavior, not addressed to specific individuals other than
Moses and Tamm, amount to intentionally urging and
inciting students and other persons to disregard the
police order.
We find the evidence strongly persuasive that
Professor Franklin intentionally urged and incited
students and others present to disregard or disobey the
police orders. His purpose was to encourage others to
remain. Except for his own denial, all percipient
witnesses testified that Professor Franklin, after leaving
Moses, directly addressed his shouts to the crowd. But
even it he did not directly address the crowd, he must
have expected the likely effect of his behavior under
those circumstances to be to urge and incite others to
stay. Professor Franklin surely would not need to have
addressed each individual by name to have urged them
to stay.
The conclusion that the incitement was intentional is
reinforced by Professor Franklin's testimony that, even
knowing the results of his actions, he would not have
changed his behavior outside the Computation Center.
He said, "The only reasonable course of action that I
could see was what 1 did. And in looking back on it now
from, 1 don't know, eight or nine months, I still can't see
any other alternative."
The charge is not that Professor Franklin disobeyed
the police order himself, but that he intentionally
incited others to disobey the order. His behavior
increased the risk to others, a risk of which many were
unaware. The evidence meets the standards for
incitement that we set out earlier.
CONCLUSION
We find the evidence strongly persuasive that
Professor Franklin ' did significantly interfere with
orderly dispersal following the clearing of the
Computation Center by intentionally urging and inciting
students and other persons present to disregard or
disobey such orders to disperse, that this police order to
disperse was clearly reasonable under the circumstances,
and that Professor Franklin's conduct and speech did
substantially increase the danger of injury to other
persons.
DISSENTING OPINION
Professors Brown and Kennedy, although in accord
with much of the descriptive account of the majority
report on the events outside the Computation Center,
dissent as follows:
We place a sufficiently different interpretive weight
on the evidence at certain crucial points to make us
unable to sustain the charge.
1. The first of these centers on an element of
Professor Franklin's conduct that is central in the
testimony of virtually every witness, his concern that
faculty members remain as observers-a concern without
which many of his actions remain inexplicable. This is a
major substantive point in the conversations with Tamm
and Moses, it persuades Professor Eklof to stay on the
scene when he had decided to leave and persuades
Professor Moses in retrospect that perhaps he should
have stayed, it is a subject Professor Franklin pursues
with Professor Hastorf after the police charge, and it is
the dominant concern in Professor Franldin's later
conversation with Litterman and in a speech in front of
President Lyman's office. He asserts that he felt (a) that
the continuing presence of faculty observers might avert

a police charge, (b) that "respectable" faculty like Moses
might help him persuade the police of the right of
people to remain, and (c) that if there were a charge, the
faculty presence might minimize its brutality. He
testified that he felt a police charge would be
"inevitable" if there was a "withdrawal of the faculty
observers and other kinds of neutral people who had
made up a significant section of that crowd."
We agree with the majority report that "the presence
of faculty observers could have been expected to reduce
the risk of injury to persons." However, that fact,
coupled with Professor Franklin's own concern to keep
faculty observers on the scene, cause us to dissent from
the majority conclusion: "that he believed his actions
were basically conciliatory and aimed primarily at
lessening the likelihood of a police charge and arrest is
difficult to accept." We find the conclusion plausible
rather than difficult even though we believe that
Professor Franklin's manner of seeking this end was
unwise.
2. A second difference of interpretation involves fact
more than motivation, and we find the call a close one
either way. This concerns the crucial period between the
time Professor Franklin leaves Moses and the time he is
back in conversation with Tamm, some 40 to 60 feet
away. His own witnesses state that he was shouting
loudly during these moments, but assert, along with him,
that the comments were addressed only to Moses and
Tamm. The majority report believes that in addition he
spoke directly to others, and that, even if he had not, his
voice and demeanor were such that others would
inevitably hear him, and that he should have known that
his words and actions would influence them not to
disperse. Broholm and Blank are no longer completely
sure that Professor Franklin was directly haranguing the
crowd, although that was their on-the-spot impression.
Moses believes he was, though his assessment is
predicated on action after Professor Franklin turned his
back on him, so that the direction of the shouts is only
conjecture. Waterman believes Professor Franklin was
directly enlisting crowd support, but his timing of the
event is uncertain, and he saw only Professor Franklin's
back and left side. The identity of his audience is thus
once again conjecture. It is clear, however, that by the
time Professor Franklin was within ten feet of Tamm he
was yelling directly at him such words as, "Hey, Don,
this is ridiculous . . . In the interval he was apparently
asserting "that it was not an illegal assembly, and that
people should stay," though no witness produced
unshakeable testimony that he shouted this directly at
individuals within the crowd.
The possible reconstructions not all mutually
exclusive, are (a) that he spoke directly to Moses and
Tamm, but that he was overheard by others, some of
whom responded to his exhortations, (b) that he was
directly urging members of the crowd to stay, or (c) that
he was expressing his disgust and anger at the police
order either to the heavens or to onlookers in general,
rather than as specific instructions to members of the
crowd. There is clear evidence for the first alternative,
evidence (though less persuasive) for the second, and
plausibility for the third. The weight one puts on such
alternative explanations, and the interpretation one
makes of Professor Franklin's actions during these
moments, is dependent on a third consideration.
3. The third matter Involves an element in Professor
Franklin's conduct that, like the first, appears in the
testimony of virtually every witness: his strongly stated
conviction that the police order to disperse was illegal.

This is the second substantive point of his conversations
with both Moses and Tamm. We accept the majority
opinion that it is beyond our province or expertise to
determine whether or not the order was legal, and with
the majority "we conclude that the police order
declaring this demonstration an illegal assembly and
ordering dispersal was clearly reasonable in these
circumstances."
However, if a citizen wishes to question a police order
he believes unreasonable and unlawful, he has the right
to do so for a limited period of time. We place great
weight on this right, and believe that at least in part
Professor Franklin was trying to assert it: he believed the
order to be both unreasonable and unlawful, and so he
exercised the right of a citizen to object to it, in a brief
initial dispute with Tamm, in the attempt to enlist
Moses, and then in the second heated exchange with
Tamm. Ihe elapsed time of these three conversations
was probably no more than three or four minutes. To
Professor Franklin, standing on the grassy area where all
witnesses agree that they had seen no illegal acts, the
order to disperse may have seemed patently
unreasonable. That the Board in hindsight does not share
this assessment does not diminish the right of Professor
Franklin to have held it at the time or to have acted
upon it, lor a reasonable length of time, in the name of
the right of peaceable assembly. The fact that the mood
of the crowd immediately following the evacuation of
the Computation Center was reasonably calm and may
have caused no immediate danger to the police or the
building gives added legitimacy to the right, under such
conditions, to make a brief protest against the order, and
even to seek faculty help in so doing. That Professor
Franklin tried to enlist the aid of Professor Moses in his
exercise of this right is looked upon by no member of
the Board as culpable. It is even arguable that Professor
Franklin, if he did indeed urge "students and others" to
remain, was not engaging in culpable action, but only
reminding them of their own rights as citizens to protest,
at least briefly, an order that might be considered
unlawful or unreasonable.
4. The accumulation of the above considerations
leads us to believe (a) that Professor Franklin tried to get
other faculty members to remain on the scene in order
to reduce the likelihood of a police charge, (b) that his
continuing argument about the order to disperse was an
attempt to protest a police decision he felt to be illegal,
and one which as a citizen he had a right to protest, at
least briefly, and (c) that these two strongly held
convictions, uncontested in the testimony, led him to
loud and angry shouting, clearly directed at Moses and
Tamm, and possibly though not so clearly directed at
others, centering on the need for faculty observers to
stay, and the right of others to stay. The University's
Supplementary Written Brief states, "The issue is
whether a faculty member in a situation laden with the
risk of violent confrontation between demonstrators and
the police is acting properly when by his conduct he
increases that risk." We conclude that, even if one
accepts this as a statement of "the issue," such a
description does not adequately match the conduct
charged, and that there is not in our view strongly
persuasive evidence that his words or actions constituted
an incitement. Consequently, the charge that "Professor
Franklin did significantly interfere with orderly dispersal
by intentionally urging and inciting students and other
persons present at the Computation Center to disregard
or disobey such orders to disperse" is not one that we
can sustain.
A. CHARGES
The relevant University charge concerning the
Computation Center incident is contained in paragraph 9
of the "Statement of Charges."
9. Further, on February 10, 1971 and in connection
with the activity at the Computation Center
described in paragraph 8, students and other persons
were arrested for failure to disperse after orders had
been given to clear an area around the Computation
Center. Professor Franklin signilicantly interfered
with orderly dispersal by intentionally urging and
inciting students and other persons present at the
Computation Center to disregard or disobey such
orders to disperse.
B. FINDING OF FACTS
1. Occupation of the Computation Center. Shortly
before 1:00 p.m. on February 10, 1971, the
Computation Center building was closed on the basis of
a telephone order from Provost Miller, but the computer
was kept running. Handwritten notices were posted on
the doors of the Computation Center; doors, windows,
and gates were locked; and two campus policemen were
stationed at the front door. Provost Miller had been
informed that a group was proceeding from White Plaza
to the Computation Center. An estimated 100 to 200
demonstrators arrived at the Computation Center
shortly after 1:00 p.m. There were apparently no
previous collective decisions or explicit understandings
by the group as to what actions were to be taken or as to
whether to damage the computer. Some subgroups may
have had previous understandings; different individuals
testified as to different expectations. There were no
plans for formal picketing with picket signs as in many
"strikes," and there had been no attempt to
communicate with Computation Center workers about a
strike after the Dinkelspiel meeting of February 9.
At about 1:15 p.m., forcible entry was made into the
Computation Center; the gate was scaled and the back
door forced. About 50 demonstrators then entered
through the back door. As they moved through the
building, they opened other entrances and admitted
other demonstrators. Power to the building and to the
computer was shut off at 1:20 by pulling a master
switch located near the back door. Some 100-200 more
persons entered and milled about inside the
Computation Center. Some demonstrators, according to
officials of the Center, jimmied the door and entered the
machine room. They went to the 2301 drums, yanked
out wires, and flipped switches behind gates or doors on
two of the data storage drums. Other demonstrators in
that group went directly to the racks where tape reels
were stored and began looking through them. The
telephone lines were made inoperative. Once
demonstrators were inside the building and the doors
were thrown open, the Stanford police did not try to

stop movement in and out of the building. Some of the
demonstrators posted themselves at the doors, and to
some extent controlled entry and exit, for example,
denying entry to a photographer.
During this period, there was a continual movement
of demonstrators into and out of the Computation
Center. It is agreed that some time during the
occupation approximately $800 of physical damage was
done to the premises and contents of the Computation
Center, not counting any costs of shut-down time on the
computer. This damage was partly caused by the pulling
of the wires and damage to the 2301 unit, partly to the
premises. Two fire hoses were taken out of racks arid
valves opened, but the water had been turned off earlier
by the University. The printout of each of three printers
was removed. It is agreed that no substantial damage was
done to the computer itself. However, the shutdown,
lasting until about 8:00 p.m., made it impossible for the
Computation Center to process 700-800 student and
faculty jobs scheduled for that period. Montgomery
testified that these jobs would be run during the
succeeding two weeks.
Given the fact that the demonstrators illegally seized
the Computation Center and made impossible
continuation of its regular activities, the Board does not
consider further details on the conduct of the occupiers
important for Charge 9 against Professor Franklin. It
should be noted that the occupiers refused to obey the
requests to leave the building required by law-by Bruce
Wiggins on behalf of Stanford University and by Officers
Marron, Rosa and Tamm of the Santa Clara Sheriffs
office. However, as a context for other events, we note
briefly some undisputed facts concerning the
occupation.
Professor Franklin met his 1:15 class. Only seven of
the 150 registered students were present. He believed the
others were at the Computation Center and suggested
moving the class to the area outside the Center.
Professor Franklin did not hold his class because, he
testified, many of his students were inside the
Computation Center. It is uncontested that he remained
outside the Computation Center, talking with individuals
about a variety of topics prior to the arrival of the
police.
Bruce Wiggins, Stanford Director of Public Safety,
arrived at the Computation Center soon after its
occupation. He walked through and around the building
with Assistant Fire Chief Barr. Soon thereafter, around
2:00 p.m., he telephoned the Santa Clara Sheriffs office
and told them of the occupation.
Shortly after 2:00 p.m., C. D. Marron of the Santa
Clara Sheriffs office arrived at the Computation Center.
He too walked through the building, and then went to
Redwood Hall nearby to confer with Wiggins and others,
including Messrs. Rosenzweig and Schwartz from the

University administration, Sergeant Tamm and Captain
Rosa of the Santa Clara Sheriffs office, and an Assistant
District Attorney of Santa Clara County.
At about 3:00 p.m., it was decided that Wiggins
should return to the Computation Center and issue, in
the name of Stanford University, a declaration of
trespass, declaring the occupation a violation of Stanford
University regulations and ordering the occupants to
leave immediately. Wiggins used a bullhorn as he moved
through the building making this declaration. Wiggins
claims he was jostled, pushed and shoved; it is agreed
that his announcement was greeted by jeers and catcalls,
and that virtually no one left the building in response to
his order. He then returned to the group at Redwood
Hall.
At some point, probably after 3:00 p.m., an informal
meeting was held by the demonstrators. It was chaired
by Janet Weiss, near the door of the Computation
Center, partly inside and partly outside the building.
Although reports on this meeting are somewhat
confused, apparently there was an informal discussion as
to what to do, including whether to continue the
occupation of the Computation Center, what to do if
the police came, and whether to damage the computer.
The discussion, according to Harry Press, a University
witness, included talk about what would be the impact
on student support if the computer were wrecked. Janet
Weiss is reported to have stressed the political neutrality
of machines, urging that they not be damaged.
Apparently agreement was reached to stay in the
Computation Center until the police came, and then to
leave voluntarily without damaging the computer.
Station KZSU, misunderstanding this vote, reported that
the occupiers would damage the computer, but Janet
Weiss asked them to broadcast a retraction of that
report. There may have been other, smaller meetings of
the occupiers during the afternoon; testimony on this
question is confusing.
At about 4:00 p.m., the group in Redwood Hall
decided that Messrs. Marron, Rosa, and Tamm would go
back to the Computation Center and again try to
persuade the occupants to leave voluntarily. They did so,
asking what the occupants wanted, calling attention to
the vulnerability of the computer and the data it
contained, and to possible injury to persons in the
University and in the hospital. The responses of the
demonstrators were that the occupants wanted to get
the Gamut-H program, SRI research, and war-related
research out of the Computation Center; the precise
nature of all the demands is unclear. Marron testified
that there were scattered shouts of "Down with SRI"
and "Get SRI out." Few if any of the occupiers left. The
three officers returned to Redwood Hall.
After further discussion by the group in Redwood
Hall, the three officers again returned to the
Computation Center. The police announced to the
occupants that they had been informed that the SRI
work had been stopped at the Computation Center.
Some demonstrators replied that such word was not
good enough, and they wanted a written statement from
President Lyman. After a brief discussion, the police said
there was nothing more that could be done, and the
three officers returned again to Redwood Hall.
2. Order to Disperse and Police Arrival. Police
officers had been called and their arrival was imminent.
Just before they were expected to arrive, Marron went
out to the front steps of Redwood Hall, and, using a
bullhorn, he made a formal statement declaring the
occupation of the Center and its immediately adjacent
territory unlawful and ordering the demonstrators to
disperse, also stating that they were subject to arrest if
they did not do so. It is uncontested that he made this
announcement three times, pointing in three different
directions, with one aimed directly at the people inside
the Computation Center and the two others at the
people in the area outside the Computation Center to his
left and right. There was no response to these orders to
disperse, although Professor Franklin's witness
Litterman said he heard them.
Very soon thereafter, the police arrived and entered
the Computation Center. Lookouts for the occupiers
observed the police arrival and notified those inside, so
that the occupiers left the building rapidly just as the
police were entering from another direction. The police
made no arrests in the building, although they indicated
that they would have made arrests if the occupiers had
remained in the building. Marron entered the building
immediately after the police, continuing to declare the
assembly an unlawful one, ordering dispersal, and
threatening arrest for any who did not obey the order to
disperse. Since the Computation Center had been
cleared, he then went outside and walked clockwise
around the building continuing to give his order to
disperse. He continued his series of announcements and,
by his testimony, returned to the front of the
Computation Center about eight minutes after the
arrival of the police. A double line of police had been
formed in front of the Center. Marron repeated his
complete order at least three or four times in front of
the Computation Center, stating that the area from the
Computation Center to Jordan Way was to be cleared.
Some demonstrators did not hear or did not know the
extent of the prohibited area. Marron testified that
ordering dispersal from a wide area was common police
practice. He testified to his concern that the police
officers under his command would be vulnerable to
rock-throwing and possible injury if the demonstrators
were permitted to stay close to the police lines and the
building which had just been cleared. As long as a
confrontation between demonstrators and police
persisted, indefinite police presence would have been
necessary to protect the building and computer.
As police lines were formed in front of the
Computation Center and as Marron repeated his
announcement, some clusters of demonstrators remained
in front of the police line, perhaps six to ten feet away,
chanting "Pigs off campus" and other slogans, and
loudly questioning the legality of Marron's order to
disperse. These demonstrators formed several clusters;
they included a number of members of the
"movement." Other demonstrators, faculty observers,
students, and passersby were farther from the police line
in two grassy areas and in the park lot; they were less
active.
After leaving the Computation Center, the small
clusters of demonstrators near the police lines made no
movement to withdraw in response to Marron's repeated
order. At first the more distant persons also did not
withdraw. Professor Franklin, Marron, and other
witnesses who were near the grassy areas testified,
however, that the more distant crowd began to withdraw
as the order to disperse was repeated. Professor Franklin,
in his affidavit prepared shortly after the event, stated
that he believed "most" of the crowd was beginning to
move back; in his oral testimony at the hearing he stated
that he now believes that a smaller number was
beginning to move away-perhaps only more than half,
or fewer. Marron, Moses, and Waterman, testifying for
the University, and Professor Franklin's witness Owen
Blank in a direct report to KZSU from the scene, all
agreed that the portion of the crowd away from the
police lines was definitely moving back in response to
the repeated announcements to disperse. Most of
Professor Franklin's witnesses, primarily individuals
standing near the front portion of the grassy area nearest
the Computation Center, testified that they did not see
any significant part of the crowd moving back. This
apparent contradiction in testimony is explainable, in
part at least, by the fact that those witnesses who had
reason to be observing the rear part of the crowd saw the
movement away, while those who were focusing their
attention on the police lines and events nearby did not
see the movement of the rear portion of the crowd.
3. Professor Franklin's Role. At this stage, Professor
Franklin moved forward and stood in front of a cluster
of demonstrators who were loudly stating that the order
to disperse was illegal. Some of Professor Franklin's
close political associates were part of this cluster. They
were giving a clenched fist salute while vociferously
denouncing the police order. Professor Franklin,
according to testimony and photographs, stood quietly
in front of this active group and observed what was
occurring. He then moved closer to Tamm, who was near
the police line, and argued briefly and vigorously that
the dispersal order was illegal and he had a right to
remain as a faculty observer. Tamm disagreed on both
points, pointing out that Franklin was not on the official
list of faculty observers supplied by the President's
Office. Professor Franklin then wheeled and strode
toward Dean Lincoln Moses. Moses was some 30-50 feet
farther back, perhaps 40-60 feet from Tamm, and was
beginning to leave in response to the police order.
Professor Franklin called out, "Lincoln Moses!".
Professor Franklin shouted some words like "God damn
it, this happens every time the police charge. The faculty
observers are all gone!" He argued loudly that Moses
should not leave, that the order to disperse was
improper, and that faculty observers, like Moses, should
remain to observe possible police brutality. There is
substantial agreement on what Professor Franklin said to
Moses in this brief but loud set of statements. It is
further agreed that Professor Franklin was heard by a
nearby circle of 10 to 12 persons and by others farther
away; although he was close to Moses, Professor
Franklin was shouting his arguments. Professor Franklin
testified that he was being careful while shouting at
Moses not to use language in describing the police which
would reduce the likelihood of his persuading Moses to

stay. Professor Franklin's statements to Moses took
about a minute and a half. Franklin then headed back
toward the police line, some 40-60 feet away.
Witnesses for the University testified that Professor
Franklin was shouting loudly as soon as he took his first
steps back toward the police lines, angrily denouncing
the police order as illegal. He made his way back to
Tamm, some 50 feet distant, through the substantial
group remaining in the first grassy area. The items of
dispute are whether Professor Franklin was addressing
his shouts to the police or to others in the crowd when
he started shouting, and whether his shouts included
exhortations that people not leave.
4. Testimony that Professor Franklin Urged and
Incited the Crowd to Stay. Moses reports that at first he
was convinced by Franklin's statement that he should
stay as a laculty observer and started to follow Franklin
back toward the police line. However, he goes on,
He meanwhile continued talking. He turned his back
to me and went toward the line, talking loudly
and .. . waving his arms or gesticulating. . . . And as
he went, a group of people formed about him and
went with him. And whether he was addressing only
them or generally all who could hear I wouldn't say.
On cross-examination, Moses said,
Then as you [Franklin] went on, you appeared to me
to be encouraging as many people to come as would
come. And that is what turned me around. ... I felt
that I was just being recruited to be one more person
present. ... I took the whole crowd to be provocative
of the police.
Under further cross-examination by Professor Franklin,
Moses reiterated this testimony and his statement that
Professor Franklin was urging people around him to
disobey the police order and return. Although he
admitted it was "conceivable" that Professor Franklin's
words were solely addressed to the police, he said that
his understanding was clearly to the contrary.
Moses was asked by Professor Franklin on
cross-examination whether Professor Franklin could not
have been merely urging faculty observers to join him in
going towards the police lines. Moses responded that
Professor Franklin was not addressing his remarks to
faculty members but to the entire crowd or all within
the sound of his voice. Moses said, "You spoke to me
about faculty people. And then as you went on you
appeared to me to be encouraging as many people to
come as would come. And that is what turned me
around."
Waterman testified that before Franklin approached
Moses,
.... the crowd was definitely starting to drift back
this way ... in fact they were drifting back in
appreciable numbers. ... I definitely had the
impression that the crisis was past, that people were
leaving, and that the situation was about to calm
down.
He then testified that he observed Franklin at this point
crossing the grass in front of Redwood Hall toward the
police, although Waterman was not sure whether before
or after the Moses encounter,
. . . shouting to the crowd, telling them to come back,
challenging the right of the sheriffs men to declare it
an illegal assembly, and saying that they had a perfect
right to hold a peaceful meeting and that they should
return to do so. .. . He seemed to be shouting in
general to the bunch that were leaving and had gotten
about as far as the second grassy plot.
Broholm, reporting from the scene for KZSU,
reported (a tape recording is available) first that "the
crowd was definitely moving back"; and then that
Professor Franklin "was haranguing the crowd to stay"
and resist the order to disperse, and "was berating the
crowd for leaving." On cross-examination by Professor
Franklin, Broholm confirmed this on-the-scene report:
"After you turned away from Moses you turned back in
that direction and began yelling. And again, "You
turned around, faced back toward the police . . . and
you started yelling in that direction." It is important to
note that Broholm placed the Moses-Franklin encounter
and subsequent Franklin shouting near the edge of the
crosswalk in front of Redwood Hall, at least 60 feet
from Tamm and Marron. Under further
cross-examination, Broholm said that he now doubts the
accuracy of his on-the-scene report that Professor
Franklin was "haranguing the crowd to stay," and that
instead Professor Franklin was probably shouting at
Tamm. He did not, however, change his estimate that
Professor Franklin began shouting in an area some 60
feet from Tamm, who was separated from Professor
Franklin by a substantial number of individuals in the
first grassy area. We believe that Broholm's on-the-scene
account can be presumed more accurate than his
recollection eight months later.
Owen Blank, another KZSU announcer, also reported
from the scene (recorded on tape) that the crowd in the
grassy areas was moving away at first, and then turned
and moved back toward the police line as Professor
Franklin was shouting. As Professor Franklin's witness,
Blank attached the accuracy of the taped reports by
Broholm and Blank or, Professor Franklin's role in
reversing the crowd's dispersal, but Blank's testimony
when related to the times on the taped reports instead
confirms the on-the-scene reports by Broholm and
Blank. Although Broholm and Blank apologized to
Moses for errors in Broholm's reporting at the time,
these errors concerned Moses's alleged assent
to Professor Franklin's urgings, not Professor
Franklin's own behavior.
Professor Edward Begle testified that he saw
Professor Franklin apparently urging a group of young
people to stay at the gathering, but it is not clear
whether this was the group of people around Moses and
the details of his testimony are not confirmed by others.
The witnesses who heard Professor Franklin's words
testified that he, as he strode back towards Tamm, was
angry and shouting, repeating the same arguments as
before, that the order to disperse was illegal and the
crowd should not leave. Moses's, Waterman's and
Broholm's testimony was cited above. Professor
Franklin's witness Doering testified that "He [Professor
Franklin] walked away from Moses a couple of paces,
and I think he said some things on the way." Doering
places the Moses encounter at about the group of birth
trees furthest from the police lines, some 30-40 feet
away.
As Professor Franklin returned to confront Tamm, an
indefinite number of other persons moved along, beside,
or behind him. In moving back toward Tamm, Professor
Franklin moved through a substantial number of persons
between Moses and Tamm. These included some of
Professor Franklin's political associates (identified in
pictures) and others not identified. Thus, it seems
certain that Professor Franklin's shouts against dispersal
would be clearly heard by these persons, whether or not
they were primarily addressed to Tamm, and that
Professor Franklin must surely have known that they
would be received by at least these demonstrators

through whom he advanced, whether or not they were
heard by persons behind Moses and Fiofessor
Franklin in the second grassy area.
5. Testimony that Professor Franklin Did Not Urge
and Incite the Crowd to Stay. On the other hand,
Professor Franklin and many of his witnesses testified
that Professor Franklin spoke only to Moses when he
strode from Tamm to Moses, and that he spoke only to
Tamm when he turned from Moses back toward the
police line. They described his comments to both as not
intended to incite other people to disobey the police
order. One of his witnesses, photographer Harrison,
described both the scene and Professor Franklin's
following confrontation with Tamm as "tranquil."
Another witness, Professor Switzer, described the
atmosphere as a "picnic." But these evaluations are
specifically controverted by pictures, tapes and other
testimony. Nearly all, including Professor Charles Stein
who was near Moses, deny hearing Professor Franklin
directly address anyone other than Moses or Tamm.
Most of Professor Franklin's witnesses testified that they
did not hear, or did not remember, what Professor
Franklin was saying as he strode forward, until he was
close to Tamm (e.g., Pace, Lonsdale, Hunkeler). They
report that they heard him shout only as he neared
Tamm, and then only at Tamm. This, however, is not
inconsistent with Moses', Waterman's and Broholm's
testimony that Professor Franklin was shouting earlier
when much farther from the police. Most of Protessor
Franklin's witnesses were nearer the police line, mainly
facing the police, and hence did not observe Professor
Franklin's entire movement forward. But Doering did,
and testified that Professor Franklin spoke as soon as he
left Moses. Hunkeler did not have Professor Franklin
under constant scrutiny and could hear only a few
words.
Professor Franklin testified that he began to shout at
Tamm from a distance because he wanted to be sure that
Tamm understood why he was returning to the police
line and that his action was intended to be conciliatory
and to lessen the danger of a police charge and arrests of
the demonstrators there. But that he should have done
so at such a great distance seems highly implausible
under the circumstances, and conflicts with considerable
testimony from witnesses from both parties. Clearly,
Professor Franklin did, as he stated, address Tamm,
saying, "Don, this is ridiculous ..." as he approached
Tamm and Marron, apparently from a distance of five to
ten feet; this is confirmed by his witnesses who were
near the police line.
With one exception, Professor Franklin's own
witnesses did not support his version of events as he left
Moses. The only witness for Professor Franklin who gave
evidence contradictory to that of the University
witnesses was Downey, who testified that, although he
was not sure, Professor Franklin was not saying anything
as he left Moses and walked towards the police lines. It is
likely that Downey was confused about the timing of his
interaction with Professor Franklin. Downey testified
that he never was with Professor Franklin until after the
encounter with Moses, but pictures show Downey
standing with Professor Franklin and the group shouting
at the police at a time identified by Professor Franklin's
witnesses as prior to his words with Moses. With this
doubtful exception, Professor Franklin produced no
witness who contradicted the testimony of
Administration witnesses who observed his shouting as
he left Moses at a considerable distance from the police
lines.
Professor Franklin was apparently himself confused
as to the locus of his confrontation with Moses in
relation to the police lines, and, in his testimony, he
minimized the distance from the police lines. He
testified that he was only a few steps away from Tamm
when he turned away from Moses.
One witness for Professor Franklin, Stein, supported
this spatial image by testifying that Professor Franklin
was about 15 feet from the police lines. No other
witness for either party supported Professor Franklin on
this point; indeed, five witnesses for Professor Franklin
directly contradicted him in their testimony.
6. Franklin-Tamm Confrontation and Police Charge.
It is agreed, and supported by photographic evidence,
that after Professor Franklin approached Tamm, a
substantial number of people, approximately 30, closed
in around and behind Professor Franklin as he angrily
confronted Tamm. Professor Franklin testified that he
was aware of people moving in from both sides but he
didn't know how many newsmen were present. Some
witnesses, including Professor Franklin's witness,
Litterman, testified that the crowd threatened to engulf
the police officers and Professor Franklin. Professor
Franklin and Tamm stood face to face shouting angrily
at one another. Witnesses of both parties described the
situation as very tense. Professor Franklin was repeating
his basic arguments and Tamm was denying the validity
of both.
After a very short interval, two, perhaps more,
policemen moved rapidly from behind Tamm and
Marron to try to arrest Professor Franklin, but Professor
Franklin slipped away from them, perhaps with the help
of some of his friends. At almost exactly the same time
the police line moved forward on the demonstrators in
what is commonly called a "police charge."
We note, parenthetically, that we do not consider
Professor Franklin's acknowledged urging of Moses and
other faculty observers to stay to be objectionable under
the charge. Formally designated faculty observers were
asked by the University administration to be present,
even though some, not identified to the police, were
apparently struck during the charge. The presence of
faculty observers could have been expected to reduce
the risk of injury to persons.
7. Findings of Fact. The Board finds the evidence
strongly persuasive that: (a) the police order to disperse
was clearly reasonable, given the illegal seizure of the
Computation Center, possible serious damage to the
computer and data stored there, possible danger to
police and demonstrators outside after the building was
cleared, and the need to return the Center promptly to
normal action without police presence; (b) while some
demonstrators refused to disperse after the building was
cleared, a substantial portion of the crowd was moving
back in response to repeated police orders, prior to
Professor Franklin's intervention; (c) Professor Franklin
played a central role in reversing the movement of the
crowd to disperse and his shouts and behavior
significantly increased the likelihood that a substantial
number of those present would stay; (d) Professor
Franklin intended his shouts after leaving Moses to be
heard by, and to influence the crowd to remain at the
scene in defiance of the police order to disperse.
However, even if lie did not directly address his shouts
to the crowd, he must reasonably have expected that a
result of his shouts would be to incite members of the
crowd to disobey the dispersal order, increasing the risk
to themselves; Professor Franklin's conduct and shouts

cannot reasonably be interpreted as merely attempts to
persuade Moses and other faculty observers to stay, to
conciliate the police or the crowd, or to lessen the
danger of a police charge or arrests with their attendant
dangers to the demonstrators. We comment further on
these findings in the following section.
C. SUPPLEMENTA R Y EVIDENCE AND EINDINGS
A number of points in the testimony require special
attention in order to amplify and interpret the findings
of fact indicated above.
1. Charge of University Negligence. Professor
Franklin suggests that the University administration was
negligent in not announcing to the occupiers of the
Computation Center that work on the disputed SRI
contract had, in fact, been halted one or more days
before, because this information might have been
sufficient to induce the occupiers to leave the
Computation Center peacefully. Alternatively, he
implies that had some official of the University
explained that an investigation was under way, this
might have induced the occupiers to lave the building
voluntarily without the police having to be called.
In fact, SRI had apparently stopped using the
computer for the GAMUT-Hand its other programs
prior to February 10, but it had not informed Stanford
of any policy decision regarding GAMUT-H or other SRI
projects on the Stanford computer. The SRI accounts
had not been cancelled. Moreover, the Stanford
administration at that time believed, on the information
received from SRI, that there was no violation of
University policy; SRI had indicated to the University
administration that the research in question was not
classified and was available for publication. Thus Provost
Miller testified that he did not believe it would be proper
for the University to issue any statement pending receipt
of information on SRl's position on the whole matter.
Moreover, the Computer Facilities Committee of the
University was meeting on the afternoon of February
10, during the occupation, precisely to discuss the issues
raised by the GAMLTT-H program.
We do not agree with Professor Franklin's argument
that the University administration's refusal to negotiate
with, or report to, the Computation Center occupiers
justifies the refusal of the demonstrators to leave the
Computation Center which they were illegally
occupying. Some persons believe the University
administration would have been well advised to issue a
public statement that it was investigating the whole
situation, although we find the University
administration's position on the matter easy to
understand, given the uncertainty about SRl's position
and the fact that the relevant University committee was
in fact meeting at 2 p.m. on the afternoon of the
occupation. But even if the University officials involved
were guilty of faulty administrative judgment, this
would in no way justify the illegal occupation of the
Computation Center and its continuance in the face of
both University and police orders to disperse. Moreover,
it is important to remember that the protestors had
made no direct effort vis-a-vis the administration to halt
the GAMUT-H work beyond one unsigned leaflet,
although they had, according to their own testimony,
known of it for at least a week or two; the Computation
Center sit-in was in no sense a "last resort" step after all
legal avenues were exhausted. The demands of the
occupiers were vague, and we see no reason to believe
that they would have left the Center merely on
notification by the administration that the problem was
under active investigation.
2. Argument that Police Order to Disperse was
Unreasonable and Illegal. Professor Franklin argues that
the police order to disperse was unreasonable and
unlawful-that the crowd outside the Computation
Center was peaceful and within its rights of free
assembly as guaranteed by the First Amendment to the
Constitution. Thus, not only was he within his
constitutional rights in refusing to disperse and urging
others not to disperse, but indeed he was following his
duty as a citizen and a professor in so acting.
California law clearly gives to police the authority to
disperse illegal assemblies and sets out the legal
requirements for such orders. Only a court of law, which
we are not, could finally determine whether in fact the
police declaration of illegal assembly and the order to
disperse in this instance was legal. In our judgment, the
police order to disperse was clearly reasonable and, as we
understand the law, was probably legal as well. An illegal
seizure of the Computation Center had occurred, and
both University and police officials were understandably
concerned lest serious damage be done to the valuable
equipment housed there and to the even more valuable
data stored there. It was widely known that major
damage to computers, totalling millions of dollars, had
been done to other university computers.
The order declaring the occupation of the
Computation Center an illegal assembly and ordering
dispersal was a single order aimed at the occupiers of the
Computation Center when they were inside the building
and at those participating in the demonstration outside
the building, both before and following its evacuation.
Marron's testimony on this point is clear, and it is
confirmed by one of Professor Franklin's wftnesses. He
began giving the complete order before the arrival of the
police and continued with the same order during the
evacuation of the Computation Center and following the
evacuation when part of the demonstrators stayed close
to the Computation Center building. That this order to
evacuate the building was fully warranted can hardly be
denied. It was that same order that insisted that the
demonstrators withdraw a substantial distance from the
building being evacuated.
Moreover, we conclude that the order to disperse
back to Jordan Way outside the building was reasonable
on its own merits as well. The police knew that violence
had occurred on the Stanford campus during
police-demonstrator confrontations several times during
the past few years; the precaution of moving the crowd
back a substantial distance from the police line was
understandable, and was probably calculated to lessen
injury to both the police and the demonstrators. Thus
we conclude that the police order declaring the
demonstration an illegal assembly and ordering dispersal
was clearly reasonable in these circumstances.
Professor Franklin may have had the right as a citizen
briefly to protest the police order which he believed
unreasonable. But, especially given the strongly negative
police response to his first protest which he himself
noted, he surely did not have the right to increase the
risk of injury to others by urging them to stay and
disobey the police order.
3. Argument that Professor Franklin's Action was
Aimed at Conciliation and Reducing Danger to Those
Present. Professor Franklin argues that his action outside
the Computation Center was aimed primarily at
protecting demonstrators from injury or arrest at the
hands of the police that his argument with faculty
observers (and others) to remain and with the police
against the legality of the dispersal order was aimed at
avoiding such danger to the demonstrators. Some of his
witnesses testified that in their judgment Professor
Franklin's purpose was conciliation and avoidance of
danger to the demonstrators.
We find it plausible that Professor Franklin may have
believed that he was acting to protect the rights of his
friends and co-workers in the "movement" in some ol
his actions. It is clear that those in the small group
clustered in front of the police line as the larger group of
demonstrators moved back were largely members of the
"movement," including several of its best known
participants. It thus became increasingly likely that these
individuals would be in the forefront of a police charge
and most likely to be arrested if, in fact, a charge did
occur. That Professor Franklin should endeavor to
prevent the isolation of these individuals from the rest of
the group of demonstrators and passersby is
understandable.
But that he believed that his actions were basically
conciliatory and aimed primarily at lessening the
likelihood of a police charge and arrest is difficult to
accept. His behavior was surely encouraging other people
to remain at greatly increased risks to themselves.
Shouting loudly and angrily at either faculty observers,
the police, or others in the crowd is hardly calculated to
calm crowd or police behavior, or to lessen the
likelihood of violence. Thus, Professor Franklin's loud
shouts as he turned from Moses some 40-60 feet from
the police could hardly have been calculated to calm the
situation. He apparently addressed Tamm by name only
after he had approached within 10 feet or so of the
police; surely he would have done so sooner had his
main goal been to persuade Tamm, and he would have
not shouted to the crowd upon turning away from
Moses. Professor Franklin described Tamm during the
second confrontation as "more immediately hostile than
I had ever seen him before." Moreover, Professor
Franklin himself testified that he knew "for a certainty"
that a police charge or arrest would occur under such
conditions once the police line-up occurred and the
order to disperse was read. He testified that he knew of
no case where such a situation was not followed by a
police charge or arrests. On his own testimony, he had
these points in mind prior to his discussion with Moses
and his shouting return to confront Tamm. Several of
Professor Franklin's witnesses testified that they too
thought a police charge to be highly likely or inevitable,
and became even surer when they saw Professor Franklin
striding back to confront Tamm the second time. Given
this testimony, it is difficult to accept the argument that
Professor Franklin seriously hoped by his actions to
eliminate the possibility of either a police charge or
arrests outside the Computation Center.
It is difficult to believe that Professor Franklin's duty
as a professor encompassed using others to stay and
confront the police when he felt certain that the result
would be a police charge and arrests, with a danger of
serious personal injury (which he testified is likely
whenever a police charge occurs). He testified that he
personally was resolved not to give way to fascism and
was going to stay and confront the police no matter
what happened. He testified, as did several of his
witnesses, that dispersal would be a political defeat for
the "movement" and an important victory for the
police.
Although Professor Franklin felt certain, or almost
certain, that a police charge and arrest would ensue
soon, he did not advise any people in the demonstrator's
group, either those in the "movement" or other
students, of the danger of a police charge, possible
injury, and arrests. Professor Franklin and some of his
close political associates testified of their awareness of
the impending police action at a time when others, less
experienced, did not anticipate any trouble. Professor
Franklin testified:
"My own experience in having been in just lots and
lots of police confrontations, is that if an order is
given declaring something an illegal assembly, telling
people to disperse, once that takes place then there
are basically one of two things that are going to
happen. Either the pigs are going to charge the people
or they're going to move for a mass bust.
"1 don't think I've ever seen a declaration of an illegal
assembly -maybe I have but I certainly can't
remember-l've never seen a declaration of an illegal
assembly not followed by one of those two actions.
Now it can be seconds; it can be minutes. Sometimes
they can declare an area an illegal assembly and then
nothing happens for some period of time and they're
moving what's really happening is they're moving in
for a mass bust. . . .
"And one of the signs you look for in a police line
prior to a charge is whether—one thing is the visors.
The other thing is whether they're smoking or not. If
they're not smoking then you look upon that as, you
know, a charge could take place at any time. And of
course, one of the things that they try to do is to
make the charge unexpected. So once you've got in a
situation the charge could take place the next second
or it might not take place for some time, but
something is going to happen."
Professor Franklin had difficulty explaining his
failure to warn others. He testified:
"As far as the question of whether I talked to
demonstrators on the lawn of the computer center
about the possibility of arrests and beatings and so
forth: I just—l mean, I may have had—it's possible
that I talked to some people about something about
it. But I certainly don't remember that at all, any
more than 1 remember. ... Well, I'm sure that I
didn't urge anybody to stay and I'm sure I didn't urge
anybody to leave, if that's what-if that's what the
point of that question was."
4. Did Professor Franklin Intentionally Urge and
Incite People to Remain in Defiance of the Police Order
to Disperse? The charge states that "Professor Franklin
significantly interfered with orderly dispersal by
intentionally urging and inciting students and other
persons present at the Computation Center to disregard
or disobey such orders to disperse." The evidence seems
to us convincing that the result of Professor Franklin's
behavior was to help significantly to induce students and
other persons present at the Computation Center to
disregard or disobey such orders to disperse. But
Professor Franklin argues that he did not specifically
address any individual other than Moses and Tamm. He
said, "I wouldn't take it upon myself to do that to
people in that situation because I knew that people were
defenseless in that situation." No witness testified that
Professor Franklin directly addressed other specific
individuals, although there is considerable testimony
that he addressed the crowd in more general terms,
$

urging it to resist the allegedly illegal police order to
disperse. The question is whether these shouts and this
behavior, not addressed to specific individuals other than
Moses and Tamm, amount to intentionally urging and
inciting students and other persons to disregard the
police order.
We find the evidence strongly persuasive that
Professor Franklin intentionally urged and incited
students and others present to disregard or disobey the
police orders. His purpose was to encourage others to
remain. Except for his own denial, all percipient
witnesses testified that Professor Franklin, after leaving
Moses, directly addressed his shouts to the crowd. But
even it he did not directly address the crowd, he must
have expected the likely effect of his behavior under
those circumstances to be to urge and incite others to
stay. Professor Franklin surely would not need to have
addressed each individual by name to have urged them
to stay.
The conclusion that the incitement was intentional is
reinforced by Professor Franklin's testimony that, even
knowing the results of his actions, he would not have
changed his behavior outside the Computation Center.
He said, "The only reasonable course of action that I
could see was what 1 did. And in looking back on it now
from, 1 don't know, eight or nine months, I still can't see
any other alternative."
The charge is not that Professor Franklin disobeyed
the police order himself, but that he intentionally
incited others to disobey the order. His behavior
increased the risk to others, a risk of which many were
unaware. The evidence meets the standards for
incitement that we set out earlier.
CONCLUSION
We find the evidence strongly persuasive that
Professor Franklin ' did significantly interfere with
orderly dispersal following the clearing of the
Computation Center by intentionally urging and inciting
students and other persons present to disregard or
disobey such orders to disperse, that this police order to
disperse was clearly reasonable under the circumstances,
and that Professor Franklin's conduct and speech did
substantially increase the danger of injury to other
persons.
DISSENTING OPINION
Professors Brown and Kennedy, although in accord
with much of the descriptive account of the majority
report on the events outside the Computation Center,
dissent as follows:
We place a sufficiently different interpretive weight
on the evidence at certain crucial points to make us
unable to sustain the charge.
1. The first of these centers on an element of
Professor Franklin's conduct that is central in the
testimony of virtually every witness, his concern that
faculty members remain as observers-a concern without
which many of his actions remain inexplicable. This is a
major substantive point in the conversations with Tamm
and Moses, it persuades Professor Eklof to stay on the
scene when he had decided to leave and persuades
Professor Moses in retrospect that perhaps he should
have stayed, it is a subject Professor Franklin pursues
with Professor Hastorf after the police charge, and it is
the dominant concern in Professor Franldin's later
conversation with Litterman and in a speech in front of
President Lyman's office. He asserts that he felt (a) that
the continuing presence of faculty observers might avert

a police charge, (b) that "respectable" faculty like Moses
might help him persuade the police of the right of
people to remain, and (c) that if there were a charge, the
faculty presence might minimize its brutality. He
testified that he felt a police charge would be
"inevitable" if there was a "withdrawal of the faculty
observers and other kinds of neutral people who had
made up a significant section of that crowd."
We agree with the majority report that "the presence
of faculty observers could have been expected to reduce
the risk of injury to persons." However, that fact,
coupled with Professor Franklin's own concern to keep
faculty observers on the scene, cause us to dissent from
the majority conclusion: "that he believed his actions
were basically conciliatory and aimed primarily at
lessening the likelihood of a police charge and arrest is
difficult to accept." We find the conclusion plausible
rather than difficult even though we believe that
Professor Franklin's manner of seeking this end was
unwise.
2. A second difference of interpretation involves fact
more than motivation, and we find the call a close one
either way. This concerns the crucial period between the
time Professor Franklin leaves Moses and the time he is
back in conversation with Tamm, some 40 to 60 feet
away. His own witnesses state that he was shouting
loudly during these moments, but assert, along with him,
that the comments were addressed only to Moses and
Tamm. The majority report believes that in addition he
spoke directly to others, and that, even if he had not, his
voice and demeanor were such that others would
inevitably hear him, and that he should have known that
his words and actions would influence them not to
disperse. Broholm and Blank are no longer completely
sure that Professor Franklin was directly haranguing the
crowd, although that was their on-the-spot impression.
Moses believes he was, though his assessment is
predicated on action after Professor Franklin turned his
back on him, so that the direction of the shouts is only
conjecture. Waterman believes Professor Franklin was
directly enlisting crowd support, but his timing of the
event is uncertain, and he saw only Professor Franklin's
back and left side. The identity of his audience is thus
once again conjecture. It is clear, however, that by the
time Professor Franklin was within ten feet of Tamm he
was yelling directly at him such words as, "Hey, Don,
this is ridiculous . . . In the interval he was apparently
asserting "that it was not an illegal assembly, and that
people should stay," though no witness produced
unshakeable testimony that he shouted this directly at
individuals within the crowd.
The possible reconstructions not all mutually
exclusive, are (a) that he spoke directly to Moses and
Tamm, but that he was overheard by others, some of
whom responded to his exhortations, (b) that he was
directly urging members of the crowd to stay, or (c) that
he was expressing his disgust and anger at the police
order either to the heavens or to onlookers in general,
rather than as specific instructions to members of the
crowd. There is clear evidence for the first alternative,
evidence (though less persuasive) for the second, and
plausibility for the third. The weight one puts on such
alternative explanations, and the interpretation one
makes of Professor Franklin's actions during these
moments, is dependent on a third consideration.
3. The third matter Involves an element in Professor
Franklin's conduct that, like the first, appears in the
testimony of virtually every witness: his strongly stated
conviction that the police order to disperse was illegal.

This is the second substantive point of his conversations
with both Moses and Tamm. We accept the majority
opinion that it is beyond our province or expertise to
determine whether or not the order was legal, and with
the majority "we conclude that the police order
declaring this demonstration an illegal assembly and
ordering dispersal was clearly reasonable in these
circumstances."
However, if a citizen wishes to question a police order
he believes unreasonable and unlawful, he has the right
to do so for a limited period of time. We place great
weight on this right, and believe that at least in part
Professor Franklin was trying to assert it: he believed the
order to be both unreasonable and unlawful, and so he
exercised the right of a citizen to object to it, in a brief
initial dispute with Tamm, in the attempt to enlist
Moses, and then in the second heated exchange with
Tamm. Ihe elapsed time of these three conversations
was probably no more than three or four minutes. To
Professor Franklin, standing on the grassy area where all
witnesses agree that they had seen no illegal acts, the
order to disperse may have seemed patently
unreasonable. That the Board in hindsight does not share
this assessment does not diminish the right of Professor
Franklin to have held it at the time or to have acted
upon it, lor a reasonable length of time, in the name of
the right of peaceable assembly. The fact that the mood
of the crowd immediately following the evacuation of
the Computation Center was reasonably calm and may
have caused no immediate danger to the police or the
building gives added legitimacy to the right, under such
conditions, to make a brief protest against the order, and
even to seek faculty help in so doing. That Professor
Franklin tried to enlist the aid of Professor Moses in his
exercise of this right is looked upon by no member of
the Board as culpable. It is even arguable that Professor
Franklin, if he did indeed urge "students and others" to
remain, was not engaging in culpable action, but only
reminding them of their own rights as citizens to protest,
at least briefly, an order that might be considered
unlawful or unreasonable.
4. The accumulation of the above considerations
leads us to believe (a) that Professor Franklin tried to get
other faculty members to remain on the scene in order
to reduce the likelihood of a police charge, (b) that his
continuing argument about the order to disperse was an
attempt to protest a police decision he felt to be illegal,
and one which as a citizen he had a right to protest, at
least briefly, and (c) that these two strongly held
convictions, uncontested in the testimony, led him to
loud and angry shouting, clearly directed at Moses and
Tamm, and possibly though not so clearly directed at
others, centering on the need for faculty observers to
stay, and the right of others to stay. The University's
Supplementary Written Brief states, "The issue is
whether a faculty member in a situation laden with the
risk of violent confrontation between demonstrators and
the police is acting properly when by his conduct he
increases that risk." We conclude that, even if one
accepts this as a statement of "the issue," such a
description does not adequately match the conduct
charged, and that there is not in our view strongly
persuasive evidence that his words or actions constituted
an incitement. Consequently, the charge that "Professor
Franklin did significantly interfere with orderly dispersal
by intentionally urging and inciting students and other
persons present at the Computation Center to disregard
or disobey such orders to disperse" is not one that we
can sustain.
