# DR. JORDAN DISCOURSES UPON THE UNIVERSITY IDEALS OF STANFORD IN TRIBUTE TO THE FOUNDERS
## 
### 
Dr. Jordan delivered the annual
Founders' Day address in the Assem
bly Hall this morning upon the sub
ject of "The Foundation Ideals of Stan
ford University."
From an historical as well as a per
sonal viewpoint it is eminently fit
ting that Dr. Jordan should discourse
upon this theme, which will farm a
companion piece to the Chancellor's
"The Story of a Good Woman." The
latter also first appeared as a Found
ers' Day address, and was a eulogy
of the life of Mrs. Jane Lathrop Stan
ford, and a narrative of the history
of the University during the so-called
"dark days" between 1893 and 1899,
when the ultimate fate of the institu
tion was in constant doubt.
In treating his subject this morning
Dr. Jordan gave expression to the
ideals which inspired Senator Leland
Stanford in his conception of Stanford
University. Selecting the successful
system then in practice at Cornell
University as the most suitable for the
needs of Stanford, the Senator called
upon Andrew D. White, who was
mainly responsible for the efficiency
of Cornell, where he was then acting
president, to assume the duties of
chief executive at Stanford. In declin
ing White .recommended David Stan-
Jordan, then president of the Universi
ty of Indiana, for the position.
When the present Chancellor name
to Stanford he was the youngest uni
versity president, in po'nt of years, in
the country, and when he resigned he
was the oldest in point of service, a
fact of no little significance.
The important share which Dr.
David Starr Jordan had in forming, di
recting. and developing the "founda
tion 'deals" of Stanford University
need no comment.
The address of Dr. Jordan follows:
I)r. Jordan Introduces Speech.
When Charles Darwin felt himself
growing old, he sat down in his home
in Kent to write the story of his life —
fo.r his children. He wrote, he said, as
might a spirit from another world,
looking down on this one. not swayed
by any emotion, of hope, of fear, or
eagerness or uncertainty as to the
final end. And so, today, T wish in
some such disembodied fashion to tell
the story of the founding of a univer
sity, and of the purposes and ideas
with which it started out.

Twenty-four years is a short time
in the history of a nation or a univer
sity, which is a small and swiftly
changing nation within itself. It is a
long time in the life of a man, as those
who with me have spanned it can tes
tify.
The story of today will not go far
beyond the first day of October, 1891,
when we gathered in the northwest
gate of the quadrangle for the open
ing day.
Founder and President.
Purpose must come before action,
and in the very beginning there were
only two to frame this purpose, the
founder and the president. Leland
Stanford was then scarcely older than
I am now, and I was a mere "youth
of promise," from the simple-minded
east, a "new man," as the San Francis
co journals kindly put it, and Mr.
Stanford had a reputation wider than
the nation, a philosopher and a lover
of li s kind as well as a business man
and a statesman.
A ('auspicious Figure.
Leland Stanford had been for a gen
eration the most conspicious figure in
California. He was a .rich man, weal
thy through his own effort, and he
hoped to leave humanity better for his
riches. Especially he wished to bring
to the California he loved, and who, af
ter California's fash-on, ha.l f'nst, loved
him, the abundance of life, which is
the best gift of the University. Leland
Stanford had held many relations with
California. He was an actual pion
eer. When the Civil War broke out he
had no doubt of his position and he
stood for free speech in Sacramento,
when freedom was dangerous. He was
the war governor of the state, trusted
by Lincoln, and like Lincoln, he knew
how to count the cost in a difficult
crisis. He had been one of the four
men of Sacramento who saw the vision
of a railway over the Sierras. In 1891
he was United States Senator from
California, known to every one and be
loved by all who came near him.
Typically American.
His wide influence did not rise from
his wealth. Wealth and influence
sprang alike from his personality. He
was broad-minded and long-headed,
and his simplicity of life kept him al
ways in touch with the people. "He
was active," it was said, "when other

men were idle; he was generous when
other men were grasping; he was lof
ty when other men were base." He
was thoroughly a man, and a man of
the type we like to call American.
One word of praise of Stanford
clings to my memory. At his funeral
in 1893, Horatio Stebbins in his state
ly fashion told how the Greeks did
honor to a slain hero. Then turning
to the pallbearers, stalwart men from
the Southern Pacific, he said: "Gentle
up your strength a little, for 'tis a man
ye bear."
University Idealized.
The story of the death of the only
son is known to Stanford people. The
boy, young Leland, fell ill in Rome
from the mosquito-borne Roman fever.
After coming back to Florence while
convalescent, he died of failure of the
heart. After the long vigil of a dreary
night, Mr. Stanford awoke one morn
ing with these words on his lips: "The
children of California shall be my chil
dren." And this thought grew crystal
line as the dream of a great universi
ty. And in this plan, nis wife, Jane La
throp Stanford, gave him most loyal
service, which continued unshaken
throughout twelve years of lonely wid
owhood. The story of her love and de
votion I have told as well as I could on
another occasion, the parallel to this.
< aliforiiia tlie .Motif.
So the decision was made that the
beloved Palo Alto farm —famed for the
finest horses in the world —should be
come a university campus. The Uni
versity buildings should have a motif
from California. To this end the old
mission of San Juan Capistrano, near
the seashore above San Diego, founded
by Father Junlpero Serra more than a
century before, was chosen to give the
University its form. Appeal was made
to the greatest living architects, Henry
Hobson Richardson, of Boston, for
the best was none too good for the new
University. Richardson died before
any work was begun, but his partners,
Shepley, Rutan and Coolidge, took up
the plans in all essential respects just
as we see them now in stone. Freder
ick Law Olmsted devised the garden
effects, but his plans are as yet car
ried out only in part. The streets were
laid out, and at Mr. Stanford's request.
I named them for the early padres,
who led in the missions of California.
Among these are Salvatierra Street,
named for the Jesuit father who first
urged the California missions; Serra
Avenue, fo,r Junipero Serra, the Fran
ciscan who first began the work of
building them, performing marvels of
energy and patience in long marches up
and down the coast from La Paz to
Monterey, and in dealing with the be
setting Indians for whose salvation,
temporal and spiritual, the missions
themselves were planned. Lasuen
street is named for Firmin Lasuen, the
wise and self-contained successor to
the impulsive and enthusiastic Padre
Serra. Po.rtola, Arguello, and Alvara
do were the first governors of Califor
nia; Crespi its first historian, Costan
zo its first civil engineer. These with
Ortega, Rivera, and the rest, were
members of Portola's party of explora
tion who first saw the Golden Gate
and the bay belvnd it. They likened it
to a "Mediterranean Sea," and they
named it for their patron saint, San
Francisco of Assisi, who knew the lan
guage of the birds and even that of
the fishes. Meanwhile, and with char
acteristic energy, Mr. Stanford set out
to make his vision into fact. Articles
of endowment were drawn up, and
buildings we.re provided. A president
was found and he was sent forth to
choose fifteen professors. It was not
wise to have too many professors till
we knew whether students would
come. The press notices were not en
thusiastic. The New York Mail and
Express said: "There is as much need
of a university in California as there
is in Switzerland for an asylum for de
cayed sea-captains." And it was
prophesied that even the fifteen would
for years "lecture in marble halls to
empty benches." Rut the benches
were not empty, as we all know; the
never to be forgotten pioneers of '95
were all there, altogether to the num
ber of 465, and on the first of Octob
er, with all bright auspices of earth
and sky. of wealth and generosity, the
University began. Of the fifteen pro
fessors, oldest of the old guard, par
takers in all joy, worry and success,
ten still remain,—Branner, Stillman,
Marx, Jenkins, Sanford, Campbell. An
derson, Gilbert, G.riffin, and Elliott.
Meanwhile, these were the ideas or
the Founder, as he gave them to me in
many evenings together, the
stones of the quadrangle were leaping
to find their places.
How I came in the matter you will
find in the autobiography of President
White, of Cornell, if you are interested
to read.
Possibilities of Knowledge.
The need to train his own son first
turned Mr. Stanford's thoughts to edu
cational matters. His early acquaint
ance with Professor Agassiz, perhaps
the greatest of American teachers, di
rected his thought into channels of
wisdom. From Agassiz he derived a
realizing sense of the possibilities of
human knowledge and the impelling
force of man's intellectual needs, —
that "hunger and thi.rst after truth
which only the destitute student
knows." "Man's physical needs are
slight," he said, "but his intellectual
needs are hounded only by his capacity
to receive.'
Major System Valued.
The major-subject system, especially
characteristic of Stanford, but later
taken in part by several other univer
sities, among them Harvard, may be
traced in some degree back to Agassiz.
It was first devised in Indiana,, in
1887, by a committee of three, D,r. Bry
an. now president of Indiana, Dr. von
Jagemann. now professor in Harvard,
and myself. In framing the plan I
had in mind the oft repeated words of
Atrassiz: "A spec'alty is the backbone
of education." "The mind is made
strong by the thorough possession of
something." And those of us who be
lieved with President White in the de
mocracy of the mental powers, realized
that in the higher education of a stu
dent it is the man himself who can
best choose what the backbone of his
training should be. For in making a
student, there are but two types of im
pulses strong enough to count, to love

the work itself and to know how the
work is related to his future life.
Mr. Stanford believed that an essen
tial part of education was thorough
knowledge in some one line, so firmly
held as to be effective for practical re
sults. He believed in early choice of
profession. The course of study, how
ever broad and however long, should
in all its parts look toward effective
1 fe. The profession chosen early gives
a purpose and stimulus to all the in
termediate training. He saw clearly
the need of individualism in education,
and that the course of study should be
built around the individual man he is.
The supposed needs of the average
man, developed by a consensus of edu
cational philosophers do not suffice for
the actual man in actual life. We must
be fed with the food that is good for
us. It is for 11s that it must be adap
ted, not for some average man in some
overage age. The ready-made curri
culum belongs to the same category
as ready-made clothing. It is some
thing cheap and easy for the man with
out individual needs.
Democracy and Knowledge.
No other university has recognized
so distinctly as ours the absolute de
mocracy of knowledge. The earlier
traditions of Cornell pointed in this di
rection, and for this reason Mr. Stan
ford found in Cornell, rather than in
Harvard Yale, or Michigan, the
nearest existing approach to his
own ideal. It was Ezra Cornell's
hope "to found an institution where
any person could find instruction in
any study." Cornell and Stanford, in
so far as they are loyal to these tra
ditions, know neither favored students
nor favored studies. No class of men
is chosen to the exclusion of others,
and no class of studies is given a fal
lacious importance through force of
academic pressure or through inertia
of academic tradition. While various
kinds of knowledge are of varying
worth td different persons, each has
its own value to the world, and the
value to the individual must he de
termined in each case by itself. The
university should be no respecter of
persons. It is not called on to approve
or condemn the\various orders of ge
nius that come to it for training.
There has been no greater hindrance
to educational progress than the hler
rchy of studies, the fiction that certain
kinds of work had an invisible value
not to be measured by tangible results.
That the work of a university should
be essentially specialized, fitting the
individual for definite forms of higher
usefulness, was an idea constantly pre
sent with Mr. Stanford. He had no
interest in general education as an end
in itself. He had no desire to fit men
for a life of leisure, or for any life
which did not involve a close adaption
of means to ends.
No Educational Millinery.
As a practical man, accustomed to
go to the heart of things, Mr. Stanford
had little respect for educational mil
l'nery and for the conventionalities
which have grown up about the great
institutions of the Old World. He saw
clearly the value of thoroughness, the
need of freedom, the individuality of
development, but cared little for the
machinery by which these ends were
achieved. So it was decreed that tho
new university should be simple in its
organization, with only those details
of structure which the needs of the
times should develop within it. If it
must have precedents and traditions,
it must make its own. "I would have
this institution," he said, "help to fit.
men and women for usefulness in this
life, by 'ncreasing their individual
power of production, and by making
them good company for themselves and
others." Or, in my own words to
young men, spoken in this same time:
"The whole of your life must be spent
in your own company, and only the
educated man is good company for
himself."
And besides, "The world turns asid<>
to let any man pass who knows whi
ther he is going."
In proportion to the extent to which
it widens the range of human know
ledge and of human power, in that de

gree does an institution deserve the
name of university. A man content
with the truth that now is, and without
ambition to venture into the unknown,
is not the proper man to be a university
professor. The truth that now is be
longs to the lower schools. The value
of its original work is the best single
test by wh'ch a university may be
judged; and as it is the best, so is it
also the severest. The incentive for
research should be from within. It
cannot be applied from without.
In its public relations, the university
stands for infinite patience, the calm
tasting of ideas and ideals. It con
ducts no propaganda, it controls no
affairs of business. There is no one
it wishes to elect to office. It is the
judge of the principles of wisdom and
the ways of nature. The details of
action it must leave to men whose
business it is to guide the currents of
the moment.
Freedom and Truth.
It was our hope that we might give
to our students the priceless legacy of
the educated man, the power of know
ing what really is. The higher edu
cation should bring men into direct
contact with truth. It should help to
free them from the dead hands of old
traditions and to enable them to form
opinions worthy of the new evidence
each new day brings before them. An
educated man should not be the slave
of the past, not a copy of men who
have gone before him. He must be in
some degree the founder of a new in
tellectual dynasty; for each new think
er is a new type of man. Whatever
is true is the truest thing in the uni
verse, and mental and moral strength
alike come from our contact with it.
And so wo believed that influence that
gees out from these halls should em
phasize the value of truth. The es
sence of scholarship is to know some
thing which is absolutely true; to
have, in the words of Huxley, "some
knowledge to the certainty of which
no authority could add nor take away
one jot or tittle, and to which the
tradition of a thousand years is but
as the hearsay of yesterday." The
scholar, as was once said of our great
chemist, Benjamin Silliman, must have
"faith in truth as truth, faith that
there is a power in the universe good
enough to make trutli-telling safe and
strong enough to make truth-telling ef
fective." The personal influence of gen
uineness, as embodied in the life of a
teacher, is one of the strongest moral
forces which the school can bring to
its aid; for moral training comes not
mainly by precept, but by practice.
We may teach the value of truth to
our students by showing that we value
it ourselves.
Educational Instrument.
Mr. Stanford insisted as a vital prin
ciple that the university exists for
the benefit of the students, present,
past, and future. It has no exist
ence or function save as an instru
ment of education. To this principle
all others should be subordinate. In
his opening address, he said to the
students of the Pioneer Class: "You
are the most important factor in this
university. It is for your benefit that
it has been established."
No Test in Numbers.
That the new university would in
time attract great numbers of stu
dents, Mr. Stanford believed as a mat
ter of course, although he found In
California few who shared his optim
ism. But he was never deceived with
the cheap test of numbers in estimat
ing the value of institutions. He knew
that a few hundred men well trained
under high influences would count for
more than as many thousand, hurried
in droves over a ready-made curricu
lum by young tutors, themselves
scarcely out of college. So it was de
creed that numbers for numbers' sake
should never be a goal of Stanford
University. And he further made the
practical request that not one dollar
directly or indirectly should be spent
in advertising. The university has no
goods for which it is anxious to find
customers.
The greatest nepd of the student is
the teacher Mr. Stanford said: "In

order that the president may have the
assistance of a competent staff of pro
fessors, we have provided that the
best talent obtainable shall be pro
cured and that liberal compensation
shall always lie offered." Again lie
said: "Ample endowment may have
been provided, intelligent management
may secure large income, students
may present themselves In numbers,
but in the end the faculty makes or
mars the university."
Facility (Greatest Need.
Compared with the character of the
faculty, every other element in the
university is of relatively little im
portance. The chief duty of the col
lege president is the choice of teach
ers. If he lias learned the art of sur
rounding himself with men who are
clean, sane, and scholarly, most other
matters of university administration
will take care of themselves, lie can
not fail if he has good men around
him. And in the choice of teachers
the element of personal sanity seemed
of first importance to Mr. Stanford—
the ability to see things as they are.
The university chai.r should be a cen
ter of clear-seeing from which right
acting should rad ate.
Mr. Stanford said, "I hope the Uni
versity may begin where the State
University leaves off." By this he
meant to lay stress on technical, pro
fessional. and research work, activi
ties which were at that time very lit
tle developed at the State University.
He spoke approvingly of an institu
tion which should combine the special
features of Johns Hopkins and Cor
nell.
A professor to whom original in
vestigation is unknown should have
no place in a university. Men of com
monplace or second-hand scholarship
are of necsssity men of low ideals,
however much the fact may be dis
guised. A man of high ideals must be
an investigator. He must know and
think for himself. Only such as do
this can be really great as teachers.
Universities already begin to recog
nize that their most important profes
sors may be men who teach not in
classes, but only by contact with indiv
iduals, devoting time and strength to
advanced research. The presence and
example of the men who really know
may be worth to the student body a
hundred-fold more than the precepts
and drill of the others. They set
standards of thought. They help to
create the university spirit, without
which any college is but a grammar
school of a little higher pretensions.
University Atmosphere.
In the address on the first day in the
old quadrangle, I said: "If our work
is successful, our ideals will appear in
the daily life of the school. In a
school, as in a fortress, it is not the
form of the building, but the strength
of the materials, which determine its
effectiveness. With a garrison of
hearts of oak, it may not matter even
whether there be a fortress. What
ever its form, or its organization, or
its pretensions, the character of the
university is fixed by the men who
teach. "Have a university in shan
ties, nay in tents," Cardinal Newman
has said, "but have great teachers in
it." The university spirit flows oik
from these teachers, and its organiza
tion serves mainly to bring them to
gether. "Colleges only serve us," says
Emerson, "when their aim is not. to
drill, but to create; when they gath
er from afar every ray of various
genius to their hospitable halls, and
by their concentrated fires set the
heart of their youth in flames."
Strong men make universities strong.
A great man never fails to leave a
ureat mark on every youth with whom
he conies in contact. Too much em
phasis cannot be laid on this: that
the real purpose of the university or
ganization is to produce a university
atmosphere—such an atmosphere as
gathered itself around Arnold at Rug
b.v. around Dollinge.r at Munich,
around Linnaeus at Upsaln. around
Werner at Freiberg, around Agassiz
at Cambridge, around Hopkins at Wil
liamstown, around White at Ithaca,
around all great teachers everywhere.
Agassi/, once said: "The physical
suffering of humanity, the wants of
the poor, the craving of the hungry
and naked, appeal to the sympathies
of every one who has a human heart.
Hut there are necessities which only
the destitute student knows. There is
a hunger and thirst which only the
highest charity can understand and re
lieve; and 011 this solemn occasion
let me say that every dollar given for
higher education, in whatever depart
ment of knowledge, is l'kely to have
a greater influence on the future char
acter of our nation than even the
thousands, the hundred thousands,
and millions which'we have spent, or
are spending, to raise the many to ma
terial ease and comfort."
Presidential Powers.
Mr. Stanford laid much stress on
the work of the President of the Uni
versity. The hoard of trustees were
directed to give to him such powers
as would enable him, with his col
leagues. to control all educational pol
icies, and such that for their success
he might justly lie held responsible.
At some future time the presidency
of the American university may lie an
outworn office, its function to he taKOn
by a committee from the faculty, as
some now urge that it should be.
Hut this cannot be done in the period
of formation of the American univer
s'ty, and no American university has
yet passed its period of youth and
growth. In that lies its strength. Its
hope lies in its imperfection. It is
not born full-grown, as the German
universities have claimed to be. With
perfection, decline sets in, as these
univers'ties have clearly shown. Ev
ery forward movement needs a lead
er. "An institution is but the length
ened shadow of a man."
It is for the president to take the
initiative in all educational affairs, to
give the university its color and its
personality. lie must know how to
take advice and how to value it. The
more checks and balances on his ac
tion the better, but none should de
prive him of his initiative. It is for
him to seek and develop those rare
elements of feeling and character by
which one university is known from
another. And in our University we
tried to weld together such elements
to form what we fondly hoped men
would call the "Stanford Spirit."
Value of Keonomy.
It was the idea of the founders that
each student should be taught the
value of economy—that lavish expen
ditures bring neither happiness nor
success. "A student," it was said by
one of the founders, "will lie better
fitted to battle with the trials and trib
ulations of life, if he lias been taught
the worth of money, the necessity of
saving and of overcoming a desire to
imitate those who are better off in the
world's goods. For, when he has
learned how to save and how to con
trol inordinate desires, be will be rel
atively rich During the past three
and a half years of close observation
on my part, the importance of econ
uniy bas impressed itself forcibly up
on me, and I wish it to be taught to
all students of the university. Na
ture has made the surroundings of
the university beautiful, and the sub
stantial character of the buildings
gives them an appearance of luxury.
I wish this natural beauty and com
parative luxury to impress upon the
students the necessity of their preser
vation for the generations that are to
follow. The lesson thus taught will
remain with them through life and
help them to teach the lesson to
ethers. The un'versitv buildings and
grounds are for their use while stu
dents. in trust for students to come."
\i*l of
The value of the study of political
and social science as a remedy for
defects of government was clearly
seen by Mr. Stanford. "All govern
ments." he said, "at" governments by
public opinion, and in the long run
ever', people is a■ well governed as it
deserves." Hence increase of knowl
edge brin-'s about bett r government.
For help in such matters the people
bavr a ri hi to look to their un ! ', : r

sities and university men. It was his
theory that the art of government is
still in its infancy. "Legislation lias
not, as a rule, been a ainst the peo
ple, but it has not done the good tli it
it might." "No greater biow can be
struck at labor than that which ren
ders ts products insecure." In the
externum of volir't irv co-operation,
he saw a remedy for many present ills,
as lie siw in the lav ef mutual help
the essence of i ur Christian civiliza
tion. He said, in laying the corner
stone: "Out of these suggestions
urows the consider tion of the great
advantages, especially to the laboring
man, of cooperation, by which each
individual has the benefit of the intel
lectual and physical forces of his as
sociates. It is I \ tli • intelligent ap
plication of these |) j c'iiles that there
will le found th? greatest lever *.o
elevate the mass o r humanity, and
laws should h< f:;iincd to protect and
develop co-operat ve associations. . . .
They will accomplish all that is

sought to lie secured by labor leagues,
trades unions and other federations of
workmen, and will be free from the
objection of even impliedly attempt
i 11 to take the unauthorised 01
wrongful control ( 112 the property,
capital, or time of others."
li<>>:ilt > and Co-ojicmtieii,
One result of voluntary co-opera
tion, in .Mr. Stanford's view, would bo
the development of the spirit of loy
> alty. the most precious attribute of
[ the laboring man in any grade, in any
j field, to the interest or cause which
' he serves. One great evil of the pres
ent era of gigantic industrial organ
izations is that it takes no account of
the spirit of loyalty, without which
no man can do li s best work. The
huge trust does away with tlie feeling
of personal association. The equally
huge trades union, in many of its op
erations. strikes directly at the per
sonality of the individual workman.
It makes him merely a pawn to be
moved hither and thither in the game
of industrial war. In the long run,
j no enterprise can flourish, unless
' those who carry it on throw them
selvi s, heart and soul,' into its ser
vice. On the other hand..no one can
do a greater injury to the cause of
labor than to take loyalty out of the
category of working virtues. IJ is one
if the traditional good traits of ihr
healthy college man to be loyal to bis
j t'ollege. This virtue Mr. Stanford
would have cultivated in all effective
ways, and in loyalty on both sides lie
would find a practical < lution of most

112 the la! or troubles of today. That
he carried his ideas into his own prac
tice ir shown by the unflinching devo
tion of all his own employees of what
ever grad j throughout his life. They
were taught to bel eve in him. to be
lieve in th > worth of their own work,
a: d thi s to have respect for tliem
selw-. Much of the dheont ill of the
day has its origin in lack of self-re
spect. The pawn that is moved in the
game of sympathetic strike lias no
control over his own actions, and
then f< re : o respect for his own mo
tives. Th <!< veiop rent of intelligent,
vclur.tary co-i.peration. n the long
r ni, lrakeg the wtvkman more than a
machi '.e. If lie is such, in the long
rti" again, ho will re e've whatever
he deserves. 11 1 will be a factor in
c'vi'i r ior, when the unskilled, un
thinking laborer is not.
\\ iisi < i I abor.
\he - ■ it economic waste in labor
oft m engaged Mr. Stanford's atton
t'on, avd he found its remedy in edu-

•'tin". "Orce," ho faid, "tho great
"n )o c:f labor was to supply the
necessities of life; now, hut a small
portion of our people are so engaged.
' o: d. clothing and shelt.fr are com
non in our country to every provident
'lerscn, excepting, of course, in occa
sional accidental cases. The great
demard for I ilor is to supply what
may he termed Intellectual wants, to
which there is no limit, except that
of intelligence to conceive. If all the
j relations and obligations of man
j were properly understood, it would
I net he nec«vsary for people to make a
| burden of labor. Th > great masses of
I the toilers are now compelled to per
form such an amount of labor as
makes life often wearisome. \n intel
ligent system of education would cor
rect. this inequality. It would make
I
the humblest laborer's work more
I valuable, it would increase both the
| demand and supply for skilled labor,
and reduce the number of the non
producing class. It would dignify la
hor, and ultimately would go far to
wipe out the mere distinctions of
wealth and ancestry. It would achieve
| a. bloodless revolution and establish
j a republic of industry, merit and
; learning.
"Ilow near to that state we may be,
j or how far from it, we cannot tell. It
■ stents very far when we contemplate
the great standing a litres of Europe,
where over five millions of men (or
about one for every twelve adult
male i are marching about with gnus
on their shoulders to preserve the
•tea(' • of nations, while hovering near

them is an innumerable force of po
lice to preserve the peace of individ
uals; but when we remember the pos
sibilities of e vilizution and the power
of education, we can foresee ;i time
when these soldiers and policemen
shall be changed to useful, producing
citizens, engaged in lilting the bur
dens of the people instead of increas
ing them. And yet. extravagant as are
the nations of Europe in standing ar
mies and preparations for war, their
xtravagance in the waste of labor is
still greater. Education, by teaching
the intelligent use of machinery, is
the only remedy for such waste."
Education a Itirtbriglit.
Mr. Stanford believed that no edu
cational system could be complete in
which entrance to the university was
a detached privilege of the chosen
few. lie believed in the unbroken lad
der from the kindergarten to the uni
versity, a ladder that, each one should
be free to climb, as far as his ability
or energy should permit. He believed,
with lan Maclaren. in keeping the
path well trodden from the farmhouse
to the university, lie asked that this
sentence from the president's first, ad
dress be placed on the University Reg
ister: "A generous education is the
birthright of every man and woman in
America." In Emerson's words:
"America means opportunity," and
opportunity comes through training to
receive it. To have such a train'ng
is to be truly free born, and this is
the birthright of each child of the re
public.
A friend at Aix-les-Mains once ar
gued with him that there is already
too much education, and that to in
crease it further ! s simply to swell the
volume of discontent. "I insisted."
Mr. Stanford said, "that there can not
be too much education any more than
too much health or intelligence. Do
you happen to know any man who has
been too well educated. Where does
he live? What is his address? If you
cannot find such a man, you cannot
speak of overeducation." There has
been unwise education or misfit, edu
cation. Some highly educated men
are neither wise nor lit, and there is a
kind of education that comes from
experience and not from books. But
with all this, too thorough or too
good a training no one ever had. Ig
norance is shadow. Education is light.
Nothing is more unpractical than
darkness, nothing is more practical
than sunshine.
Secret of Human Power.
Science is knowledge tested and set
in order, and each advance in knowl
<l ge cirrics with it a corresponding
increment of power. A machine, to
Mr. Stanford, was not a mere saver of
lal or. but an aid to labor, increasing
its efficiency and therefore adding to
the value of men. Hv greater knowl
edge of the forces of nature we ac
quire greater skill in turning these
forces '11 to man's service through the
harness of machinery. In increase of
scientific knowledge he found the se
cret of human power. An education
which does not disclose the secret of
power is unworthy the name. "We
may always advance toward the infi
nite," was a favorite saying of his.
He could find no limit to the develop
in lit of civilization. The possibilities
of human progress expressed to him
the measure of infinite goodness, in
his own words: "The beneficence of
the Creator toward man on earth, and
the possibilities of humanity, are one
and the same."
But in his forecast of the myriad
triumphs of applied science, he did not
forget that knowledge itself must pre
cede any use man can make of it.
Pure science must always go before
applied science. The higher forms of
thought have their place in mental
growth as necessities in the concrete
preparation for action,
In the new university he decreed
that "the work in applied science::
he decreed that "the work in applied
shall be carried along with that
in the pure sciences and the hu
manities. and that, so far as may be.
all lines of work included in the plan
of the university shall be equally fos
tered."
Itcnct'itN el' Vsseeialion.
Mr. Stanford's belief that literature
and engineering should be pursued
side by side was shown by his wish
to provide for each with equal gene.r

osity. And the students of each are
tlii' gainers by this relation. The de
votee of classical culture is strength
ened by his association with men to
whom their college work is part of
the serious duty of life. The student
of engineering stands with both feet
on tlie ground, li s success in life
depends on the exactness of his
knowledge of machinery and of the
basic principles of mechanics and
maihematics. He must be in dead
earnest if lie would succeed at all. On
the other hand, the student of realities
uains by his association with the poet,
the philosopher and the artist. The
finer aspects of life are brought to his
notice, and from this association re
sults tolerance and breadth of sym
( oeditcationa! \(ha»t:iges.
That worn n should receive higher
education as well as men was an ax
iom 'o Mr. Stanford. Coeducation was
taken for granted from the first, pud
the young women of Stanford have
■ ( v ;■ had to question the friendliness
I their welcome. "We have provid
ed." Mr. Stanford says"in the articles
of endowment, that the education of
tlie sexes shall be equal—deeming it.
of special importance that those who
are to be mothers of the future gen
eration shall be fitted to mold and di
rect th,' infantile mind at its most crit
ical period."
The leading argument for coeduca
tion is akin to one just indicated for
the uiron in one institution of the
various lines of literature, art, sci
ence. and applied technology.
In women's education, as planned
for women alone, the tendency is to
ward (he study of beauty and order.
Literature and language take prece
dence over science. Expression is
valued more highly than action. In
carrying this to an extreme, the ne
c ssary relat on of thought to action
becomes obscured. The scholarship
developed tends to be ineffective, be
cause it is not related to life. The
educated women are likely to master
technique, rather than art; method
than substance. She may know a
good deal, but be able to do nothing.
Often her views of life must undergo
nainful changes before she can find
her place in the world.
In schools for men alone, the re
verse condition often obtains. The
::cnse of reality obscures the element
of beauty and fitness. It is of great
advantage to both men and women to
meet on a plane of equality in edu
cation. Women are brought into con
tact, with men who can do things—
men in whom the sense of reality is
strong, and who have definite views in
life. This influence affects them for
good. It turns them away from sen
timentalism. It is opposed to un
wholesome forms of hysterical friend
ship. It. gives tone to their religious
thoughts and impulses. Above all, it
tends to encourage action governed
by ideals, as opposed to that resting
on caprice. It gives them better
standards of what is possible and im
possible, when the responsibility for
action is thrown upon them.
In like manner, the association
with wise, sane and healthy women
has its value for young men. This
value has never been fully realized,
even by the strongest advocates of
coeducation. It raises their ideals of
womanhood, and the highest manhood
must bp associated with such an ideal.
Meanly and Kitnes*.
While the work of the teachers must
make the kernel of the university, we
must rejoice that here at Palo Alto
even the husks are beautiful. Reality
and fitness are great forces in educa
tion. Every object with which the
young mind comes iti contact leaves
on it. its trace. "Nothing is unim
portant in the life of man," and the
least feature of our surroundings has
its influence, greater or less. "There
was a child went forth every day,"
Walt Whitman tells us. "and the first
object that it looked upon, that ob
lect it became." It may be for a mo
ment or an hour, or "for changing
vcb s of years." The essence of civ
'Mv.ation is exposure to vfiilnc: ami
humanizing influence " ' n- in
i university," ♦ "o <>-. "is
ivnrth more than a dol'ar ' ■' '" ,1 "and
" ery dollar spent in tinker n nuiv< r
itv beautiful will be i en,aid with in


( liancellor David Starr .lonian.
terest in the enriching of the students'
lives.
It has been a reproach to America
that for the best of her sons and
daughters she has done the least. She
lias built palaces for lunatics, idiots,
crippled and blind, —nay, even for
criminals and paupers. But the col
lege students —"the young men of
sound mind and earnest purposes, the
noblest treasures of the State," to
quote the words of President White,
"she has housed in vile barracks."
The student has no need for luxury.
Plain living has ever gone with high
thinking. But grace and fitness have
an educative power too often forgot
ten in this utilitarian age. These
long corridors with their stately
arches, these circles of waving palms,
will have their part in the students'
training as surely as the chemical lab
oratory or the seminary-room. Each
stone in the quadrangle shall teach its
lesson of grace and genuineness, and
this Valley of Santa Clara shall occu
py a warm place in every student's
heart. Pictures of this fair region will
cling to his memory amid the figures
of the draughting-room. He will not
forget the fine waves of our two moun
tain ranges, overarched by a soft blue
Grecian sky, nor the ancient oak trees,
nor the gently sloping fields, changing
from vivid green to richest yellow, as
the seasons change. The noble jnllars
of the gallery of art, its rich treas
ures, the choicest remains of the
ideals of past ages—all these, and a
hundred other things which each one
will find out for himself, shall fill his
mind with bright pictures, never to be
rubbed out in the wea,r of life. Thus
in the character of every student shall
be left some imperishable trace of the
beauty of the Stanford farm, the estate
of Palo Alto.
Influence of Character.
Above and beyond all learning is
the influence of character, the impulse
to virtue and piety which comes from
men whose lives show that virtue and
piety really exist. For the life of the
most exalted as well as the humblest
of men, there can be no nobler motto
than that inscribed by the great
scholar of the last century over his
home in Hammarby: "Innocue vivito;
numen adest." Live blameless; God
is near. "This," said Linnaeus, "is
the wisdom of my life."
Religious Freedom.
Whsn the University was founded,
it was provided that in its religious
life, as in its scientific investigations,
it should be wholly free from outside
control. No religious sect or organi
zation and no group of organizations
should have dominion over it. The
University should exist for its own
sake, to carry out its own purposes,
and to bring out its own results in
its own way.
In this regard the die is cast, once
for all. The choice of the founders
of the University was deliberate and
final. They chose the path of intel
lectual and religious freedom, in the
very interest of religion itself. Re
ligion is devotion in action. In its
higher reaches it must be individual,
because it is a function of the indiv
idual soul which must stand in per
petual protest against the religion
that finds its end in forms and cere
monies and organizations.
The .requirement was a simple re
flection of Mr. Stanford's own relig
ious character, as expressed in the
words of one very near to him: "If
a firm belief in a beneficent Creator,
a profound admiration for Jesus of
Nazareth and His teachings, and the
certainty of a personal life hereafter,
constitute religion, then Leland Stan
ford was a religious man. The nar
row walls of a creed could not confine
him; therefore, he was not a pro
fessed member of any church, for in
each confession of faith he found
something to which he could not sub
scribe. But for the principles of re
ligion he hijd a profound veneration;
in h's heart were the true sentiments
of Christianity, and ho often said that
in his opinion the Golden Rule was
the cornerstone of all religion."
RelMon must form the axis of per
sonal character, and its prime import

ance the university cannot ignore. To
attain its culture it may use indirect
rather than direct means, the influ
ence of effort and character rather
than the imposition of forms. To ac
cept ecclesiastical help is to invite
ecclesiastical control toward ecclesi
astical ends. In the grant of endow
ment it was required that the trustees
should "prohibit sectarian instruction,
but have taught in the university the
immortality of the soul, the existence
of an all-wise and benevolent Crea
tor. and that obedience to His laws
is the highest duty of man."
The founders believed truly that
freedom of thought and action would
promote morality and religion, that a
deeper, fuller religious life would
arise from the growth of the individ
ual, that only where the "winds of
freedom blow" will spring up the
highest type of religious development.
For character is formed from within
by the efforts and strivings and as
pirations of the individual. It can
never be imposed from without. The
will is made strong from choosing
the right, not from having right ac
tion enforced upon it. The life of man
is "made beautiful and sweet through
self-devotion and through self-re
straint." But this must be chosen
voluntarily, else it fails of its purpose.
Growth Through Ages.
It was Mr. Stanford's hope to leave
the University free to grow through
the coming ages. He would extend
no dead hand from the grave to limit
its activities or to control its move
ments. The deed of gift is in favor
of education pure and simple. It has
no hampering clause, and the only end
in view is that of the help of human
ity through the extension of knowl
edge. "We hope," he said, "that this
institution will endure through long
ages. Provisions regarding details of
management, however wise they may
be at present, might prove to be mis
chievous under conditions which may
arise in the future."
The growth of the University must
remain the best evidence of the
founder's wisdom. He had the sagac
ity to recognize the value of higher
education and the patriotism to give
the rewards of a successful life to its
advancement. He had the rare wis
dom to discriminate between the real
and the temporary in university organ
ization and management, and his pro
vision is for the genuine and the per
manent, not for that "which speedily
passes away." Still more rare, he had
the forethought to leave to each suc
ceeding generation, the duty of adapt
ing its details of administration and
methods to the needs of the time.
If the founders had said: "We will
found a university so strong that it
may endure for all the centuries,
whose organization shall be so free
and flexible that in each age it shall
reflect the best spirit of the time,"
they could not have given it greater
freedom of development than it has
today. For the glory of the univer
sity must lie in its freedom, in that
freedom which cannot fall into li
cense, nor lose itself in waywardness
—that freedom which knows but one
bond of control, the eternal truth of
God.
Perpetual Power.
When the University opened its
doors in 1891, Millicent Shinn printed
these words of prophecy: "Greater
than the achievement of lasting hon
or among one's fellow-men of later
generations, is it to become a living
power among them forever. It rarely
happens to one man and woman to
have both the power and the skill to
thus live after death, working and
shaping beneficently in the lives of
many—not of tens nor of hundreds,
but of thousands and tens of thou
sands, as the generations follow on.
Herein is the wisdom of money spent
in education, that each recipient of in
fluence becomes in his time a center
to transmit the same in every direc
tion. so that it multiplies forever in
geometric .ratio. The power to mold
unborn generations for good, to keen
one's hards mightily on human af
fairs after the flesh has been dust for
years, seems not onlv more than mor

tal, but more than man. Thus does
man become co-worker with God in
the shaping of the world to a good
outcome."
And this I said in my opening day
address, "The Golden Age of Califor
nia begins when its gold is used for
purposes like this. From such deeds
must rise the new California of the
coming century, no longer the Califor
nia of the gold-seeker and the adven
turer, but the abode of high-minded
men and women, trained in the wis
dom of the ages, and imbued with the
love of nature, the love of man, and
the love of God. And bright indeed
will be the future of our State if in
the usefulness every hope and prayer
of the founders shall be realized."
University Life
With those words of mine, spoken
twenty-four years ago, the University
began. "We come together today," I
said, "for the first time as teacher and
students. With this relation, the life
of the University begins. It is such
personal contact of young men and
young women with scholars and in
vestigators which constitutes the life
of the University. It is for us as
teachers and students in the Univer
sity's first year to lay the foundations
of a school which may last as long as
human civilization. Ours is the
youngest of the universities, but it is
heir to the wisdom of all the ages,
and with this inheritance it has the
promise of a rapid and sturdy growth
"But the future, with its glories and
responsibilities, will be in other
hands. It is ours at the beginning to
give the University its form, its ten
dencies, its customs. The power of
precedent will cause to be repeated
over again everything that we do —
our errors as well as our wisdom, it
becomes us, then, to begin work mod
estly, as under the eye of the coming
ages. We must lay the foundations
broad and firm, so as to give full sup
port to whatever edifice the future
may build. Ours is the humbler task,
but not the least in importance, and
our work will not be in vain if all we
do is done in sincerity. As sound as
the rocks from which these walls are
hewn should be the work of every
teacher who comes within them. To
the extent that this is true will the
University be successful. Unless its
work be thus 'wrought in sad sincer
ity' nothing can redeem it from fail
ure. In this feeling, and realizing,
too, that only the help we give to the
men and women whose lives we reach
can justify our presence here, we are
ready to begin our work.
"Our University has no history to
fall back upon; no memories of great
teachers to haunt its corridors; in
none of its rooms appear the traces
which show where a great man has
lived and worked. No tender asso
ciations cling, ivv-like, to its fresh,
new halls. It is hallowed by no tra
dition. it is hampered by none.
Traditions and associations it is ours
to make. From our work the future
of the University will grow, as the
splendid lily from the modest bulb."
Dr. Jordan delivered the annual
Founders' Day address in the Assem
bly Hall this morning upon the sub
ject of "The Foundation Ideals of Stan
ford University."
From an historical as well as a per
sonal viewpoint it is eminently fit
ting that Dr. Jordan should discourse
upon this theme, which will farm a
companion piece to the Chancellor's
"The Story of a Good Woman." The
latter also first appeared as a Found
ers' Day address, and was a eulogy
of the life of Mrs. Jane Lathrop Stan
ford, and a narrative of the history
of the University during the so-called
"dark days" between 1893 and 1899,
when the ultimate fate of the institu
tion was in constant doubt.
In treating his subject this morning
Dr. Jordan gave expression to the
ideals which inspired Senator Leland
Stanford in his conception of Stanford
University. Selecting the successful
system then in practice at Cornell
University as the most suitable for the
needs of Stanford, the Senator called
upon Andrew D. White, who was
mainly responsible for the efficiency
of Cornell, where he was then acting
president, to assume the duties of
chief executive at Stanford. In declin
ing White .recommended David Stan-
Jordan, then president of the Universi
ty of Indiana, for the position.
When the present Chancellor name
to Stanford he was the youngest uni
versity president, in po'nt of years, in
the country, and when he resigned he
was the oldest in point of service, a
fact of no little significance.
The important share which Dr.
David Starr Jordan had in forming, di
recting. and developing the "founda
tion 'deals" of Stanford University
need no comment.
The address of Dr. Jordan follows:
I)r. Jordan Introduces Speech.
When Charles Darwin felt himself
growing old, he sat down in his home
in Kent to write the story of his life —
fo.r his children. He wrote, he said, as
might a spirit from another world,
looking down on this one. not swayed
by any emotion, of hope, of fear, or
eagerness or uncertainty as to the
final end. And so, today, T wish in
some such disembodied fashion to tell
the story of the founding of a univer
sity, and of the purposes and ideas
with which it started out.

Twenty-four years is a short time
in the history of a nation or a univer
sity, which is a small and swiftly
changing nation within itself. It is a
long time in the life of a man, as those
who with me have spanned it can tes
tify.
The story of today will not go far
beyond the first day of October, 1891,
when we gathered in the northwest
gate of the quadrangle for the open
ing day.
Founder and President.
Purpose must come before action,
and in the very beginning there were
only two to frame this purpose, the
founder and the president. Leland
Stanford was then scarcely older than
I am now, and I was a mere "youth
of promise," from the simple-minded
east, a "new man," as the San Francis
co journals kindly put it, and Mr.
Stanford had a reputation wider than
the nation, a philosopher and a lover
of li s kind as well as a business man
and a statesman.
A ('auspicious Figure.
Leland Stanford had been for a gen
eration the most conspicious figure in
California. He was a .rich man, weal
thy through his own effort, and he
hoped to leave humanity better for his
riches. Especially he wished to bring
to the California he loved, and who, af
ter California's fash-on, ha.l f'nst, loved
him, the abundance of life, which is
the best gift of the University. Leland
Stanford had held many relations with
California. He was an actual pion
eer. When the Civil War broke out he
had no doubt of his position and he
stood for free speech in Sacramento,
when freedom was dangerous. He was
the war governor of the state, trusted
by Lincoln, and like Lincoln, he knew
how to count the cost in a difficult
crisis. He had been one of the four
men of Sacramento who saw the vision
of a railway over the Sierras. In 1891
he was United States Senator from
California, known to every one and be
loved by all who came near him.
Typically American.
His wide influence did not rise from
his wealth. Wealth and influence
sprang alike from his personality. He
was broad-minded and long-headed,
and his simplicity of life kept him al
ways in touch with the people. "He
was active," it was said, "when other

men were idle; he was generous when
other men were grasping; he was lof
ty when other men were base." He
was thoroughly a man, and a man of
the type we like to call American.
One word of praise of Stanford
clings to my memory. At his funeral
in 1893, Horatio Stebbins in his state
ly fashion told how the Greeks did
honor to a slain hero. Then turning
to the pallbearers, stalwart men from
the Southern Pacific, he said: "Gentle
up your strength a little, for 'tis a man
ye bear."
University Idealized.
The story of the death of the only
son is known to Stanford people. The
boy, young Leland, fell ill in Rome
from the mosquito-borne Roman fever.
After coming back to Florence while
convalescent, he died of failure of the
heart. After the long vigil of a dreary
night, Mr. Stanford awoke one morn
ing with these words on his lips: "The
children of California shall be my chil
dren." And this thought grew crystal
line as the dream of a great universi
ty. And in this plan, nis wife, Jane La
throp Stanford, gave him most loyal
service, which continued unshaken
throughout twelve years of lonely wid
owhood. The story of her love and de
votion I have told as well as I could on
another occasion, the parallel to this.
< aliforiiia tlie .Motif.
So the decision was made that the
beloved Palo Alto farm —famed for the
finest horses in the world —should be
come a university campus. The Uni
versity buildings should have a motif
from California. To this end the old
mission of San Juan Capistrano, near
the seashore above San Diego, founded
by Father Junlpero Serra more than a
century before, was chosen to give the
University its form. Appeal was made
to the greatest living architects, Henry
Hobson Richardson, of Boston, for
the best was none too good for the new
University. Richardson died before
any work was begun, but his partners,
Shepley, Rutan and Coolidge, took up
the plans in all essential respects just
as we see them now in stone. Freder
ick Law Olmsted devised the garden
effects, but his plans are as yet car
ried out only in part. The streets were
laid out, and at Mr. Stanford's request.
I named them for the early padres,
who led in the missions of California.
Among these are Salvatierra Street,
named for the Jesuit father who first
urged the California missions; Serra
Avenue, fo,r Junipero Serra, the Fran
ciscan who first began the work of
building them, performing marvels of
energy and patience in long marches up
and down the coast from La Paz to
Monterey, and in dealing with the be
setting Indians for whose salvation,
temporal and spiritual, the missions
themselves were planned. Lasuen
street is named for Firmin Lasuen, the
wise and self-contained successor to
the impulsive and enthusiastic Padre
Serra. Po.rtola, Arguello, and Alvara
do were the first governors of Califor
nia; Crespi its first historian, Costan
zo its first civil engineer. These with
Ortega, Rivera, and the rest, were
members of Portola's party of explora
tion who first saw the Golden Gate
and the bay belvnd it. They likened it
to a "Mediterranean Sea," and they
named it for their patron saint, San
Francisco of Assisi, who knew the lan
guage of the birds and even that of
the fishes. Meanwhile, and with char
acteristic energy, Mr. Stanford set out
to make his vision into fact. Articles
of endowment were drawn up, and
buildings we.re provided. A president
was found and he was sent forth to
choose fifteen professors. It was not
wise to have too many professors till
we knew whether students would
come. The press notices were not en
thusiastic. The New York Mail and
Express said: "There is as much need
of a university in California as there
is in Switzerland for an asylum for de
cayed sea-captains." And it was
prophesied that even the fifteen would
for years "lecture in marble halls to
empty benches." Rut the benches
were not empty, as we all know; the
never to be forgotten pioneers of '95
were all there, altogether to the num
ber of 465, and on the first of Octob
er, with all bright auspices of earth
and sky. of wealth and generosity, the
University began. Of the fifteen pro
fessors, oldest of the old guard, par
takers in all joy, worry and success,
ten still remain,—Branner, Stillman,
Marx, Jenkins, Sanford, Campbell. An
derson, Gilbert, G.riffin, and Elliott.
Meanwhile, these were the ideas or
the Founder, as he gave them to me in
many evenings together, the
stones of the quadrangle were leaping
to find their places.
How I came in the matter you will
find in the autobiography of President
White, of Cornell, if you are interested
to read.
Possibilities of Knowledge.
The need to train his own son first
turned Mr. Stanford's thoughts to edu
cational matters. His early acquaint
ance with Professor Agassiz, perhaps
the greatest of American teachers, di
rected his thought into channels of
wisdom. From Agassiz he derived a
realizing sense of the possibilities of
human knowledge and the impelling
force of man's intellectual needs, —
that "hunger and thi.rst after truth
which only the destitute student
knows." "Man's physical needs are
slight," he said, "but his intellectual
needs are hounded only by his capacity
to receive.'
Major System Valued.
The major-subject system, especially
characteristic of Stanford, but later
taken in part by several other univer
sities, among them Harvard, may be
traced in some degree back to Agassiz.
It was first devised in Indiana,, in
1887, by a committee of three, D,r. Bry
an. now president of Indiana, Dr. von
Jagemann. now professor in Harvard,
and myself. In framing the plan I
had in mind the oft repeated words of
Atrassiz: "A spec'alty is the backbone
of education." "The mind is made
strong by the thorough possession of
something." And those of us who be
lieved with President White in the de
mocracy of the mental powers, realized
that in the higher education of a stu
dent it is the man himself who can
best choose what the backbone of his
training should be. For in making a
student, there are but two types of im
pulses strong enough to count, to love

the work itself and to know how the
work is related to his future life.
Mr. Stanford believed that an essen
tial part of education was thorough
knowledge in some one line, so firmly
held as to be effective for practical re
sults. He believed in early choice of
profession. The course of study, how
ever broad and however long, should
in all its parts look toward effective
1 fe. The profession chosen early gives
a purpose and stimulus to all the in
termediate training. He saw clearly
the need of individualism in education,
and that the course of study should be
built around the individual man he is.
The supposed needs of the average
man, developed by a consensus of edu
cational philosophers do not suffice for
the actual man in actual life. We must
be fed with the food that is good for
us. It is for 11s that it must be adap
ted, not for some average man in some
overage age. The ready-made curri
culum belongs to the same category
as ready-made clothing. It is some
thing cheap and easy for the man with
out individual needs.
Democracy and Knowledge.
No other university has recognized
so distinctly as ours the absolute de
mocracy of knowledge. The earlier
traditions of Cornell pointed in this di
rection, and for this reason Mr. Stan
ford found in Cornell, rather than in
Harvard Yale, or Michigan, the
nearest existing approach to his
own ideal. It was Ezra Cornell's
hope "to found an institution where
any person could find instruction in
any study." Cornell and Stanford, in
so far as they are loyal to these tra
ditions, know neither favored students
nor favored studies. No class of men
is chosen to the exclusion of others,
and no class of studies is given a fal
lacious importance through force of
academic pressure or through inertia
of academic tradition. While various
kinds of knowledge are of varying
worth td different persons, each has
its own value to the world, and the
value to the individual must he de
termined in each case by itself. The
university should be no respecter of
persons. It is not called on to approve
or condemn the\various orders of ge
nius that come to it for training.
There has been no greater hindrance
to educational progress than the hler
rchy of studies, the fiction that certain
kinds of work had an invisible value
not to be measured by tangible results.
That the work of a university should
be essentially specialized, fitting the
individual for definite forms of higher
usefulness, was an idea constantly pre
sent with Mr. Stanford. He had no
interest in general education as an end
in itself. He had no desire to fit men
for a life of leisure, or for any life
which did not involve a close adaption
of means to ends.
No Educational Millinery.
As a practical man, accustomed to
go to the heart of things, Mr. Stanford
had little respect for educational mil
l'nery and for the conventionalities
which have grown up about the great
institutions of the Old World. He saw
clearly the value of thoroughness, the
need of freedom, the individuality of
development, but cared little for the
machinery by which these ends were
achieved. So it was decreed that tho
new university should be simple in its
organization, with only those details
of structure which the needs of the
times should develop within it. If it
must have precedents and traditions,
it must make its own. "I would have
this institution," he said, "help to fit.
men and women for usefulness in this
life, by 'ncreasing their individual
power of production, and by making
them good company for themselves and
others." Or, in my own words to
young men, spoken in this same time:
"The whole of your life must be spent
in your own company, and only the
educated man is good company for
himself."
And besides, "The world turns asid<>
to let any man pass who knows whi
ther he is going."
In proportion to the extent to which
it widens the range of human know
ledge and of human power, in that de

gree does an institution deserve the
name of university. A man content
with the truth that now is, and without
ambition to venture into the unknown,
is not the proper man to be a university
professor. The truth that now is be
longs to the lower schools. The value
of its original work is the best single
test by wh'ch a university may be
judged; and as it is the best, so is it
also the severest. The incentive for
research should be from within. It
cannot be applied from without.
In its public relations, the university
stands for infinite patience, the calm
tasting of ideas and ideals. It con
ducts no propaganda, it controls no
affairs of business. There is no one
it wishes to elect to office. It is the
judge of the principles of wisdom and
the ways of nature. The details of
action it must leave to men whose
business it is to guide the currents of
the moment.
Freedom and Truth.
It was our hope that we might give
to our students the priceless legacy of
the educated man, the power of know
ing what really is. The higher edu
cation should bring men into direct
contact with truth. It should help to
free them from the dead hands of old
traditions and to enable them to form
opinions worthy of the new evidence
each new day brings before them. An
educated man should not be the slave
of the past, not a copy of men who
have gone before him. He must be in
some degree the founder of a new in
tellectual dynasty; for each new think
er is a new type of man. Whatever
is true is the truest thing in the uni
verse, and mental and moral strength
alike come from our contact with it.
And so wo believed that influence that
gees out from these halls should em
phasize the value of truth. The es
sence of scholarship is to know some
thing which is absolutely true; to
have, in the words of Huxley, "some
knowledge to the certainty of which
no authority could add nor take away
one jot or tittle, and to which the
tradition of a thousand years is but
as the hearsay of yesterday." The
scholar, as was once said of our great
chemist, Benjamin Silliman, must have
"faith in truth as truth, faith that
there is a power in the universe good
enough to make trutli-telling safe and
strong enough to make truth-telling ef
fective." The personal influence of gen
uineness, as embodied in the life of a
teacher, is one of the strongest moral
forces which the school can bring to
its aid; for moral training comes not
mainly by precept, but by practice.
We may teach the value of truth to
our students by showing that we value
it ourselves.
Educational Instrument.
Mr. Stanford insisted as a vital prin
ciple that the university exists for
the benefit of the students, present,
past, and future. It has no exist
ence or function save as an instru
ment of education. To this principle
all others should be subordinate. In
his opening address, he said to the
students of the Pioneer Class: "You
are the most important factor in this
university. It is for your benefit that
it has been established."
No Test in Numbers.
That the new university would in
time attract great numbers of stu
dents, Mr. Stanford believed as a mat
ter of course, although he found In
California few who shared his optim
ism. But he was never deceived with
the cheap test of numbers in estimat
ing the value of institutions. He knew
that a few hundred men well trained
under high influences would count for
more than as many thousand, hurried
in droves over a ready-made curricu
lum by young tutors, themselves
scarcely out of college. So it was de
creed that numbers for numbers' sake
should never be a goal of Stanford
University. And he further made the
practical request that not one dollar
directly or indirectly should be spent
in advertising. The university has no
goods for which it is anxious to find
customers.
The greatest nepd of the student is
the teacher Mr. Stanford said: "In

order that the president may have the
assistance of a competent staff of pro
fessors, we have provided that the
best talent obtainable shall be pro
cured and that liberal compensation
shall always lie offered." Again lie
said: "Ample endowment may have
been provided, intelligent management
may secure large income, students
may present themselves In numbers,
but in the end the faculty makes or
mars the university."
Facility (Greatest Need.
Compared with the character of the
faculty, every other element in the
university is of relatively little im
portance. The chief duty of the col
lege president is the choice of teach
ers. If he lias learned the art of sur
rounding himself with men who are
clean, sane, and scholarly, most other
matters of university administration
will take care of themselves, lie can
not fail if he has good men around
him. And in the choice of teachers
the element of personal sanity seemed
of first importance to Mr. Stanford—
the ability to see things as they are.
The university chai.r should be a cen
ter of clear-seeing from which right
acting should rad ate.
Mr. Stanford said, "I hope the Uni
versity may begin where the State
University leaves off." By this he
meant to lay stress on technical, pro
fessional. and research work, activi
ties which were at that time very lit
tle developed at the State University.
He spoke approvingly of an institu
tion which should combine the special
features of Johns Hopkins and Cor
nell.
A professor to whom original in
vestigation is unknown should have
no place in a university. Men of com
monplace or second-hand scholarship
are of necsssity men of low ideals,
however much the fact may be dis
guised. A man of high ideals must be
an investigator. He must know and
think for himself. Only such as do
this can be really great as teachers.
Universities already begin to recog
nize that their most important profes
sors may be men who teach not in
classes, but only by contact with indiv
iduals, devoting time and strength to
advanced research. The presence and
example of the men who really know
may be worth to the student body a
hundred-fold more than the precepts
and drill of the others. They set
standards of thought. They help to
create the university spirit, without
which any college is but a grammar
school of a little higher pretensions.
University Atmosphere.
In the address on the first day in the
old quadrangle, I said: "If our work
is successful, our ideals will appear in
the daily life of the school. In a
school, as in a fortress, it is not the
form of the building, but the strength
of the materials, which determine its
effectiveness. With a garrison of
hearts of oak, it may not matter even
whether there be a fortress. What
ever its form, or its organization, or
its pretensions, the character of the
university is fixed by the men who
teach. "Have a university in shan
ties, nay in tents," Cardinal Newman
has said, "but have great teachers in
it." The university spirit flows oik
from these teachers, and its organiza
tion serves mainly to bring them to
gether. "Colleges only serve us," says
Emerson, "when their aim is not. to
drill, but to create; when they gath
er from afar every ray of various
genius to their hospitable halls, and
by their concentrated fires set the
heart of their youth in flames."
Strong men make universities strong.
A great man never fails to leave a
ureat mark on every youth with whom
he conies in contact. Too much em
phasis cannot be laid on this: that
the real purpose of the university or
ganization is to produce a university
atmosphere—such an atmosphere as
gathered itself around Arnold at Rug
b.v. around Dollinge.r at Munich,
around Linnaeus at Upsaln. around
Werner at Freiberg, around Agassiz
at Cambridge, around Hopkins at Wil
liamstown, around White at Ithaca,
around all great teachers everywhere.
Agassi/, once said: "The physical
suffering of humanity, the wants of
the poor, the craving of the hungry
and naked, appeal to the sympathies
of every one who has a human heart.
Hut there are necessities which only
the destitute student knows. There is
a hunger and thirst which only the
highest charity can understand and re
lieve; and 011 this solemn occasion
let me say that every dollar given for
higher education, in whatever depart
ment of knowledge, is l'kely to have
a greater influence on the future char
acter of our nation than even the
thousands, the hundred thousands,
and millions which'we have spent, or
are spending, to raise the many to ma
terial ease and comfort."
Presidential Powers.
Mr. Stanford laid much stress on
the work of the President of the Uni
versity. The hoard of trustees were
directed to give to him such powers
as would enable him, with his col
leagues. to control all educational pol
icies, and such that for their success
he might justly lie held responsible.
At some future time the presidency
of the American university may lie an
outworn office, its function to he taKOn
by a committee from the faculty, as
some now urge that it should be.
Hut this cannot be done in the period
of formation of the American univer
s'ty, and no American university has
yet passed its period of youth and
growth. In that lies its strength. Its
hope lies in its imperfection. It is
not born full-grown, as the German
universities have claimed to be. With
perfection, decline sets in, as these
univers'ties have clearly shown. Ev
ery forward movement needs a lead
er. "An institution is but the length
ened shadow of a man."
It is for the president to take the
initiative in all educational affairs, to
give the university its color and its
personality. lie must know how to
take advice and how to value it. The
more checks and balances on his ac
tion the better, but none should de
prive him of his initiative. It is for
him to seek and develop those rare
elements of feeling and character by
which one university is known from
another. And in our University we
tried to weld together such elements
to form what we fondly hoped men
would call the "Stanford Spirit."
Value of Keonomy.
It was the idea of the founders that
each student should be taught the
value of economy—that lavish expen
ditures bring neither happiness nor
success. "A student," it was said by
one of the founders, "will lie better
fitted to battle with the trials and trib
ulations of life, if he lias been taught
the worth of money, the necessity of
saving and of overcoming a desire to
imitate those who are better off in the
world's goods. For, when he has
learned how to save and how to con
trol inordinate desires, be will be rel
atively rich During the past three
and a half years of close observation
on my part, the importance of econ
uniy bas impressed itself forcibly up
on me, and I wish it to be taught to
all students of the university. Na
ture has made the surroundings of
the university beautiful, and the sub
stantial character of the buildings
gives them an appearance of luxury.
I wish this natural beauty and com
parative luxury to impress upon the
students the necessity of their preser
vation for the generations that are to
follow. The lesson thus taught will
remain with them through life and
help them to teach the lesson to
ethers. The un'versitv buildings and
grounds are for their use while stu
dents. in trust for students to come."
\i*l of
The value of the study of political
and social science as a remedy for
defects of government was clearly
seen by Mr. Stanford. "All govern
ments." he said, "at" governments by
public opinion, and in the long run
ever', people is a■ well governed as it
deserves." Hence increase of knowl
edge brin-'s about bett r government.
For help in such matters the people
bavr a ri hi to look to their un ! ', : r

sities and university men. It was his
theory that the art of government is
still in its infancy. "Legislation lias
not, as a rule, been a ainst the peo
ple, but it has not done the good tli it
it might." "No greater biow can be
struck at labor than that which ren
ders ts products insecure." In the
externum of volir't irv co-operation,
he saw a remedy for many present ills,
as lie siw in the lav ef mutual help
the essence of i ur Christian civiliza
tion. He said, in laying the corner
stone: "Out of these suggestions
urows the consider tion of the great
advantages, especially to the laboring
man, of cooperation, by which each
individual has the benefit of the intel
lectual and physical forces of his as
sociates. It is I \ tli • intelligent ap
plication of these |) j c'iiles that there
will le found th? greatest lever *.o
elevate the mass o r humanity, and
laws should h< f:;iincd to protect and
develop co-operat ve associations. . . .
They will accomplish all that is

sought to lie secured by labor leagues,
trades unions and other federations of
workmen, and will be free from the
objection of even impliedly attempt
i 11 to take the unauthorised 01
wrongful control ( 112 the property,
capital, or time of others."
li<>>:ilt > and Co-ojicmtieii,
One result of voluntary co-opera
tion, in .Mr. Stanford's view, would bo
the development of the spirit of loy
> alty. the most precious attribute of
[ the laboring man in any grade, in any
j field, to the interest or cause which
' he serves. One great evil of the pres
ent era of gigantic industrial organ
izations is that it takes no account of
the spirit of loyalty, without which
no man can do li s best work. The
huge trust does away with tlie feeling
of personal association. The equally
huge trades union, in many of its op
erations. strikes directly at the per
sonality of the individual workman.
It makes him merely a pawn to be
moved hither and thither in the game
of industrial war. In the long run,
j no enterprise can flourish, unless
' those who carry it on throw them
selvi s, heart and soul,' into its ser
vice. On the other hand..no one can
do a greater injury to the cause of
labor than to take loyalty out of the
category of working virtues. IJ is one
if the traditional good traits of ihr
healthy college man to be loyal to bis
j t'ollege. This virtue Mr. Stanford
would have cultivated in all effective
ways, and in loyalty on both sides lie
would find a practical < lution of most

112 the la! or troubles of today. That
he carried his ideas into his own prac
tice ir shown by the unflinching devo
tion of all his own employees of what
ever grad j throughout his life. They
were taught to bel eve in him. to be
lieve in th > worth of their own work,
a: d thi s to have respect for tliem
selw-. Much of the dheont ill of the
day has its origin in lack of self-re
spect. The pawn that is moved in the
game of sympathetic strike lias no
control over his own actions, and
then f< re : o respect for his own mo
tives. Th <!< veiop rent of intelligent,
vclur.tary co-i.peration. n the long
r ni, lrakeg the wtvkman more than a
machi '.e. If lie is such, in the long
rti" again, ho will re e've whatever
he deserves. 11 1 will be a factor in
c'vi'i r ior, when the unskilled, un
thinking laborer is not.
\\ iisi < i I abor.
\he - ■ it economic waste in labor
oft m engaged Mr. Stanford's atton
t'on, avd he found its remedy in edu-

•'tin". "Orce," ho faid, "tho great
"n )o c:f labor was to supply the
necessities of life; now, hut a small
portion of our people are so engaged.
' o: d. clothing and shelt.fr are com
non in our country to every provident
'lerscn, excepting, of course, in occa
sional accidental cases. The great
demard for I ilor is to supply what
may he termed Intellectual wants, to
which there is no limit, except that
of intelligence to conceive. If all the
j relations and obligations of man
j were properly understood, it would
I net he nec«vsary for people to make a
| burden of labor. Th > great masses of
I the toilers are now compelled to per
form such an amount of labor as
makes life often wearisome. \n intel
ligent system of education would cor
rect. this inequality. It would make
I
the humblest laborer's work more
I valuable, it would increase both the
| demand and supply for skilled labor,
and reduce the number of the non
producing class. It would dignify la
hor, and ultimately would go far to
wipe out the mere distinctions of
wealth and ancestry. It would achieve
| a. bloodless revolution and establish
j a republic of industry, merit and
; learning.
"Ilow near to that state we may be,
j or how far from it, we cannot tell. It
■ stents very far when we contemplate
the great standing a litres of Europe,
where over five millions of men (or
about one for every twelve adult
male i are marching about with gnus
on their shoulders to preserve the
•tea(' • of nations, while hovering near

them is an innumerable force of po
lice to preserve the peace of individ
uals; but when we remember the pos
sibilities of e vilizution and the power
of education, we can foresee ;i time
when these soldiers and policemen
shall be changed to useful, producing
citizens, engaged in lilting the bur
dens of the people instead of increas
ing them. And yet. extravagant as are
the nations of Europe in standing ar
mies and preparations for war, their
xtravagance in the waste of labor is
still greater. Education, by teaching
the intelligent use of machinery, is
the only remedy for such waste."
Education a Itirtbriglit.
Mr. Stanford believed that no edu
cational system could be complete in
which entrance to the university was
a detached privilege of the chosen
few. lie believed in the unbroken lad
der from the kindergarten to the uni
versity, a ladder that, each one should
be free to climb, as far as his ability
or energy should permit. He believed,
with lan Maclaren. in keeping the
path well trodden from the farmhouse
to the university, lie asked that this
sentence from the president's first, ad
dress be placed on the University Reg
ister: "A generous education is the
birthright of every man and woman in
America." In Emerson's words:
"America means opportunity," and
opportunity comes through training to
receive it. To have such a train'ng
is to be truly free born, and this is
the birthright of each child of the re
public.
A friend at Aix-les-Mains once ar
gued with him that there is already
too much education, and that to in
crease it further ! s simply to swell the
volume of discontent. "I insisted."
Mr. Stanford said, "that there can not
be too much education any more than
too much health or intelligence. Do
you happen to know any man who has
been too well educated. Where does
he live? What is his address? If you
cannot find such a man, you cannot
speak of overeducation." There has
been unwise education or misfit, edu
cation. Some highly educated men
are neither wise nor lit, and there is a
kind of education that comes from
experience and not from books. But
with all this, too thorough or too
good a training no one ever had. Ig
norance is shadow. Education is light.
Nothing is more unpractical than
darkness, nothing is more practical
than sunshine.
Secret of Human Power.
Science is knowledge tested and set
in order, and each advance in knowl
<l ge cirrics with it a corresponding
increment of power. A machine, to
Mr. Stanford, was not a mere saver of
lal or. but an aid to labor, increasing
its efficiency and therefore adding to
the value of men. Hv greater knowl
edge of the forces of nature we ac
quire greater skill in turning these
forces '11 to man's service through the
harness of machinery. In increase of
scientific knowledge he found the se
cret of human power. An education
which does not disclose the secret of
power is unworthy the name. "We
may always advance toward the infi
nite," was a favorite saying of his.
He could find no limit to the develop
in lit of civilization. The possibilities
of human progress expressed to him
the measure of infinite goodness, in
his own words: "The beneficence of
the Creator toward man on earth, and
the possibilities of humanity, are one
and the same."
But in his forecast of the myriad
triumphs of applied science, he did not
forget that knowledge itself must pre
cede any use man can make of it.
Pure science must always go before
applied science. The higher forms of
thought have their place in mental
growth as necessities in the concrete
preparation for action,
In the new university he decreed
that "the work in applied science::
he decreed that "the work in applied
shall be carried along with that
in the pure sciences and the hu
manities. and that, so far as may be.
all lines of work included in the plan
of the university shall be equally fos
tered."
Itcnct'itN el' Vsseeialion.
Mr. Stanford's belief that literature
and engineering should be pursued
side by side was shown by his wish
to provide for each with equal gene.r

osity. And the students of each are
tlii' gainers by this relation. The de
votee of classical culture is strength
ened by his association with men to
whom their college work is part of
the serious duty of life. The student
of engineering stands with both feet
on tlie ground, li s success in life
depends on the exactness of his
knowledge of machinery and of the
basic principles of mechanics and
maihematics. He must be in dead
earnest if lie would succeed at all. On
the other hand, the student of realities
uains by his association with the poet,
the philosopher and the artist. The
finer aspects of life are brought to his
notice, and from this association re
sults tolerance and breadth of sym
( oeditcationa! \(ha»t:iges.
That worn n should receive higher
education as well as men was an ax
iom 'o Mr. Stanford. Coeducation was
taken for granted from the first, pud
the young women of Stanford have
■ ( v ;■ had to question the friendliness
I their welcome. "We have provid
ed." Mr. Stanford says"in the articles
of endowment, that the education of
tlie sexes shall be equal—deeming it.
of special importance that those who
are to be mothers of the future gen
eration shall be fitted to mold and di
rect th,' infantile mind at its most crit
ical period."
The leading argument for coeduca
tion is akin to one just indicated for
the uiron in one institution of the
various lines of literature, art, sci
ence. and applied technology.
In women's education, as planned
for women alone, the tendency is to
ward (he study of beauty and order.
Literature and language take prece
dence over science. Expression is
valued more highly than action. In
carrying this to an extreme, the ne
c ssary relat on of thought to action
becomes obscured. The scholarship
developed tends to be ineffective, be
cause it is not related to life. The
educated women are likely to master
technique, rather than art; method
than substance. She may know a
good deal, but be able to do nothing.
Often her views of life must undergo
nainful changes before she can find
her place in the world.
In schools for men alone, the re
verse condition often obtains. The
::cnse of reality obscures the element
of beauty and fitness. It is of great
advantage to both men and women to
meet on a plane of equality in edu
cation. Women are brought into con
tact, with men who can do things—
men in whom the sense of reality is
strong, and who have definite views in
life. This influence affects them for
good. It turns them away from sen
timentalism. It is opposed to un
wholesome forms of hysterical friend
ship. It. gives tone to their religious
thoughts and impulses. Above all, it
tends to encourage action governed
by ideals, as opposed to that resting
on caprice. It gives them better
standards of what is possible and im
possible, when the responsibility for
action is thrown upon them.
In like manner, the association
with wise, sane and healthy women
has its value for young men. This
value has never been fully realized,
even by the strongest advocates of
coeducation. It raises their ideals of
womanhood, and the highest manhood
must bp associated with such an ideal.
Meanly and Kitnes*.
While the work of the teachers must
make the kernel of the university, we
must rejoice that here at Palo Alto
even the husks are beautiful. Reality
and fitness are great forces in educa
tion. Every object with which the
young mind comes iti contact leaves
on it. its trace. "Nothing is unim
portant in the life of man," and the
least feature of our surroundings has
its influence, greater or less. "There
was a child went forth every day,"
Walt Whitman tells us. "and the first
object that it looked upon, that ob
lect it became." It may be for a mo
ment or an hour, or "for changing
vcb s of years." The essence of civ
'Mv.ation is exposure to vfiilnc: ami
humanizing influence " ' n- in
i university," ♦ "o <>-. "is
ivnrth more than a dol'ar ' ■' '" ,1 "and
" ery dollar spent in tinker n nuiv< r
itv beautiful will be i en,aid with in


( liancellor David Starr .lonian.
terest in the enriching of the students'
lives.
It has been a reproach to America
that for the best of her sons and
daughters she has done the least. She
lias built palaces for lunatics, idiots,
crippled and blind, —nay, even for
criminals and paupers. But the col
lege students —"the young men of
sound mind and earnest purposes, the
noblest treasures of the State," to
quote the words of President White,
"she has housed in vile barracks."
The student has no need for luxury.
Plain living has ever gone with high
thinking. But grace and fitness have
an educative power too often forgot
ten in this utilitarian age. These
long corridors with their stately
arches, these circles of waving palms,
will have their part in the students'
training as surely as the chemical lab
oratory or the seminary-room. Each
stone in the quadrangle shall teach its
lesson of grace and genuineness, and
this Valley of Santa Clara shall occu
py a warm place in every student's
heart. Pictures of this fair region will
cling to his memory amid the figures
of the draughting-room. He will not
forget the fine waves of our two moun
tain ranges, overarched by a soft blue
Grecian sky, nor the ancient oak trees,
nor the gently sloping fields, changing
from vivid green to richest yellow, as
the seasons change. The noble jnllars
of the gallery of art, its rich treas
ures, the choicest remains of the
ideals of past ages—all these, and a
hundred other things which each one
will find out for himself, shall fill his
mind with bright pictures, never to be
rubbed out in the wea,r of life. Thus
in the character of every student shall
be left some imperishable trace of the
beauty of the Stanford farm, the estate
of Palo Alto.
Influence of Character.
Above and beyond all learning is
the influence of character, the impulse
to virtue and piety which comes from
men whose lives show that virtue and
piety really exist. For the life of the
most exalted as well as the humblest
of men, there can be no nobler motto
than that inscribed by the great
scholar of the last century over his
home in Hammarby: "Innocue vivito;
numen adest." Live blameless; God
is near. "This," said Linnaeus, "is
the wisdom of my life."
Religious Freedom.
Whsn the University was founded,
it was provided that in its religious
life, as in its scientific investigations,
it should be wholly free from outside
control. No religious sect or organi
zation and no group of organizations
should have dominion over it. The
University should exist for its own
sake, to carry out its own purposes,
and to bring out its own results in
its own way.
In this regard the die is cast, once
for all. The choice of the founders
of the University was deliberate and
final. They chose the path of intel
lectual and religious freedom, in the
very interest of religion itself. Re
ligion is devotion in action. In its
higher reaches it must be individual,
because it is a function of the indiv
idual soul which must stand in per
petual protest against the religion
that finds its end in forms and cere
monies and organizations.
The .requirement was a simple re
flection of Mr. Stanford's own relig
ious character, as expressed in the
words of one very near to him: "If
a firm belief in a beneficent Creator,
a profound admiration for Jesus of
Nazareth and His teachings, and the
certainty of a personal life hereafter,
constitute religion, then Leland Stan
ford was a religious man. The nar
row walls of a creed could not confine
him; therefore, he was not a pro
fessed member of any church, for in
each confession of faith he found
something to which he could not sub
scribe. But for the principles of re
ligion he hijd a profound veneration;
in h's heart were the true sentiments
of Christianity, and ho often said that
in his opinion the Golden Rule was
the cornerstone of all religion."
RelMon must form the axis of per
sonal character, and its prime import

ance the university cannot ignore. To
attain its culture it may use indirect
rather than direct means, the influ
ence of effort and character rather
than the imposition of forms. To ac
cept ecclesiastical help is to invite
ecclesiastical control toward ecclesi
astical ends. In the grant of endow
ment it was required that the trustees
should "prohibit sectarian instruction,
but have taught in the university the
immortality of the soul, the existence
of an all-wise and benevolent Crea
tor. and that obedience to His laws
is the highest duty of man."
The founders believed truly that
freedom of thought and action would
promote morality and religion, that a
deeper, fuller religious life would
arise from the growth of the individ
ual, that only where the "winds of
freedom blow" will spring up the
highest type of religious development.
For character is formed from within
by the efforts and strivings and as
pirations of the individual. It can
never be imposed from without. The
will is made strong from choosing
the right, not from having right ac
tion enforced upon it. The life of man
is "made beautiful and sweet through
self-devotion and through self-re
straint." But this must be chosen
voluntarily, else it fails of its purpose.
Growth Through Ages.
It was Mr. Stanford's hope to leave
the University free to grow through
the coming ages. He would extend
no dead hand from the grave to limit
its activities or to control its move
ments. The deed of gift is in favor
of education pure and simple. It has
no hampering clause, and the only end
in view is that of the help of human
ity through the extension of knowl
edge. "We hope," he said, "that this
institution will endure through long
ages. Provisions regarding details of
management, however wise they may
be at present, might prove to be mis
chievous under conditions which may
arise in the future."
The growth of the University must
remain the best evidence of the
founder's wisdom. He had the sagac
ity to recognize the value of higher
education and the patriotism to give
the rewards of a successful life to its
advancement. He had the rare wis
dom to discriminate between the real
and the temporary in university organ
ization and management, and his pro
vision is for the genuine and the per
manent, not for that "which speedily
passes away." Still more rare, he had
the forethought to leave to each suc
ceeding generation, the duty of adapt
ing its details of administration and
methods to the needs of the time.
If the founders had said: "We will
found a university so strong that it
may endure for all the centuries,
whose organization shall be so free
and flexible that in each age it shall
reflect the best spirit of the time,"
they could not have given it greater
freedom of development than it has
today. For the glory of the univer
sity must lie in its freedom, in that
freedom which cannot fall into li
cense, nor lose itself in waywardness
—that freedom which knows but one
bond of control, the eternal truth of
God.
Perpetual Power.
When the University opened its
doors in 1891, Millicent Shinn printed
these words of prophecy: "Greater
than the achievement of lasting hon
or among one's fellow-men of later
generations, is it to become a living
power among them forever. It rarely
happens to one man and woman to
have both the power and the skill to
thus live after death, working and
shaping beneficently in the lives of
many—not of tens nor of hundreds,
but of thousands and tens of thou
sands, as the generations follow on.
Herein is the wisdom of money spent
in education, that each recipient of in
fluence becomes in his time a center
to transmit the same in every direc
tion. so that it multiplies forever in
geometric .ratio. The power to mold
unborn generations for good, to keen
one's hards mightily on human af
fairs after the flesh has been dust for
years, seems not onlv more than mor

tal, but more than man. Thus does
man become co-worker with God in
the shaping of the world to a good
outcome."
And this I said in my opening day
address, "The Golden Age of Califor
nia begins when its gold is used for
purposes like this. From such deeds
must rise the new California of the
coming century, no longer the Califor
nia of the gold-seeker and the adven
turer, but the abode of high-minded
men and women, trained in the wis
dom of the ages, and imbued with the
love of nature, the love of man, and
the love of God. And bright indeed
will be the future of our State if in
the usefulness every hope and prayer
of the founders shall be realized."
University Life
With those words of mine, spoken
twenty-four years ago, the University
began. "We come together today," I
said, "for the first time as teacher and
students. With this relation, the life
of the University begins. It is such
personal contact of young men and
young women with scholars and in
vestigators which constitutes the life
of the University. It is for us as
teachers and students in the Univer
sity's first year to lay the foundations
of a school which may last as long as
human civilization. Ours is the
youngest of the universities, but it is
heir to the wisdom of all the ages,
and with this inheritance it has the
promise of a rapid and sturdy growth
"But the future, with its glories and
responsibilities, will be in other
hands. It is ours at the beginning to
give the University its form, its ten
dencies, its customs. The power of
precedent will cause to be repeated
over again everything that we do —
our errors as well as our wisdom, it
becomes us, then, to begin work mod
estly, as under the eye of the coming
ages. We must lay the foundations
broad and firm, so as to give full sup
port to whatever edifice the future
may build. Ours is the humbler task,
but not the least in importance, and
our work will not be in vain if all we
do is done in sincerity. As sound as
the rocks from which these walls are
hewn should be the work of every
teacher who comes within them. To
the extent that this is true will the
University be successful. Unless its
work be thus 'wrought in sad sincer
ity' nothing can redeem it from fail
ure. In this feeling, and realizing,
too, that only the help we give to the
men and women whose lives we reach
can justify our presence here, we are
ready to begin our work.
"Our University has no history to
fall back upon; no memories of great
teachers to haunt its corridors; in
none of its rooms appear the traces
which show where a great man has
lived and worked. No tender asso
ciations cling, ivv-like, to its fresh,
new halls. It is hallowed by no tra
dition. it is hampered by none.
Traditions and associations it is ours
to make. From our work the future
of the University will grow, as the
splendid lily from the modest bulb."
Dr. Jordan delivered the annual
Founders' Day address in the Assem
bly Hall this morning upon the sub
ject of "The Foundation Ideals of Stan
ford University."
From an historical as well as a per
sonal viewpoint it is eminently fit
ting that Dr. Jordan should discourse
upon this theme, which will farm a
companion piece to the Chancellor's
"The Story of a Good Woman." The
latter also first appeared as a Found
ers' Day address, and was a eulogy
of the life of Mrs. Jane Lathrop Stan
ford, and a narrative of the history
of the University during the so-called
"dark days" between 1893 and 1899,
when the ultimate fate of the institu
tion was in constant doubt.
In treating his subject this morning
Dr. Jordan gave expression to the
ideals which inspired Senator Leland
Stanford in his conception of Stanford
University. Selecting the successful
system then in practice at Cornell
University as the most suitable for the
needs of Stanford, the Senator called
upon Andrew D. White, who was
mainly responsible for the efficiency
of Cornell, where he was then acting
president, to assume the duties of
chief executive at Stanford. In declin
ing White .recommended David Stan-
Jordan, then president of the Universi
ty of Indiana, for the position.
When the present Chancellor name
to Stanford he was the youngest uni
versity president, in po'nt of years, in
the country, and when he resigned he
was the oldest in point of service, a
fact of no little significance.
The important share which Dr.
David Starr Jordan had in forming, di
recting. and developing the "founda
tion 'deals" of Stanford University
need no comment.
The address of Dr. Jordan follows:
I)r. Jordan Introduces Speech.
When Charles Darwin felt himself
growing old, he sat down in his home
in Kent to write the story of his life —
fo.r his children. He wrote, he said, as
might a spirit from another world,
looking down on this one. not swayed
by any emotion, of hope, of fear, or
eagerness or uncertainty as to the
final end. And so, today, T wish in
some such disembodied fashion to tell
the story of the founding of a univer
sity, and of the purposes and ideas
with which it started out.

Twenty-four years is a short time
in the history of a nation or a univer
sity, which is a small and swiftly
changing nation within itself. It is a
long time in the life of a man, as those
who with me have spanned it can tes
tify.
The story of today will not go far
beyond the first day of October, 1891,
when we gathered in the northwest
gate of the quadrangle for the open
ing day.
Founder and President.
Purpose must come before action,
and in the very beginning there were
only two to frame this purpose, the
founder and the president. Leland
Stanford was then scarcely older than
I am now, and I was a mere "youth
of promise," from the simple-minded
east, a "new man," as the San Francis
co journals kindly put it, and Mr.
Stanford had a reputation wider than
the nation, a philosopher and a lover
of li s kind as well as a business man
and a statesman.
A ('auspicious Figure.
Leland Stanford had been for a gen
eration the most conspicious figure in
California. He was a .rich man, weal
thy through his own effort, and he
hoped to leave humanity better for his
riches. Especially he wished to bring
to the California he loved, and who, af
ter California's fash-on, ha.l f'nst, loved
him, the abundance of life, which is
the best gift of the University. Leland
Stanford had held many relations with
California. He was an actual pion
eer. When the Civil War broke out he
had no doubt of his position and he
stood for free speech in Sacramento,
when freedom was dangerous. He was
the war governor of the state, trusted
by Lincoln, and like Lincoln, he knew
how to count the cost in a difficult
crisis. He had been one of the four
men of Sacramento who saw the vision
of a railway over the Sierras. In 1891
he was United States Senator from
California, known to every one and be
loved by all who came near him.
Typically American.
His wide influence did not rise from
his wealth. Wealth and influence
sprang alike from his personality. He
was broad-minded and long-headed,
and his simplicity of life kept him al
ways in touch with the people. "He
was active," it was said, "when other

men were idle; he was generous when
other men were grasping; he was lof
ty when other men were base." He
was thoroughly a man, and a man of
the type we like to call American.
One word of praise of Stanford
clings to my memory. At his funeral
in 1893, Horatio Stebbins in his state
ly fashion told how the Greeks did
honor to a slain hero. Then turning
to the pallbearers, stalwart men from
the Southern Pacific, he said: "Gentle
up your strength a little, for 'tis a man
ye bear."
University Idealized.
The story of the death of the only
son is known to Stanford people. The
boy, young Leland, fell ill in Rome
from the mosquito-borne Roman fever.
After coming back to Florence while
convalescent, he died of failure of the
heart. After the long vigil of a dreary
night, Mr. Stanford awoke one morn
ing with these words on his lips: "The
children of California shall be my chil
dren." And this thought grew crystal
line as the dream of a great universi
ty. And in this plan, nis wife, Jane La
throp Stanford, gave him most loyal
service, which continued unshaken
throughout twelve years of lonely wid
owhood. The story of her love and de
votion I have told as well as I could on
another occasion, the parallel to this.
< aliforiiia tlie .Motif.
So the decision was made that the
beloved Palo Alto farm —famed for the
finest horses in the world —should be
come a university campus. The Uni
versity buildings should have a motif
from California. To this end the old
mission of San Juan Capistrano, near
the seashore above San Diego, founded
by Father Junlpero Serra more than a
century before, was chosen to give the
University its form. Appeal was made
to the greatest living architects, Henry
Hobson Richardson, of Boston, for
the best was none too good for the new
University. Richardson died before
any work was begun, but his partners,
Shepley, Rutan and Coolidge, took up
the plans in all essential respects just
as we see them now in stone. Freder
ick Law Olmsted devised the garden
effects, but his plans are as yet car
ried out only in part. The streets were
laid out, and at Mr. Stanford's request.
I named them for the early padres,
who led in the missions of California.
Among these are Salvatierra Street,
named for the Jesuit father who first
urged the California missions; Serra
Avenue, fo,r Junipero Serra, the Fran
ciscan who first began the work of
building them, performing marvels of
energy and patience in long marches up
and down the coast from La Paz to
Monterey, and in dealing with the be
setting Indians for whose salvation,
temporal and spiritual, the missions
themselves were planned. Lasuen
street is named for Firmin Lasuen, the
wise and self-contained successor to
the impulsive and enthusiastic Padre
Serra. Po.rtola, Arguello, and Alvara
do were the first governors of Califor
nia; Crespi its first historian, Costan
zo its first civil engineer. These with
Ortega, Rivera, and the rest, were
members of Portola's party of explora
tion who first saw the Golden Gate
and the bay belvnd it. They likened it
to a "Mediterranean Sea," and they
named it for their patron saint, San
Francisco of Assisi, who knew the lan
guage of the birds and even that of
the fishes. Meanwhile, and with char
acteristic energy, Mr. Stanford set out
to make his vision into fact. Articles
of endowment were drawn up, and
buildings we.re provided. A president
was found and he was sent forth to
choose fifteen professors. It was not
wise to have too many professors till
we knew whether students would
come. The press notices were not en
thusiastic. The New York Mail and
Express said: "There is as much need
of a university in California as there
is in Switzerland for an asylum for de
cayed sea-captains." And it was
prophesied that even the fifteen would
for years "lecture in marble halls to
empty benches." Rut the benches
were not empty, as we all know; the
never to be forgotten pioneers of '95
were all there, altogether to the num
ber of 465, and on the first of Octob
er, with all bright auspices of earth
and sky. of wealth and generosity, the
University began. Of the fifteen pro
fessors, oldest of the old guard, par
takers in all joy, worry and success,
ten still remain,—Branner, Stillman,
Marx, Jenkins, Sanford, Campbell. An
derson, Gilbert, G.riffin, and Elliott.
Meanwhile, these were the ideas or
the Founder, as he gave them to me in
many evenings together, the
stones of the quadrangle were leaping
to find their places.
How I came in the matter you will
find in the autobiography of President
White, of Cornell, if you are interested
to read.
Possibilities of Knowledge.
The need to train his own son first
turned Mr. Stanford's thoughts to edu
cational matters. His early acquaint
ance with Professor Agassiz, perhaps
the greatest of American teachers, di
rected his thought into channels of
wisdom. From Agassiz he derived a
realizing sense of the possibilities of
human knowledge and the impelling
force of man's intellectual needs, —
that "hunger and thi.rst after truth
which only the destitute student
knows." "Man's physical needs are
slight," he said, "but his intellectual
needs are hounded only by his capacity
to receive.'
Major System Valued.
The major-subject system, especially
characteristic of Stanford, but later
taken in part by several other univer
sities, among them Harvard, may be
traced in some degree back to Agassiz.
It was first devised in Indiana,, in
1887, by a committee of three, D,r. Bry
an. now president of Indiana, Dr. von
Jagemann. now professor in Harvard,
and myself. In framing the plan I
had in mind the oft repeated words of
Atrassiz: "A spec'alty is the backbone
of education." "The mind is made
strong by the thorough possession of
something." And those of us who be
lieved with President White in the de
mocracy of the mental powers, realized
that in the higher education of a stu
dent it is the man himself who can
best choose what the backbone of his
training should be. For in making a
student, there are but two types of im
pulses strong enough to count, to love

the work itself and to know how the
work is related to his future life.
Mr. Stanford believed that an essen
tial part of education was thorough
knowledge in some one line, so firmly
held as to be effective for practical re
sults. He believed in early choice of
profession. The course of study, how
ever broad and however long, should
in all its parts look toward effective
1 fe. The profession chosen early gives
a purpose and stimulus to all the in
termediate training. He saw clearly
the need of individualism in education,
and that the course of study should be
built around the individual man he is.
The supposed needs of the average
man, developed by a consensus of edu
cational philosophers do not suffice for
the actual man in actual life. We must
be fed with the food that is good for
us. It is for 11s that it must be adap
ted, not for some average man in some
overage age. The ready-made curri
culum belongs to the same category
as ready-made clothing. It is some
thing cheap and easy for the man with
out individual needs.
Democracy and Knowledge.
No other university has recognized
so distinctly as ours the absolute de
mocracy of knowledge. The earlier
traditions of Cornell pointed in this di
rection, and for this reason Mr. Stan
ford found in Cornell, rather than in
Harvard Yale, or Michigan, the
nearest existing approach to his
own ideal. It was Ezra Cornell's
hope "to found an institution where
any person could find instruction in
any study." Cornell and Stanford, in
so far as they are loyal to these tra
ditions, know neither favored students
nor favored studies. No class of men
is chosen to the exclusion of others,
and no class of studies is given a fal
lacious importance through force of
academic pressure or through inertia
of academic tradition. While various
kinds of knowledge are of varying
worth td different persons, each has
its own value to the world, and the
value to the individual must he de
termined in each case by itself. The
university should be no respecter of
persons. It is not called on to approve
or condemn the\various orders of ge
nius that come to it for training.
There has been no greater hindrance
to educational progress than the hler
rchy of studies, the fiction that certain
kinds of work had an invisible value
not to be measured by tangible results.
That the work of a university should
be essentially specialized, fitting the
individual for definite forms of higher
usefulness, was an idea constantly pre
sent with Mr. Stanford. He had no
interest in general education as an end
in itself. He had no desire to fit men
for a life of leisure, or for any life
which did not involve a close adaption
of means to ends.
No Educational Millinery.
As a practical man, accustomed to
go to the heart of things, Mr. Stanford
had little respect for educational mil
l'nery and for the conventionalities
which have grown up about the great
institutions of the Old World. He saw
clearly the value of thoroughness, the
need of freedom, the individuality of
development, but cared little for the
machinery by which these ends were
achieved. So it was decreed that tho
new university should be simple in its
organization, with only those details
of structure which the needs of the
times should develop within it. If it
must have precedents and traditions,
it must make its own. "I would have
this institution," he said, "help to fit.
men and women for usefulness in this
life, by 'ncreasing their individual
power of production, and by making
them good company for themselves and
others." Or, in my own words to
young men, spoken in this same time:
"The whole of your life must be spent
in your own company, and only the
educated man is good company for
himself."
And besides, "The world turns asid<>
to let any man pass who knows whi
ther he is going."
In proportion to the extent to which
it widens the range of human know
ledge and of human power, in that de

gree does an institution deserve the
name of university. A man content
with the truth that now is, and without
ambition to venture into the unknown,
is not the proper man to be a university
professor. The truth that now is be
longs to the lower schools. The value
of its original work is the best single
test by wh'ch a university may be
judged; and as it is the best, so is it
also the severest. The incentive for
research should be from within. It
cannot be applied from without.
In its public relations, the university
stands for infinite patience, the calm
tasting of ideas and ideals. It con
ducts no propaganda, it controls no
affairs of business. There is no one
it wishes to elect to office. It is the
judge of the principles of wisdom and
the ways of nature. The details of
action it must leave to men whose
business it is to guide the currents of
the moment.
Freedom and Truth.
It was our hope that we might give
to our students the priceless legacy of
the educated man, the power of know
ing what really is. The higher edu
cation should bring men into direct
contact with truth. It should help to
free them from the dead hands of old
traditions and to enable them to form
opinions worthy of the new evidence
each new day brings before them. An
educated man should not be the slave
of the past, not a copy of men who
have gone before him. He must be in
some degree the founder of a new in
tellectual dynasty; for each new think
er is a new type of man. Whatever
is true is the truest thing in the uni
verse, and mental and moral strength
alike come from our contact with it.
And so wo believed that influence that
gees out from these halls should em
phasize the value of truth. The es
sence of scholarship is to know some
thing which is absolutely true; to
have, in the words of Huxley, "some
knowledge to the certainty of which
no authority could add nor take away
one jot or tittle, and to which the
tradition of a thousand years is but
as the hearsay of yesterday." The
scholar, as was once said of our great
chemist, Benjamin Silliman, must have
"faith in truth as truth, faith that
there is a power in the universe good
enough to make trutli-telling safe and
strong enough to make truth-telling ef
fective." The personal influence of gen
uineness, as embodied in the life of a
teacher, is one of the strongest moral
forces which the school can bring to
its aid; for moral training comes not
mainly by precept, but by practice.
We may teach the value of truth to
our students by showing that we value
it ourselves.
Educational Instrument.
Mr. Stanford insisted as a vital prin
ciple that the university exists for
the benefit of the students, present,
past, and future. It has no exist
ence or function save as an instru
ment of education. To this principle
all others should be subordinate. In
his opening address, he said to the
students of the Pioneer Class: "You
are the most important factor in this
university. It is for your benefit that
it has been established."
No Test in Numbers.
That the new university would in
time attract great numbers of stu
dents, Mr. Stanford believed as a mat
ter of course, although he found In
California few who shared his optim
ism. But he was never deceived with
the cheap test of numbers in estimat
ing the value of institutions. He knew
that a few hundred men well trained
under high influences would count for
more than as many thousand, hurried
in droves over a ready-made curricu
lum by young tutors, themselves
scarcely out of college. So it was de
creed that numbers for numbers' sake
should never be a goal of Stanford
University. And he further made the
practical request that not one dollar
directly or indirectly should be spent
in advertising. The university has no
goods for which it is anxious to find
customers.
The greatest nepd of the student is
the teacher Mr. Stanford said: "In

order that the president may have the
assistance of a competent staff of pro
fessors, we have provided that the
best talent obtainable shall be pro
cured and that liberal compensation
shall always lie offered." Again lie
said: "Ample endowment may have
been provided, intelligent management
may secure large income, students
may present themselves In numbers,
but in the end the faculty makes or
mars the university."
Facility (Greatest Need.
Compared with the character of the
faculty, every other element in the
university is of relatively little im
portance. The chief duty of the col
lege president is the choice of teach
ers. If he lias learned the art of sur
rounding himself with men who are
clean, sane, and scholarly, most other
matters of university administration
will take care of themselves, lie can
not fail if he has good men around
him. And in the choice of teachers
the element of personal sanity seemed
of first importance to Mr. Stanford—
the ability to see things as they are.
The university chai.r should be a cen
ter of clear-seeing from which right
acting should rad ate.
Mr. Stanford said, "I hope the Uni
versity may begin where the State
University leaves off." By this he
meant to lay stress on technical, pro
fessional. and research work, activi
ties which were at that time very lit
tle developed at the State University.
He spoke approvingly of an institu
tion which should combine the special
features of Johns Hopkins and Cor
nell.
A professor to whom original in
vestigation is unknown should have
no place in a university. Men of com
monplace or second-hand scholarship
are of necsssity men of low ideals,
however much the fact may be dis
guised. A man of high ideals must be
an investigator. He must know and
think for himself. Only such as do
this can be really great as teachers.
Universities already begin to recog
nize that their most important profes
sors may be men who teach not in
classes, but only by contact with indiv
iduals, devoting time and strength to
advanced research. The presence and
example of the men who really know
may be worth to the student body a
hundred-fold more than the precepts
and drill of the others. They set
standards of thought. They help to
create the university spirit, without
which any college is but a grammar
school of a little higher pretensions.
University Atmosphere.
In the address on the first day in the
old quadrangle, I said: "If our work
is successful, our ideals will appear in
the daily life of the school. In a
school, as in a fortress, it is not the
form of the building, but the strength
of the materials, which determine its
effectiveness. With a garrison of
hearts of oak, it may not matter even
whether there be a fortress. What
ever its form, or its organization, or
its pretensions, the character of the
university is fixed by the men who
teach. "Have a university in shan
ties, nay in tents," Cardinal Newman
has said, "but have great teachers in
it." The university spirit flows oik
from these teachers, and its organiza
tion serves mainly to bring them to
gether. "Colleges only serve us," says
Emerson, "when their aim is not. to
drill, but to create; when they gath
er from afar every ray of various
genius to their hospitable halls, and
by their concentrated fires set the
heart of their youth in flames."
Strong men make universities strong.
A great man never fails to leave a
ureat mark on every youth with whom
he conies in contact. Too much em
phasis cannot be laid on this: that
the real purpose of the university or
ganization is to produce a university
atmosphere—such an atmosphere as
gathered itself around Arnold at Rug
b.v. around Dollinge.r at Munich,
around Linnaeus at Upsaln. around
Werner at Freiberg, around Agassiz
at Cambridge, around Hopkins at Wil
liamstown, around White at Ithaca,
around all great teachers everywhere.
Agassi/, once said: "The physical
suffering of humanity, the wants of
the poor, the craving of the hungry
and naked, appeal to the sympathies
of every one who has a human heart.
Hut there are necessities which only
the destitute student knows. There is
a hunger and thirst which only the
highest charity can understand and re
lieve; and 011 this solemn occasion
let me say that every dollar given for
higher education, in whatever depart
ment of knowledge, is l'kely to have
a greater influence on the future char
acter of our nation than even the
thousands, the hundred thousands,
and millions which'we have spent, or
are spending, to raise the many to ma
terial ease and comfort."
Presidential Powers.
Mr. Stanford laid much stress on
the work of the President of the Uni
versity. The hoard of trustees were
directed to give to him such powers
as would enable him, with his col
leagues. to control all educational pol
icies, and such that for their success
he might justly lie held responsible.
At some future time the presidency
of the American university may lie an
outworn office, its function to he taKOn
by a committee from the faculty, as
some now urge that it should be.
Hut this cannot be done in the period
of formation of the American univer
s'ty, and no American university has
yet passed its period of youth and
growth. In that lies its strength. Its
hope lies in its imperfection. It is
not born full-grown, as the German
universities have claimed to be. With
perfection, decline sets in, as these
univers'ties have clearly shown. Ev
ery forward movement needs a lead
er. "An institution is but the length
ened shadow of a man."
It is for the president to take the
initiative in all educational affairs, to
give the university its color and its
personality. lie must know how to
take advice and how to value it. The
more checks and balances on his ac
tion the better, but none should de
prive him of his initiative. It is for
him to seek and develop those rare
elements of feeling and character by
which one university is known from
another. And in our University we
tried to weld together such elements
to form what we fondly hoped men
would call the "Stanford Spirit."
Value of Keonomy.
It was the idea of the founders that
each student should be taught the
value of economy—that lavish expen
ditures bring neither happiness nor
success. "A student," it was said by
one of the founders, "will lie better
fitted to battle with the trials and trib
ulations of life, if he lias been taught
the worth of money, the necessity of
saving and of overcoming a desire to
imitate those who are better off in the
world's goods. For, when he has
learned how to save and how to con
trol inordinate desires, be will be rel
atively rich During the past three
and a half years of close observation
on my part, the importance of econ
uniy bas impressed itself forcibly up
on me, and I wish it to be taught to
all students of the university. Na
ture has made the surroundings of
the university beautiful, and the sub
stantial character of the buildings
gives them an appearance of luxury.
I wish this natural beauty and com
parative luxury to impress upon the
students the necessity of their preser
vation for the generations that are to
follow. The lesson thus taught will
remain with them through life and
help them to teach the lesson to
ethers. The un'versitv buildings and
grounds are for their use while stu
dents. in trust for students to come."
\i*l of
The value of the study of political
and social science as a remedy for
defects of government was clearly
seen by Mr. Stanford. "All govern
ments." he said, "at" governments by
public opinion, and in the long run
ever', people is a■ well governed as it
deserves." Hence increase of knowl
edge brin-'s about bett r government.
For help in such matters the people
bavr a ri hi to look to their un ! ', : r

sities and university men. It was his
theory that the art of government is
still in its infancy. "Legislation lias
not, as a rule, been a ainst the peo
ple, but it has not done the good tli it
it might." "No greater biow can be
struck at labor than that which ren
ders ts products insecure." In the
externum of volir't irv co-operation,
he saw a remedy for many present ills,
as lie siw in the lav ef mutual help
the essence of i ur Christian civiliza
tion. He said, in laying the corner
stone: "Out of these suggestions
urows the consider tion of the great
advantages, especially to the laboring
man, of cooperation, by which each
individual has the benefit of the intel
lectual and physical forces of his as
sociates. It is I \ tli • intelligent ap
plication of these |) j c'iiles that there
will le found th? greatest lever *.o
elevate the mass o r humanity, and
laws should h< f:;iincd to protect and
develop co-operat ve associations. . . .
They will accomplish all that is

sought to lie secured by labor leagues,
trades unions and other federations of
workmen, and will be free from the
objection of even impliedly attempt
i 11 to take the unauthorised 01
wrongful control ( 112 the property,
capital, or time of others."
li<>>:ilt > and Co-ojicmtieii,
One result of voluntary co-opera
tion, in .Mr. Stanford's view, would bo
the development of the spirit of loy
> alty. the most precious attribute of
[ the laboring man in any grade, in any
j field, to the interest or cause which
' he serves. One great evil of the pres
ent era of gigantic industrial organ
izations is that it takes no account of
the spirit of loyalty, without which
no man can do li s best work. The
huge trust does away with tlie feeling
of personal association. The equally
huge trades union, in many of its op
erations. strikes directly at the per
sonality of the individual workman.
It makes him merely a pawn to be
moved hither and thither in the game
of industrial war. In the long run,
j no enterprise can flourish, unless
' those who carry it on throw them
selvi s, heart and soul,' into its ser
vice. On the other hand..no one can
do a greater injury to the cause of
labor than to take loyalty out of the
category of working virtues. IJ is one
if the traditional good traits of ihr
healthy college man to be loyal to bis
j t'ollege. This virtue Mr. Stanford
would have cultivated in all effective
ways, and in loyalty on both sides lie
would find a practical < lution of most

112 the la! or troubles of today. That
he carried his ideas into his own prac
tice ir shown by the unflinching devo
tion of all his own employees of what
ever grad j throughout his life. They
were taught to bel eve in him. to be
lieve in th > worth of their own work,
a: d thi s to have respect for tliem
selw-. Much of the dheont ill of the
day has its origin in lack of self-re
spect. The pawn that is moved in the
game of sympathetic strike lias no
control over his own actions, and
then f< re : o respect for his own mo
tives. Th <!< veiop rent of intelligent,
vclur.tary co-i.peration. n the long
r ni, lrakeg the wtvkman more than a
machi '.e. If lie is such, in the long
rti" again, ho will re e've whatever
he deserves. 11 1 will be a factor in
c'vi'i r ior, when the unskilled, un
thinking laborer is not.
\\ iisi < i I abor.
\he - ■ it economic waste in labor
oft m engaged Mr. Stanford's atton
t'on, avd he found its remedy in edu-

•'tin". "Orce," ho faid, "tho great
"n )o c:f labor was to supply the
necessities of life; now, hut a small
portion of our people are so engaged.
' o: d. clothing and shelt.fr are com
non in our country to every provident
'lerscn, excepting, of course, in occa
sional accidental cases. The great
demard for I ilor is to supply what
may he termed Intellectual wants, to
which there is no limit, except that
of intelligence to conceive. If all the
j relations and obligations of man
j were properly understood, it would
I net he nec«vsary for people to make a
| burden of labor. Th > great masses of
I the toilers are now compelled to per
form such an amount of labor as
makes life often wearisome. \n intel
ligent system of education would cor
rect. this inequality. It would make
I
the humblest laborer's work more
I valuable, it would increase both the
| demand and supply for skilled labor,
and reduce the number of the non
producing class. It would dignify la
hor, and ultimately would go far to
wipe out the mere distinctions of
wealth and ancestry. It would achieve
| a. bloodless revolution and establish
j a republic of industry, merit and
; learning.
"Ilow near to that state we may be,
j or how far from it, we cannot tell. It
■ stents very far when we contemplate
the great standing a litres of Europe,
where over five millions of men (or
about one for every twelve adult
male i are marching about with gnus
on their shoulders to preserve the
•tea(' • of nations, while hovering near

them is an innumerable force of po
lice to preserve the peace of individ
uals; but when we remember the pos
sibilities of e vilizution and the power
of education, we can foresee ;i time
when these soldiers and policemen
shall be changed to useful, producing
citizens, engaged in lilting the bur
dens of the people instead of increas
ing them. And yet. extravagant as are
the nations of Europe in standing ar
mies and preparations for war, their
xtravagance in the waste of labor is
still greater. Education, by teaching
the intelligent use of machinery, is
the only remedy for such waste."
Education a Itirtbriglit.
Mr. Stanford believed that no edu
cational system could be complete in
which entrance to the university was
a detached privilege of the chosen
few. lie believed in the unbroken lad
der from the kindergarten to the uni
versity, a ladder that, each one should
be free to climb, as far as his ability
or energy should permit. He believed,
with lan Maclaren. in keeping the
path well trodden from the farmhouse
to the university, lie asked that this
sentence from the president's first, ad
dress be placed on the University Reg
ister: "A generous education is the
birthright of every man and woman in
America." In Emerson's words:
"America means opportunity," and
opportunity comes through training to
receive it. To have such a train'ng
is to be truly free born, and this is
the birthright of each child of the re
public.
A friend at Aix-les-Mains once ar
gued with him that there is already
too much education, and that to in
crease it further ! s simply to swell the
volume of discontent. "I insisted."
Mr. Stanford said, "that there can not
be too much education any more than
too much health or intelligence. Do
you happen to know any man who has
been too well educated. Where does
he live? What is his address? If you
cannot find such a man, you cannot
speak of overeducation." There has
been unwise education or misfit, edu
cation. Some highly educated men
are neither wise nor lit, and there is a
kind of education that comes from
experience and not from books. But
with all this, too thorough or too
good a training no one ever had. Ig
norance is shadow. Education is light.
Nothing is more unpractical than
darkness, nothing is more practical
than sunshine.
Secret of Human Power.
Science is knowledge tested and set
in order, and each advance in knowl
<l ge cirrics with it a corresponding
increment of power. A machine, to
Mr. Stanford, was not a mere saver of
lal or. but an aid to labor, increasing
its efficiency and therefore adding to
the value of men. Hv greater knowl
edge of the forces of nature we ac
quire greater skill in turning these
forces '11 to man's service through the
harness of machinery. In increase of
scientific knowledge he found the se
cret of human power. An education
which does not disclose the secret of
power is unworthy the name. "We
may always advance toward the infi
nite," was a favorite saying of his.
He could find no limit to the develop
in lit of civilization. The possibilities
of human progress expressed to him
the measure of infinite goodness, in
his own words: "The beneficence of
the Creator toward man on earth, and
the possibilities of humanity, are one
and the same."
But in his forecast of the myriad
triumphs of applied science, he did not
forget that knowledge itself must pre
cede any use man can make of it.
Pure science must always go before
applied science. The higher forms of
thought have their place in mental
growth as necessities in the concrete
preparation for action,
In the new university he decreed
that "the work in applied science::
he decreed that "the work in applied
shall be carried along with that
in the pure sciences and the hu
manities. and that, so far as may be.
all lines of work included in the plan
of the university shall be equally fos
tered."
Itcnct'itN el' Vsseeialion.
Mr. Stanford's belief that literature
and engineering should be pursued
side by side was shown by his wish
to provide for each with equal gene.r

osity. And the students of each are
tlii' gainers by this relation. The de
votee of classical culture is strength
ened by his association with men to
whom their college work is part of
the serious duty of life. The student
of engineering stands with both feet
on tlie ground, li s success in life
depends on the exactness of his
knowledge of machinery and of the
basic principles of mechanics and
maihematics. He must be in dead
earnest if lie would succeed at all. On
the other hand, the student of realities
uains by his association with the poet,
the philosopher and the artist. The
finer aspects of life are brought to his
notice, and from this association re
sults tolerance and breadth of sym
( oeditcationa! \(ha»t:iges.
That worn n should receive higher
education as well as men was an ax
iom 'o Mr. Stanford. Coeducation was
taken for granted from the first, pud
the young women of Stanford have
■ ( v ;■ had to question the friendliness
I their welcome. "We have provid
ed." Mr. Stanford says"in the articles
of endowment, that the education of
tlie sexes shall be equal—deeming it.
of special importance that those who
are to be mothers of the future gen
eration shall be fitted to mold and di
rect th,' infantile mind at its most crit
ical period."
The leading argument for coeduca
tion is akin to one just indicated for
the uiron in one institution of the
various lines of literature, art, sci
ence. and applied technology.
In women's education, as planned
for women alone, the tendency is to
ward (he study of beauty and order.
Literature and language take prece
dence over science. Expression is
valued more highly than action. In
carrying this to an extreme, the ne
c ssary relat on of thought to action
becomes obscured. The scholarship
developed tends to be ineffective, be
cause it is not related to life. The
educated women are likely to master
technique, rather than art; method
than substance. She may know a
good deal, but be able to do nothing.
Often her views of life must undergo
nainful changes before she can find
her place in the world.
In schools for men alone, the re
verse condition often obtains. The
::cnse of reality obscures the element
of beauty and fitness. It is of great
advantage to both men and women to
meet on a plane of equality in edu
cation. Women are brought into con
tact, with men who can do things—
men in whom the sense of reality is
strong, and who have definite views in
life. This influence affects them for
good. It turns them away from sen
timentalism. It is opposed to un
wholesome forms of hysterical friend
ship. It. gives tone to their religious
thoughts and impulses. Above all, it
tends to encourage action governed
by ideals, as opposed to that resting
on caprice. It gives them better
standards of what is possible and im
possible, when the responsibility for
action is thrown upon them.
In like manner, the association
with wise, sane and healthy women
has its value for young men. This
value has never been fully realized,
even by the strongest advocates of
coeducation. It raises their ideals of
womanhood, and the highest manhood
must bp associated with such an ideal.
Meanly and Kitnes*.
While the work of the teachers must
make the kernel of the university, we
must rejoice that here at Palo Alto
even the husks are beautiful. Reality
and fitness are great forces in educa
tion. Every object with which the
young mind comes iti contact leaves
on it. its trace. "Nothing is unim
portant in the life of man," and the
least feature of our surroundings has
its influence, greater or less. "There
was a child went forth every day,"
Walt Whitman tells us. "and the first
object that it looked upon, that ob
lect it became." It may be for a mo
ment or an hour, or "for changing
vcb s of years." The essence of civ
'Mv.ation is exposure to vfiilnc: ami
humanizing influence " ' n- in
i university," ♦ "o <>-. "is
ivnrth more than a dol'ar ' ■' '" ,1 "and
" ery dollar spent in tinker n nuiv< r
itv beautiful will be i en,aid with in


( liancellor David Starr .lonian.
terest in the enriching of the students'
lives.
It has been a reproach to America
that for the best of her sons and
daughters she has done the least. She
lias built palaces for lunatics, idiots,
crippled and blind, —nay, even for
criminals and paupers. But the col
lege students —"the young men of
sound mind and earnest purposes, the
noblest treasures of the State," to
quote the words of President White,
"she has housed in vile barracks."
The student has no need for luxury.
Plain living has ever gone with high
thinking. But grace and fitness have
an educative power too often forgot
ten in this utilitarian age. These
long corridors with their stately
arches, these circles of waving palms,
will have their part in the students'
training as surely as the chemical lab
oratory or the seminary-room. Each
stone in the quadrangle shall teach its
lesson of grace and genuineness, and
this Valley of Santa Clara shall occu
py a warm place in every student's
heart. Pictures of this fair region will
cling to his memory amid the figures
of the draughting-room. He will not
forget the fine waves of our two moun
tain ranges, overarched by a soft blue
Grecian sky, nor the ancient oak trees,
nor the gently sloping fields, changing
from vivid green to richest yellow, as
the seasons change. The noble jnllars
of the gallery of art, its rich treas
ures, the choicest remains of the
ideals of past ages—all these, and a
hundred other things which each one
will find out for himself, shall fill his
mind with bright pictures, never to be
rubbed out in the wea,r of life. Thus
in the character of every student shall
be left some imperishable trace of the
beauty of the Stanford farm, the estate
of Palo Alto.
Influence of Character.
Above and beyond all learning is
the influence of character, the impulse
to virtue and piety which comes from
men whose lives show that virtue and
piety really exist. For the life of the
most exalted as well as the humblest
of men, there can be no nobler motto
than that inscribed by the great
scholar of the last century over his
home in Hammarby: "Innocue vivito;
numen adest." Live blameless; God
is near. "This," said Linnaeus, "is
the wisdom of my life."
Religious Freedom.
Whsn the University was founded,
it was provided that in its religious
life, as in its scientific investigations,
it should be wholly free from outside
control. No religious sect or organi
zation and no group of organizations
should have dominion over it. The
University should exist for its own
sake, to carry out its own purposes,
and to bring out its own results in
its own way.
In this regard the die is cast, once
for all. The choice of the founders
of the University was deliberate and
final. They chose the path of intel
lectual and religious freedom, in the
very interest of religion itself. Re
ligion is devotion in action. In its
higher reaches it must be individual,
because it is a function of the indiv
idual soul which must stand in per
petual protest against the religion
that finds its end in forms and cere
monies and organizations.
The .requirement was a simple re
flection of Mr. Stanford's own relig
ious character, as expressed in the
words of one very near to him: "If
a firm belief in a beneficent Creator,
a profound admiration for Jesus of
Nazareth and His teachings, and the
certainty of a personal life hereafter,
constitute religion, then Leland Stan
ford was a religious man. The nar
row walls of a creed could not confine
him; therefore, he was not a pro
fessed member of any church, for in
each confession of faith he found
something to which he could not sub
scribe. But for the principles of re
ligion he hijd a profound veneration;
in h's heart were the true sentiments
of Christianity, and ho often said that
in his opinion the Golden Rule was
the cornerstone of all religion."
RelMon must form the axis of per
sonal character, and its prime import

ance the university cannot ignore. To
attain its culture it may use indirect
rather than direct means, the influ
ence of effort and character rather
than the imposition of forms. To ac
cept ecclesiastical help is to invite
ecclesiastical control toward ecclesi
astical ends. In the grant of endow
ment it was required that the trustees
should "prohibit sectarian instruction,
but have taught in the university the
immortality of the soul, the existence
of an all-wise and benevolent Crea
tor. and that obedience to His laws
is the highest duty of man."
The founders believed truly that
freedom of thought and action would
promote morality and religion, that a
deeper, fuller religious life would
arise from the growth of the individ
ual, that only where the "winds of
freedom blow" will spring up the
highest type of religious development.
For character is formed from within
by the efforts and strivings and as
pirations of the individual. It can
never be imposed from without. The
will is made strong from choosing
the right, not from having right ac
tion enforced upon it. The life of man
is "made beautiful and sweet through
self-devotion and through self-re
straint." But this must be chosen
voluntarily, else it fails of its purpose.
Growth Through Ages.
It was Mr. Stanford's hope to leave
the University free to grow through
the coming ages. He would extend
no dead hand from the grave to limit
its activities or to control its move
ments. The deed of gift is in favor
of education pure and simple. It has
no hampering clause, and the only end
in view is that of the help of human
ity through the extension of knowl
edge. "We hope," he said, "that this
institution will endure through long
ages. Provisions regarding details of
management, however wise they may
be at present, might prove to be mis
chievous under conditions which may
arise in the future."
The growth of the University must
remain the best evidence of the
founder's wisdom. He had the sagac
ity to recognize the value of higher
education and the patriotism to give
the rewards of a successful life to its
advancement. He had the rare wis
dom to discriminate between the real
and the temporary in university organ
ization and management, and his pro
vision is for the genuine and the per
manent, not for that "which speedily
passes away." Still more rare, he had
the forethought to leave to each suc
ceeding generation, the duty of adapt
ing its details of administration and
methods to the needs of the time.
If the founders had said: "We will
found a university so strong that it
may endure for all the centuries,
whose organization shall be so free
and flexible that in each age it shall
reflect the best spirit of the time,"
they could not have given it greater
freedom of development than it has
today. For the glory of the univer
sity must lie in its freedom, in that
freedom which cannot fall into li
cense, nor lose itself in waywardness
—that freedom which knows but one
bond of control, the eternal truth of
God.
Perpetual Power.
When the University opened its
doors in 1891, Millicent Shinn printed
these words of prophecy: "Greater
than the achievement of lasting hon
or among one's fellow-men of later
generations, is it to become a living
power among them forever. It rarely
happens to one man and woman to
have both the power and the skill to
thus live after death, working and
shaping beneficently in the lives of
many—not of tens nor of hundreds,
but of thousands and tens of thou
sands, as the generations follow on.
Herein is the wisdom of money spent
in education, that each recipient of in
fluence becomes in his time a center
to transmit the same in every direc
tion. so that it multiplies forever in
geometric .ratio. The power to mold
unborn generations for good, to keen
one's hards mightily on human af
fairs after the flesh has been dust for
years, seems not onlv more than mor

tal, but more than man. Thus does
man become co-worker with God in
the shaping of the world to a good
outcome."
And this I said in my opening day
address, "The Golden Age of Califor
nia begins when its gold is used for
purposes like this. From such deeds
must rise the new California of the
coming century, no longer the Califor
nia of the gold-seeker and the adven
turer, but the abode of high-minded
men and women, trained in the wis
dom of the ages, and imbued with the
love of nature, the love of man, and
the love of God. And bright indeed
will be the future of our State if in
the usefulness every hope and prayer
of the founders shall be realized."
University Life
With those words of mine, spoken
twenty-four years ago, the University
began. "We come together today," I
said, "for the first time as teacher and
students. With this relation, the life
of the University begins. It is such
personal contact of young men and
young women with scholars and in
vestigators which constitutes the life
of the University. It is for us as
teachers and students in the Univer
sity's first year to lay the foundations
of a school which may last as long as
human civilization. Ours is the
youngest of the universities, but it is
heir to the wisdom of all the ages,
and with this inheritance it has the
promise of a rapid and sturdy growth
"But the future, with its glories and
responsibilities, will be in other
hands. It is ours at the beginning to
give the University its form, its ten
dencies, its customs. The power of
precedent will cause to be repeated
over again everything that we do —
our errors as well as our wisdom, it
becomes us, then, to begin work mod
estly, as under the eye of the coming
ages. We must lay the foundations
broad and firm, so as to give full sup
port to whatever edifice the future
may build. Ours is the humbler task,
but not the least in importance, and
our work will not be in vain if all we
do is done in sincerity. As sound as
the rocks from which these walls are
hewn should be the work of every
teacher who comes within them. To
the extent that this is true will the
University be successful. Unless its
work be thus 'wrought in sad sincer
ity' nothing can redeem it from fail
ure. In this feeling, and realizing,
too, that only the help we give to the
men and women whose lives we reach
can justify our presence here, we are
ready to begin our work.
"Our University has no history to
fall back upon; no memories of great
teachers to haunt its corridors; in
none of its rooms appear the traces
which show where a great man has
lived and worked. No tender asso
ciations cling, ivv-like, to its fresh,
new halls. It is hallowed by no tra
dition. it is hampered by none.
Traditions and associations it is ours
to make. From our work the future
of the University will grow, as the
splendid lily from the modest bulb."
Dr. Jordan delivered the annual
Founders' Day address in the Assem
bly Hall this morning upon the sub
ject of "The Foundation Ideals of Stan
ford University."
From an historical as well as a per
sonal viewpoint it is eminently fit
ting that Dr. Jordan should discourse
upon this theme, which will farm a
companion piece to the Chancellor's
"The Story of a Good Woman." The
latter also first appeared as a Found
ers' Day address, and was a eulogy
of the life of Mrs. Jane Lathrop Stan
ford, and a narrative of the history
of the University during the so-called
"dark days" between 1893 and 1899,
when the ultimate fate of the institu
tion was in constant doubt.
In treating his subject this morning
Dr. Jordan gave expression to the
ideals which inspired Senator Leland
Stanford in his conception of Stanford
University. Selecting the successful
system then in practice at Cornell
University as the most suitable for the
needs of Stanford, the Senator called
upon Andrew D. White, who was
mainly responsible for the efficiency
of Cornell, where he was then acting
president, to assume the duties of
chief executive at Stanford. In declin
ing White .recommended David Stan-
Jordan, then president of the Universi
ty of Indiana, for the position.
When the present Chancellor name
to Stanford he was the youngest uni
versity president, in po'nt of years, in
the country, and when he resigned he
was the oldest in point of service, a
fact of no little significance.
The important share which Dr.
David Starr Jordan had in forming, di
recting. and developing the "founda
tion 'deals" of Stanford University
need no comment.
The address of Dr. Jordan follows:
I)r. Jordan Introduces Speech.
When Charles Darwin felt himself
growing old, he sat down in his home
in Kent to write the story of his life —
fo.r his children. He wrote, he said, as
might a spirit from another world,
looking down on this one. not swayed
by any emotion, of hope, of fear, or
eagerness or uncertainty as to the
final end. And so, today, T wish in
some such disembodied fashion to tell
the story of the founding of a univer
sity, and of the purposes and ideas
with which it started out.

Twenty-four years is a short time
in the history of a nation or a univer
sity, which is a small and swiftly
changing nation within itself. It is a
long time in the life of a man, as those
who with me have spanned it can tes
tify.
The story of today will not go far
beyond the first day of October, 1891,
when we gathered in the northwest
gate of the quadrangle for the open
ing day.
Founder and President.
Purpose must come before action,
and in the very beginning there were
only two to frame this purpose, the
founder and the president. Leland
Stanford was then scarcely older than
I am now, and I was a mere "youth
of promise," from the simple-minded
east, a "new man," as the San Francis
co journals kindly put it, and Mr.
Stanford had a reputation wider than
the nation, a philosopher and a lover
of li s kind as well as a business man
and a statesman.
A ('auspicious Figure.
Leland Stanford had been for a gen
eration the most conspicious figure in
California. He was a .rich man, weal
thy through his own effort, and he
hoped to leave humanity better for his
riches. Especially he wished to bring
to the California he loved, and who, af
ter California's fash-on, ha.l f'nst, loved
him, the abundance of life, which is
the best gift of the University. Leland
Stanford had held many relations with
California. He was an actual pion
eer. When the Civil War broke out he
had no doubt of his position and he
stood for free speech in Sacramento,
when freedom was dangerous. He was
the war governor of the state, trusted
by Lincoln, and like Lincoln, he knew
how to count the cost in a difficult
crisis. He had been one of the four
men of Sacramento who saw the vision
of a railway over the Sierras. In 1891
he was United States Senator from
California, known to every one and be
loved by all who came near him.
Typically American.
His wide influence did not rise from
his wealth. Wealth and influence
sprang alike from his personality. He
was broad-minded and long-headed,
and his simplicity of life kept him al
ways in touch with the people. "He
was active," it was said, "when other

men were idle; he was generous when
other men were grasping; he was lof
ty when other men were base." He
was thoroughly a man, and a man of
the type we like to call American.
One word of praise of Stanford
clings to my memory. At his funeral
in 1893, Horatio Stebbins in his state
ly fashion told how the Greeks did
honor to a slain hero. Then turning
to the pallbearers, stalwart men from
the Southern Pacific, he said: "Gentle
up your strength a little, for 'tis a man
ye bear."
University Idealized.
The story of the death of the only
son is known to Stanford people. The
boy, young Leland, fell ill in Rome
from the mosquito-borne Roman fever.
After coming back to Florence while
convalescent, he died of failure of the
heart. After the long vigil of a dreary
night, Mr. Stanford awoke one morn
ing with these words on his lips: "The
children of California shall be my chil
dren." And this thought grew crystal
line as the dream of a great universi
ty. And in this plan, nis wife, Jane La
throp Stanford, gave him most loyal
service, which continued unshaken
throughout twelve years of lonely wid
owhood. The story of her love and de
votion I have told as well as I could on
another occasion, the parallel to this.
< aliforiiia tlie .Motif.
So the decision was made that the
beloved Palo Alto farm —famed for the
finest horses in the world —should be
come a university campus. The Uni
versity buildings should have a motif
from California. To this end the old
mission of San Juan Capistrano, near
the seashore above San Diego, founded
by Father Junlpero Serra more than a
century before, was chosen to give the
University its form. Appeal was made
to the greatest living architects, Henry
Hobson Richardson, of Boston, for
the best was none too good for the new
University. Richardson died before
any work was begun, but his partners,
Shepley, Rutan and Coolidge, took up
the plans in all essential respects just
as we see them now in stone. Freder
ick Law Olmsted devised the garden
effects, but his plans are as yet car
ried out only in part. The streets were
laid out, and at Mr. Stanford's request.
I named them for the early padres,
who led in the missions of California.
Among these are Salvatierra Street,
named for the Jesuit father who first
urged the California missions; Serra
Avenue, fo,r Junipero Serra, the Fran
ciscan who first began the work of
building them, performing marvels of
energy and patience in long marches up
and down the coast from La Paz to
Monterey, and in dealing with the be
setting Indians for whose salvation,
temporal and spiritual, the missions
themselves were planned. Lasuen
street is named for Firmin Lasuen, the
wise and self-contained successor to
the impulsive and enthusiastic Padre
Serra. Po.rtola, Arguello, and Alvara
do were the first governors of Califor
nia; Crespi its first historian, Costan
zo its first civil engineer. These with
Ortega, Rivera, and the rest, were
members of Portola's party of explora
tion who first saw the Golden Gate
and the bay belvnd it. They likened it
to a "Mediterranean Sea," and they
named it for their patron saint, San
Francisco of Assisi, who knew the lan
guage of the birds and even that of
the fishes. Meanwhile, and with char
acteristic energy, Mr. Stanford set out
to make his vision into fact. Articles
of endowment were drawn up, and
buildings we.re provided. A president
was found and he was sent forth to
choose fifteen professors. It was not
wise to have too many professors till
we knew whether students would
come. The press notices were not en
thusiastic. The New York Mail and
Express said: "There is as much need
of a university in California as there
is in Switzerland for an asylum for de
cayed sea-captains." And it was
prophesied that even the fifteen would
for years "lecture in marble halls to
empty benches." Rut the benches
were not empty, as we all know; the
never to be forgotten pioneers of '95
were all there, altogether to the num
ber of 465, and on the first of Octob
er, with all bright auspices of earth
and sky. of wealth and generosity, the
University began. Of the fifteen pro
fessors, oldest of the old guard, par
takers in all joy, worry and success,
ten still remain,—Branner, Stillman,
Marx, Jenkins, Sanford, Campbell. An
derson, Gilbert, G.riffin, and Elliott.
Meanwhile, these were the ideas or
the Founder, as he gave them to me in
many evenings together, the
stones of the quadrangle were leaping
to find their places.
How I came in the matter you will
find in the autobiography of President
White, of Cornell, if you are interested
to read.
Possibilities of Knowledge.
The need to train his own son first
turned Mr. Stanford's thoughts to edu
cational matters. His early acquaint
ance with Professor Agassiz, perhaps
the greatest of American teachers, di
rected his thought into channels of
wisdom. From Agassiz he derived a
realizing sense of the possibilities of
human knowledge and the impelling
force of man's intellectual needs, —
that "hunger and thi.rst after truth
which only the destitute student
knows." "Man's physical needs are
slight," he said, "but his intellectual
needs are hounded only by his capacity
to receive.'
Major System Valued.
The major-subject system, especially
characteristic of Stanford, but later
taken in part by several other univer
sities, among them Harvard, may be
traced in some degree back to Agassiz.
It was first devised in Indiana,, in
1887, by a committee of three, D,r. Bry
an. now president of Indiana, Dr. von
Jagemann. now professor in Harvard,
and myself. In framing the plan I
had in mind the oft repeated words of
Atrassiz: "A spec'alty is the backbone
of education." "The mind is made
strong by the thorough possession of
something." And those of us who be
lieved with President White in the de
mocracy of the mental powers, realized
that in the higher education of a stu
dent it is the man himself who can
best choose what the backbone of his
training should be. For in making a
student, there are but two types of im
pulses strong enough to count, to love

the work itself and to know how the
work is related to his future life.
Mr. Stanford believed that an essen
tial part of education was thorough
knowledge in some one line, so firmly
held as to be effective for practical re
sults. He believed in early choice of
profession. The course of study, how
ever broad and however long, should
in all its parts look toward effective
1 fe. The profession chosen early gives
a purpose and stimulus to all the in
termediate training. He saw clearly
the need of individualism in education,
and that the course of study should be
built around the individual man he is.
The supposed needs of the average
man, developed by a consensus of edu
cational philosophers do not suffice for
the actual man in actual life. We must
be fed with the food that is good for
us. It is for 11s that it must be adap
ted, not for some average man in some
overage age. The ready-made curri
culum belongs to the same category
as ready-made clothing. It is some
thing cheap and easy for the man with
out individual needs.
Democracy and Knowledge.
No other university has recognized
so distinctly as ours the absolute de
mocracy of knowledge. The earlier
traditions of Cornell pointed in this di
rection, and for this reason Mr. Stan
ford found in Cornell, rather than in
Harvard Yale, or Michigan, the
nearest existing approach to his
own ideal. It was Ezra Cornell's
hope "to found an institution where
any person could find instruction in
any study." Cornell and Stanford, in
so far as they are loyal to these tra
ditions, know neither favored students
nor favored studies. No class of men
is chosen to the exclusion of others,
and no class of studies is given a fal
lacious importance through force of
academic pressure or through inertia
of academic tradition. While various
kinds of knowledge are of varying
worth td different persons, each has
its own value to the world, and the
value to the individual must he de
termined in each case by itself. The
university should be no respecter of
persons. It is not called on to approve
or condemn the\various orders of ge
nius that come to it for training.
There has been no greater hindrance
to educational progress than the hler
rchy of studies, the fiction that certain
kinds of work had an invisible value
not to be measured by tangible results.
That the work of a university should
be essentially specialized, fitting the
individual for definite forms of higher
usefulness, was an idea constantly pre
sent with Mr. Stanford. He had no
interest in general education as an end
in itself. He had no desire to fit men
for a life of leisure, or for any life
which did not involve a close adaption
of means to ends.
No Educational Millinery.
As a practical man, accustomed to
go to the heart of things, Mr. Stanford
had little respect for educational mil
l'nery and for the conventionalities
which have grown up about the great
institutions of the Old World. He saw
clearly the value of thoroughness, the
need of freedom, the individuality of
development, but cared little for the
machinery by which these ends were
achieved. So it was decreed that tho
new university should be simple in its
organization, with only those details
of structure which the needs of the
times should develop within it. If it
must have precedents and traditions,
it must make its own. "I would have
this institution," he said, "help to fit.
men and women for usefulness in this
life, by 'ncreasing their individual
power of production, and by making
them good company for themselves and
others." Or, in my own words to
young men, spoken in this same time:
"The whole of your life must be spent
in your own company, and only the
educated man is good company for
himself."
And besides, "The world turns asid<>
to let any man pass who knows whi
ther he is going."
In proportion to the extent to which
it widens the range of human know
ledge and of human power, in that de

gree does an institution deserve the
name of university. A man content
with the truth that now is, and without
ambition to venture into the unknown,
is not the proper man to be a university
professor. The truth that now is be
longs to the lower schools. The value
of its original work is the best single
test by wh'ch a university may be
judged; and as it is the best, so is it
also the severest. The incentive for
research should be from within. It
cannot be applied from without.
In its public relations, the university
stands for infinite patience, the calm
tasting of ideas and ideals. It con
ducts no propaganda, it controls no
affairs of business. There is no one
it wishes to elect to office. It is the
judge of the principles of wisdom and
the ways of nature. The details of
action it must leave to men whose
business it is to guide the currents of
the moment.
Freedom and Truth.
It was our hope that we might give
to our students the priceless legacy of
the educated man, the power of know
ing what really is. The higher edu
cation should bring men into direct
contact with truth. It should help to
free them from the dead hands of old
traditions and to enable them to form
opinions worthy of the new evidence
each new day brings before them. An
educated man should not be the slave
of the past, not a copy of men who
have gone before him. He must be in
some degree the founder of a new in
tellectual dynasty; for each new think
er is a new type of man. Whatever
is true is the truest thing in the uni
verse, and mental and moral strength
alike come from our contact with it.
And so wo believed that influence that
gees out from these halls should em
phasize the value of truth. The es
sence of scholarship is to know some
thing which is absolutely true; to
have, in the words of Huxley, "some
knowledge to the certainty of which
no authority could add nor take away
one jot or tittle, and to which the
tradition of a thousand years is but
as the hearsay of yesterday." The
scholar, as was once said of our great
chemist, Benjamin Silliman, must have
"faith in truth as truth, faith that
there is a power in the universe good
enough to make trutli-telling safe and
strong enough to make truth-telling ef
fective." The personal influence of gen
uineness, as embodied in the life of a
teacher, is one of the strongest moral
forces which the school can bring to
its aid; for moral training comes not
mainly by precept, but by practice.
We may teach the value of truth to
our students by showing that we value
it ourselves.
Educational Instrument.
Mr. Stanford insisted as a vital prin
ciple that the university exists for
the benefit of the students, present,
past, and future. It has no exist
ence or function save as an instru
ment of education. To this principle
all others should be subordinate. In
his opening address, he said to the
students of the Pioneer Class: "You
are the most important factor in this
university. It is for your benefit that
it has been established."
No Test in Numbers.
That the new university would in
time attract great numbers of stu
dents, Mr. Stanford believed as a mat
ter of course, although he found In
California few who shared his optim
ism. But he was never deceived with
the cheap test of numbers in estimat
ing the value of institutions. He knew
that a few hundred men well trained
under high influences would count for
more than as many thousand, hurried
in droves over a ready-made curricu
lum by young tutors, themselves
scarcely out of college. So it was de
creed that numbers for numbers' sake
should never be a goal of Stanford
University. And he further made the
practical request that not one dollar
directly or indirectly should be spent
in advertising. The university has no
goods for which it is anxious to find
customers.
The greatest nepd of the student is
the teacher Mr. Stanford said: "In

order that the president may have the
assistance of a competent staff of pro
fessors, we have provided that the
best talent obtainable shall be pro
cured and that liberal compensation
shall always lie offered." Again lie
said: "Ample endowment may have
been provided, intelligent management
may secure large income, students
may present themselves In numbers,
but in the end the faculty makes or
mars the university."
Facility (Greatest Need.
Compared with the character of the
faculty, every other element in the
university is of relatively little im
portance. The chief duty of the col
lege president is the choice of teach
ers. If he lias learned the art of sur
rounding himself with men who are
clean, sane, and scholarly, most other
matters of university administration
will take care of themselves, lie can
not fail if he has good men around
him. And in the choice of teachers
the element of personal sanity seemed
of first importance to Mr. Stanford—
the ability to see things as they are.
The university chai.r should be a cen
ter of clear-seeing from which right
acting should rad ate.
Mr. Stanford said, "I hope the Uni
versity may begin where the State
University leaves off." By this he
meant to lay stress on technical, pro
fessional. and research work, activi
ties which were at that time very lit
tle developed at the State University.
He spoke approvingly of an institu
tion which should combine the special
features of Johns Hopkins and Cor
nell.
A professor to whom original in
vestigation is unknown should have
no place in a university. Men of com
monplace or second-hand scholarship
are of necsssity men of low ideals,
however much the fact may be dis
guised. A man of high ideals must be
an investigator. He must know and
think for himself. Only such as do
this can be really great as teachers.
Universities already begin to recog
nize that their most important profes
sors may be men who teach not in
classes, but only by contact with indiv
iduals, devoting time and strength to
advanced research. The presence and
example of the men who really know
may be worth to the student body a
hundred-fold more than the precepts
and drill of the others. They set
standards of thought. They help to
create the university spirit, without
which any college is but a grammar
school of a little higher pretensions.
University Atmosphere.
In the address on the first day in the
old quadrangle, I said: "If our work
is successful, our ideals will appear in
the daily life of the school. In a
school, as in a fortress, it is not the
form of the building, but the strength
of the materials, which determine its
effectiveness. With a garrison of
hearts of oak, it may not matter even
whether there be a fortress. What
ever its form, or its organization, or
its pretensions, the character of the
university is fixed by the men who
teach. "Have a university in shan
ties, nay in tents," Cardinal Newman
has said, "but have great teachers in
it." The university spirit flows oik
from these teachers, and its organiza
tion serves mainly to bring them to
gether. "Colleges only serve us," says
Emerson, "when their aim is not. to
drill, but to create; when they gath
er from afar every ray of various
genius to their hospitable halls, and
by their concentrated fires set the
heart of their youth in flames."
Strong men make universities strong.
A great man never fails to leave a
ureat mark on every youth with whom
he conies in contact. Too much em
phasis cannot be laid on this: that
the real purpose of the university or
ganization is to produce a university
atmosphere—such an atmosphere as
gathered itself around Arnold at Rug
b.v. around Dollinge.r at Munich,
around Linnaeus at Upsaln. around
Werner at Freiberg, around Agassiz
at Cambridge, around Hopkins at Wil
liamstown, around White at Ithaca,
around all great teachers everywhere.
Agassi/, once said: "The physical
suffering of humanity, the wants of
the poor, the craving of the hungry
and naked, appeal to the sympathies
of every one who has a human heart.
Hut there are necessities which only
the destitute student knows. There is
a hunger and thirst which only the
highest charity can understand and re
lieve; and 011 this solemn occasion
let me say that every dollar given for
higher education, in whatever depart
ment of knowledge, is l'kely to have
a greater influence on the future char
acter of our nation than even the
thousands, the hundred thousands,
and millions which'we have spent, or
are spending, to raise the many to ma
terial ease and comfort."
Presidential Powers.
Mr. Stanford laid much stress on
the work of the President of the Uni
versity. The hoard of trustees were
directed to give to him such powers
as would enable him, with his col
leagues. to control all educational pol
icies, and such that for their success
he might justly lie held responsible.
At some future time the presidency
of the American university may lie an
outworn office, its function to he taKOn
by a committee from the faculty, as
some now urge that it should be.
Hut this cannot be done in the period
of formation of the American univer
s'ty, and no American university has
yet passed its period of youth and
growth. In that lies its strength. Its
hope lies in its imperfection. It is
not born full-grown, as the German
universities have claimed to be. With
perfection, decline sets in, as these
univers'ties have clearly shown. Ev
ery forward movement needs a lead
er. "An institution is but the length
ened shadow of a man."
It is for the president to take the
initiative in all educational affairs, to
give the university its color and its
personality. lie must know how to
take advice and how to value it. The
more checks and balances on his ac
tion the better, but none should de
prive him of his initiative. It is for
him to seek and develop those rare
elements of feeling and character by
which one university is known from
another. And in our University we
tried to weld together such elements
to form what we fondly hoped men
would call the "Stanford Spirit."
Value of Keonomy.
It was the idea of the founders that
each student should be taught the
value of economy—that lavish expen
ditures bring neither happiness nor
success. "A student," it was said by
one of the founders, "will lie better
fitted to battle with the trials and trib
ulations of life, if he lias been taught
the worth of money, the necessity of
saving and of overcoming a desire to
imitate those who are better off in the
world's goods. For, when he has
learned how to save and how to con
trol inordinate desires, be will be rel
atively rich During the past three
and a half years of close observation
on my part, the importance of econ
uniy bas impressed itself forcibly up
on me, and I wish it to be taught to
all students of the university. Na
ture has made the surroundings of
the university beautiful, and the sub
stantial character of the buildings
gives them an appearance of luxury.
I wish this natural beauty and com
parative luxury to impress upon the
students the necessity of their preser
vation for the generations that are to
follow. The lesson thus taught will
remain with them through life and
help them to teach the lesson to
ethers. The un'versitv buildings and
grounds are for their use while stu
dents. in trust for students to come."
\i*l of
The value of the study of political
and social science as a remedy for
defects of government was clearly
seen by Mr. Stanford. "All govern
ments." he said, "at" governments by
public opinion, and in the long run
ever', people is a■ well governed as it
deserves." Hence increase of knowl
edge brin-'s about bett r government.
For help in such matters the people
bavr a ri hi to look to their un ! ', : r

sities and university men. It was his
theory that the art of government is
still in its infancy. "Legislation lias
not, as a rule, been a ainst the peo
ple, but it has not done the good tli it
it might." "No greater biow can be
struck at labor than that which ren
ders ts products insecure." In the
externum of volir't irv co-operation,
he saw a remedy for many present ills,
as lie siw in the lav ef mutual help
the essence of i ur Christian civiliza
tion. He said, in laying the corner
stone: "Out of these suggestions
urows the consider tion of the great
advantages, especially to the laboring
man, of cooperation, by which each
individual has the benefit of the intel
lectual and physical forces of his as
sociates. It is I \ tli • intelligent ap
plication of these |) j c'iiles that there
will le found th? greatest lever *.o
elevate the mass o r humanity, and
laws should h< f:;iincd to protect and
develop co-operat ve associations. . . .
They will accomplish all that is

sought to lie secured by labor leagues,
trades unions and other federations of
workmen, and will be free from the
objection of even impliedly attempt
i 11 to take the unauthorised 01
wrongful control ( 112 the property,
capital, or time of others."
li<>>:ilt > and Co-ojicmtieii,
One result of voluntary co-opera
tion, in .Mr. Stanford's view, would bo
the development of the spirit of loy
> alty. the most precious attribute of
[ the laboring man in any grade, in any
j field, to the interest or cause which
' he serves. One great evil of the pres
ent era of gigantic industrial organ
izations is that it takes no account of
the spirit of loyalty, without which
no man can do li s best work. The
huge trust does away with tlie feeling
of personal association. The equally
huge trades union, in many of its op
erations. strikes directly at the per
sonality of the individual workman.
It makes him merely a pawn to be
moved hither and thither in the game
of industrial war. In the long run,
j no enterprise can flourish, unless
' those who carry it on throw them
selvi s, heart and soul,' into its ser
vice. On the other hand..no one can
do a greater injury to the cause of
labor than to take loyalty out of the
category of working virtues. IJ is one
if the traditional good traits of ihr
healthy college man to be loyal to bis
j t'ollege. This virtue Mr. Stanford
would have cultivated in all effective
ways, and in loyalty on both sides lie
would find a practical < lution of most

112 the la! or troubles of today. That
he carried his ideas into his own prac
tice ir shown by the unflinching devo
tion of all his own employees of what
ever grad j throughout his life. They
were taught to bel eve in him. to be
lieve in th > worth of their own work,
a: d thi s to have respect for tliem
selw-. Much of the dheont ill of the
day has its origin in lack of self-re
spect. The pawn that is moved in the
game of sympathetic strike lias no
control over his own actions, and
then f< re : o respect for his own mo
tives. Th <!< veiop rent of intelligent,
vclur.tary co-i.peration. n the long
r ni, lrakeg the wtvkman more than a
machi '.e. If lie is such, in the long
rti" again, ho will re e've whatever
he deserves. 11 1 will be a factor in
c'vi'i r ior, when the unskilled, un
thinking laborer is not.
\\ iisi < i I abor.
\he - ■ it economic waste in labor
oft m engaged Mr. Stanford's atton
t'on, avd he found its remedy in edu-

•'tin". "Orce," ho faid, "tho great
"n )o c:f labor was to supply the
necessities of life; now, hut a small
portion of our people are so engaged.
' o: d. clothing and shelt.fr are com
non in our country to every provident
'lerscn, excepting, of course, in occa
sional accidental cases. The great
demard for I ilor is to supply what
may he termed Intellectual wants, to
which there is no limit, except that
of intelligence to conceive. If all the
j relations and obligations of man
j were properly understood, it would
I net he nec«vsary for people to make a
| burden of labor. Th > great masses of
I the toilers are now compelled to per
form such an amount of labor as
makes life often wearisome. \n intel
ligent system of education would cor
rect. this inequality. It would make
I
the humblest laborer's work more
I valuable, it would increase both the
| demand and supply for skilled labor,
and reduce the number of the non
producing class. It would dignify la
hor, and ultimately would go far to
wipe out the mere distinctions of
wealth and ancestry. It would achieve
| a. bloodless revolution and establish
j a republic of industry, merit and
; learning.
"Ilow near to that state we may be,
j or how far from it, we cannot tell. It
■ stents very far when we contemplate
the great standing a litres of Europe,
where over five millions of men (or
about one for every twelve adult
male i are marching about with gnus
on their shoulders to preserve the
•tea(' • of nations, while hovering near

them is an innumerable force of po
lice to preserve the peace of individ
uals; but when we remember the pos
sibilities of e vilizution and the power
of education, we can foresee ;i time
when these soldiers and policemen
shall be changed to useful, producing
citizens, engaged in lilting the bur
dens of the people instead of increas
ing them. And yet. extravagant as are
the nations of Europe in standing ar
mies and preparations for war, their
xtravagance in the waste of labor is
still greater. Education, by teaching
the intelligent use of machinery, is
the only remedy for such waste."
Education a Itirtbriglit.
Mr. Stanford believed that no edu
cational system could be complete in
which entrance to the university was
a detached privilege of the chosen
few. lie believed in the unbroken lad
der from the kindergarten to the uni
versity, a ladder that, each one should
be free to climb, as far as his ability
or energy should permit. He believed,
with lan Maclaren. in keeping the
path well trodden from the farmhouse
to the university, lie asked that this
sentence from the president's first, ad
dress be placed on the University Reg
ister: "A generous education is the
birthright of every man and woman in
America." In Emerson's words:
"America means opportunity," and
opportunity comes through training to
receive it. To have such a train'ng
is to be truly free born, and this is
the birthright of each child of the re
public.
A friend at Aix-les-Mains once ar
gued with him that there is already
too much education, and that to in
crease it further ! s simply to swell the
volume of discontent. "I insisted."
Mr. Stanford said, "that there can not
be too much education any more than
too much health or intelligence. Do
you happen to know any man who has
been too well educated. Where does
he live? What is his address? If you
cannot find such a man, you cannot
speak of overeducation." There has
been unwise education or misfit, edu
cation. Some highly educated men
are neither wise nor lit, and there is a
kind of education that comes from
experience and not from books. But
with all this, too thorough or too
good a training no one ever had. Ig
norance is shadow. Education is light.
Nothing is more unpractical than
darkness, nothing is more practical
than sunshine.
Secret of Human Power.
Science is knowledge tested and set
in order, and each advance in knowl
<l ge cirrics with it a corresponding
increment of power. A machine, to
Mr. Stanford, was not a mere saver of
lal or. but an aid to labor, increasing
its efficiency and therefore adding to
the value of men. Hv greater knowl
edge of the forces of nature we ac
quire greater skill in turning these
forces '11 to man's service through the
harness of machinery. In increase of
scientific knowledge he found the se
cret of human power. An education
which does not disclose the secret of
power is unworthy the name. "We
may always advance toward the infi
nite," was a favorite saying of his.
He could find no limit to the develop
in lit of civilization. The possibilities
of human progress expressed to him
the measure of infinite goodness, in
his own words: "The beneficence of
the Creator toward man on earth, and
the possibilities of humanity, are one
and the same."
But in his forecast of the myriad
triumphs of applied science, he did not
forget that knowledge itself must pre
cede any use man can make of it.
Pure science must always go before
applied science. The higher forms of
thought have their place in mental
growth as necessities in the concrete
preparation for action,
In the new university he decreed
that "the work in applied science::
he decreed that "the work in applied
shall be carried along with that
in the pure sciences and the hu
manities. and that, so far as may be.
all lines of work included in the plan
of the university shall be equally fos
tered."
Itcnct'itN el' Vsseeialion.
Mr. Stanford's belief that literature
and engineering should be pursued
side by side was shown by his wish
to provide for each with equal gene.r

osity. And the students of each are
tlii' gainers by this relation. The de
votee of classical culture is strength
ened by his association with men to
whom their college work is part of
the serious duty of life. The student
of engineering stands with both feet
on tlie ground, li s success in life
depends on the exactness of his
knowledge of machinery and of the
basic principles of mechanics and
maihematics. He must be in dead
earnest if lie would succeed at all. On
the other hand, the student of realities
uains by his association with the poet,
the philosopher and the artist. The
finer aspects of life are brought to his
notice, and from this association re
sults tolerance and breadth of sym
( oeditcationa! \(ha»t:iges.
That worn n should receive higher
education as well as men was an ax
iom 'o Mr. Stanford. Coeducation was
taken for granted from the first, pud
the young women of Stanford have
■ ( v ;■ had to question the friendliness
I their welcome. "We have provid
ed." Mr. Stanford says"in the articles
of endowment, that the education of
tlie sexes shall be equal—deeming it.
of special importance that those who
are to be mothers of the future gen
eration shall be fitted to mold and di
rect th,' infantile mind at its most crit
ical period."
The leading argument for coeduca
tion is akin to one just indicated for
the uiron in one institution of the
various lines of literature, art, sci
ence. and applied technology.
In women's education, as planned
for women alone, the tendency is to
ward (he study of beauty and order.
Literature and language take prece
dence over science. Expression is
valued more highly than action. In
carrying this to an extreme, the ne
c ssary relat on of thought to action
becomes obscured. The scholarship
developed tends to be ineffective, be
cause it is not related to life. The
educated women are likely to master
technique, rather than art; method
than substance. She may know a
good deal, but be able to do nothing.
Often her views of life must undergo
nainful changes before she can find
her place in the world.
In schools for men alone, the re
verse condition often obtains. The
::cnse of reality obscures the element
of beauty and fitness. It is of great
advantage to both men and women to
meet on a plane of equality in edu
cation. Women are brought into con
tact, with men who can do things—
men in whom the sense of reality is
strong, and who have definite views in
life. This influence affects them for
good. It turns them away from sen
timentalism. It is opposed to un
wholesome forms of hysterical friend
ship. It. gives tone to their religious
thoughts and impulses. Above all, it
tends to encourage action governed
by ideals, as opposed to that resting
on caprice. It gives them better
standards of what is possible and im
possible, when the responsibility for
action is thrown upon them.
In like manner, the association
with wise, sane and healthy women
has its value for young men. This
value has never been fully realized,
even by the strongest advocates of
coeducation. It raises their ideals of
womanhood, and the highest manhood
must bp associated with such an ideal.
Meanly and Kitnes*.
While the work of the teachers must
make the kernel of the university, we
must rejoice that here at Palo Alto
even the husks are beautiful. Reality
and fitness are great forces in educa
tion. Every object with which the
young mind comes iti contact leaves
on it. its trace. "Nothing is unim
portant in the life of man," and the
least feature of our surroundings has
its influence, greater or less. "There
was a child went forth every day,"
Walt Whitman tells us. "and the first
object that it looked upon, that ob
lect it became." It may be for a mo
ment or an hour, or "for changing
vcb s of years." The essence of civ
'Mv.ation is exposure to vfiilnc: ami
humanizing influence " ' n- in
i university," ♦ "o <>-. "is
ivnrth more than a dol'ar ' ■' '" ,1 "and
" ery dollar spent in tinker n nuiv< r
itv beautiful will be i en,aid with in


( liancellor David Starr .lonian.
terest in the enriching of the students'
lives.
It has been a reproach to America
that for the best of her sons and
daughters she has done the least. She
lias built palaces for lunatics, idiots,
crippled and blind, —nay, even for
criminals and paupers. But the col
lege students —"the young men of
sound mind and earnest purposes, the
noblest treasures of the State," to
quote the words of President White,
"she has housed in vile barracks."
The student has no need for luxury.
Plain living has ever gone with high
thinking. But grace and fitness have
an educative power too often forgot
ten in this utilitarian age. These
long corridors with their stately
arches, these circles of waving palms,
will have their part in the students'
training as surely as the chemical lab
oratory or the seminary-room. Each
stone in the quadrangle shall teach its
lesson of grace and genuineness, and
this Valley of Santa Clara shall occu
py a warm place in every student's
heart. Pictures of this fair region will
cling to his memory amid the figures
of the draughting-room. He will not
forget the fine waves of our two moun
tain ranges, overarched by a soft blue
Grecian sky, nor the ancient oak trees,
nor the gently sloping fields, changing
from vivid green to richest yellow, as
the seasons change. The noble jnllars
of the gallery of art, its rich treas
ures, the choicest remains of the
ideals of past ages—all these, and a
hundred other things which each one
will find out for himself, shall fill his
mind with bright pictures, never to be
rubbed out in the wea,r of life. Thus
in the character of every student shall
be left some imperishable trace of the
beauty of the Stanford farm, the estate
of Palo Alto.
Influence of Character.
Above and beyond all learning is
the influence of character, the impulse
to virtue and piety which comes from
men whose lives show that virtue and
piety really exist. For the life of the
most exalted as well as the humblest
of men, there can be no nobler motto
than that inscribed by the great
scholar of the last century over his
home in Hammarby: "Innocue vivito;
numen adest." Live blameless; God
is near. "This," said Linnaeus, "is
the wisdom of my life."
Religious Freedom.
Whsn the University was founded,
it was provided that in its religious
life, as in its scientific investigations,
it should be wholly free from outside
control. No religious sect or organi
zation and no group of organizations
should have dominion over it. The
University should exist for its own
sake, to carry out its own purposes,
and to bring out its own results in
its own way.
In this regard the die is cast, once
for all. The choice of the founders
of the University was deliberate and
final. They chose the path of intel
lectual and religious freedom, in the
very interest of religion itself. Re
ligion is devotion in action. In its
higher reaches it must be individual,
because it is a function of the indiv
idual soul which must stand in per
petual protest against the religion
that finds its end in forms and cere
monies and organizations.
The .requirement was a simple re
flection of Mr. Stanford's own relig
ious character, as expressed in the
words of one very near to him: "If
a firm belief in a beneficent Creator,
a profound admiration for Jesus of
Nazareth and His teachings, and the
certainty of a personal life hereafter,
constitute religion, then Leland Stan
ford was a religious man. The nar
row walls of a creed could not confine
him; therefore, he was not a pro
fessed member of any church, for in
each confession of faith he found
something to which he could not sub
scribe. But for the principles of re
ligion he hijd a profound veneration;
in h's heart were the true sentiments
of Christianity, and ho often said that
in his opinion the Golden Rule was
the cornerstone of all religion."
RelMon must form the axis of per
sonal character, and its prime import

ance the university cannot ignore. To
attain its culture it may use indirect
rather than direct means, the influ
ence of effort and character rather
than the imposition of forms. To ac
cept ecclesiastical help is to invite
ecclesiastical control toward ecclesi
astical ends. In the grant of endow
ment it was required that the trustees
should "prohibit sectarian instruction,
but have taught in the university the
immortality of the soul, the existence
of an all-wise and benevolent Crea
tor. and that obedience to His laws
is the highest duty of man."
The founders believed truly that
freedom of thought and action would
promote morality and religion, that a
deeper, fuller religious life would
arise from the growth of the individ
ual, that only where the "winds of
freedom blow" will spring up the
highest type of religious development.
For character is formed from within
by the efforts and strivings and as
pirations of the individual. It can
never be imposed from without. The
will is made strong from choosing
the right, not from having right ac
tion enforced upon it. The life of man
is "made beautiful and sweet through
self-devotion and through self-re
straint." But this must be chosen
voluntarily, else it fails of its purpose.
Growth Through Ages.
It was Mr. Stanford's hope to leave
the University free to grow through
the coming ages. He would extend
no dead hand from the grave to limit
its activities or to control its move
ments. The deed of gift is in favor
of education pure and simple. It has
no hampering clause, and the only end
in view is that of the help of human
ity through the extension of knowl
edge. "We hope," he said, "that this
institution will endure through long
ages. Provisions regarding details of
management, however wise they may
be at present, might prove to be mis
chievous under conditions which may
arise in the future."
The growth of the University must
remain the best evidence of the
founder's wisdom. He had the sagac
ity to recognize the value of higher
education and the patriotism to give
the rewards of a successful life to its
advancement. He had the rare wis
dom to discriminate between the real
and the temporary in university organ
ization and management, and his pro
vision is for the genuine and the per
manent, not for that "which speedily
passes away." Still more rare, he had
the forethought to leave to each suc
ceeding generation, the duty of adapt
ing its details of administration and
methods to the needs of the time.
If the founders had said: "We will
found a university so strong that it
may endure for all the centuries,
whose organization shall be so free
and flexible that in each age it shall
reflect the best spirit of the time,"
they could not have given it greater
freedom of development than it has
today. For the glory of the univer
sity must lie in its freedom, in that
freedom which cannot fall into li
cense, nor lose itself in waywardness
—that freedom which knows but one
bond of control, the eternal truth of
God.
Perpetual Power.
When the University opened its
doors in 1891, Millicent Shinn printed
these words of prophecy: "Greater
than the achievement of lasting hon
or among one's fellow-men of later
generations, is it to become a living
power among them forever. It rarely
happens to one man and woman to
have both the power and the skill to
thus live after death, working and
shaping beneficently in the lives of
many—not of tens nor of hundreds,
but of thousands and tens of thou
sands, as the generations follow on.
Herein is the wisdom of money spent
in education, that each recipient of in
fluence becomes in his time a center
to transmit the same in every direc
tion. so that it multiplies forever in
geometric .ratio. The power to mold
unborn generations for good, to keen
one's hards mightily on human af
fairs after the flesh has been dust for
years, seems not onlv more than mor

tal, but more than man. Thus does
man become co-worker with God in
the shaping of the world to a good
outcome."
And this I said in my opening day
address, "The Golden Age of Califor
nia begins when its gold is used for
purposes like this. From such deeds
must rise the new California of the
coming century, no longer the Califor
nia of the gold-seeker and the adven
turer, but the abode of high-minded
men and women, trained in the wis
dom of the ages, and imbued with the
love of nature, the love of man, and
the love of God. And bright indeed
will be the future of our State if in
the usefulness every hope and prayer
of the founders shall be realized."
University Life
With those words of mine, spoken
twenty-four years ago, the University
began. "We come together today," I
said, "for the first time as teacher and
students. With this relation, the life
of the University begins. It is such
personal contact of young men and
young women with scholars and in
vestigators which constitutes the life
of the University. It is for us as
teachers and students in the Univer
sity's first year to lay the foundations
of a school which may last as long as
human civilization. Ours is the
youngest of the universities, but it is
heir to the wisdom of all the ages,
and with this inheritance it has the
promise of a rapid and sturdy growth
"But the future, with its glories and
responsibilities, will be in other
hands. It is ours at the beginning to
give the University its form, its ten
dencies, its customs. The power of
precedent will cause to be repeated
over again everything that we do —
our errors as well as our wisdom, it
becomes us, then, to begin work mod
estly, as under the eye of the coming
ages. We must lay the foundations
broad and firm, so as to give full sup
port to whatever edifice the future
may build. Ours is the humbler task,
but not the least in importance, and
our work will not be in vain if all we
do is done in sincerity. As sound as
the rocks from which these walls are
hewn should be the work of every
teacher who comes within them. To
the extent that this is true will the
University be successful. Unless its
work be thus 'wrought in sad sincer
ity' nothing can redeem it from fail
ure. In this feeling, and realizing,
too, that only the help we give to the
men and women whose lives we reach
can justify our presence here, we are
ready to begin our work.
"Our University has no history to
fall back upon; no memories of great
teachers to haunt its corridors; in
none of its rooms appear the traces
which show where a great man has
lived and worked. No tender asso
ciations cling, ivv-like, to its fresh,
new halls. It is hallowed by no tra
dition. it is hampered by none.
Traditions and associations it is ours
to make. From our work the future
of the University will grow, as the
splendid lily from the modest bulb."
Dr. Jordan delivered the annual
Founders' Day address in the Assem
bly Hall this morning upon the sub
ject of "The Foundation Ideals of Stan
ford University."
From an historical as well as a per
sonal viewpoint it is eminently fit
ting that Dr. Jordan should discourse
upon this theme, which will farm a
companion piece to the Chancellor's
"The Story of a Good Woman." The
latter also first appeared as a Found
ers' Day address, and was a eulogy
of the life of Mrs. Jane Lathrop Stan
ford, and a narrative of the history
of the University during the so-called
"dark days" between 1893 and 1899,
when the ultimate fate of the institu
tion was in constant doubt.
In treating his subject this morning
Dr. Jordan gave expression to the
ideals which inspired Senator Leland
Stanford in his conception of Stanford
University. Selecting the successful
system then in practice at Cornell
University as the most suitable for the
needs of Stanford, the Senator called
upon Andrew D. White, who was
mainly responsible for the efficiency
of Cornell, where he was then acting
president, to assume the duties of
chief executive at Stanford. In declin
ing White .recommended David Stan-
Jordan, then president of the Universi
ty of Indiana, for the position.
When the present Chancellor name
to Stanford he was the youngest uni
versity president, in po'nt of years, in
the country, and when he resigned he
was the oldest in point of service, a
fact of no little significance.
The important share which Dr.
David Starr Jordan had in forming, di
recting. and developing the "founda
tion 'deals" of Stanford University
need no comment.
The address of Dr. Jordan follows:
I)r. Jordan Introduces Speech.
When Charles Darwin felt himself
growing old, he sat down in his home
in Kent to write the story of his life —
fo.r his children. He wrote, he said, as
might a spirit from another world,
looking down on this one. not swayed
by any emotion, of hope, of fear, or
eagerness or uncertainty as to the
final end. And so, today, T wish in
some such disembodied fashion to tell
the story of the founding of a univer
sity, and of the purposes and ideas
with which it started out.

Twenty-four years is a short time
in the history of a nation or a univer
sity, which is a small and swiftly
changing nation within itself. It is a
long time in the life of a man, as those
who with me have spanned it can tes
tify.
The story of today will not go far
beyond the first day of October, 1891,
when we gathered in the northwest
gate of the quadrangle for the open
ing day.
Founder and President.
Purpose must come before action,
and in the very beginning there were
only two to frame this purpose, the
founder and the president. Leland
Stanford was then scarcely older than
I am now, and I was a mere "youth
of promise," from the simple-minded
east, a "new man," as the San Francis
co journals kindly put it, and Mr.
Stanford had a reputation wider than
the nation, a philosopher and a lover
of li s kind as well as a business man
and a statesman.
A ('auspicious Figure.
Leland Stanford had been for a gen
eration the most conspicious figure in
California. He was a .rich man, weal
thy through his own effort, and he
hoped to leave humanity better for his
riches. Especially he wished to bring
to the California he loved, and who, af
ter California's fash-on, ha.l f'nst, loved
him, the abundance of life, which is
the best gift of the University. Leland
Stanford had held many relations with
California. He was an actual pion
eer. When the Civil War broke out he
had no doubt of his position and he
stood for free speech in Sacramento,
when freedom was dangerous. He was
the war governor of the state, trusted
by Lincoln, and like Lincoln, he knew
how to count the cost in a difficult
crisis. He had been one of the four
men of Sacramento who saw the vision
of a railway over the Sierras. In 1891
he was United States Senator from
California, known to every one and be
loved by all who came near him.
Typically American.
His wide influence did not rise from
his wealth. Wealth and influence
sprang alike from his personality. He
was broad-minded and long-headed,
and his simplicity of life kept him al
ways in touch with the people. "He
was active," it was said, "when other

men were idle; he was generous when
other men were grasping; he was lof
ty when other men were base." He
was thoroughly a man, and a man of
the type we like to call American.
One word of praise of Stanford
clings to my memory. At his funeral
in 1893, Horatio Stebbins in his state
ly fashion told how the Greeks did
honor to a slain hero. Then turning
to the pallbearers, stalwart men from
the Southern Pacific, he said: "Gentle
up your strength a little, for 'tis a man
ye bear."
University Idealized.
The story of the death of the only
son is known to Stanford people. The
boy, young Leland, fell ill in Rome
from the mosquito-borne Roman fever.
After coming back to Florence while
convalescent, he died of failure of the
heart. After the long vigil of a dreary
night, Mr. Stanford awoke one morn
ing with these words on his lips: "The
children of California shall be my chil
dren." And this thought grew crystal
line as the dream of a great universi
ty. And in this plan, nis wife, Jane La
throp Stanford, gave him most loyal
service, which continued unshaken
throughout twelve years of lonely wid
owhood. The story of her love and de
votion I have told as well as I could on
another occasion, the parallel to this.
< aliforiiia tlie .Motif.
So the decision was made that the
beloved Palo Alto farm —famed for the
finest horses in the world —should be
come a university campus. The Uni
versity buildings should have a motif
from California. To this end the old
mission of San Juan Capistrano, near
the seashore above San Diego, founded
by Father Junlpero Serra more than a
century before, was chosen to give the
University its form. Appeal was made
to the greatest living architects, Henry
Hobson Richardson, of Boston, for
the best was none too good for the new
University. Richardson died before
any work was begun, but his partners,
Shepley, Rutan and Coolidge, took up
the plans in all essential respects just
as we see them now in stone. Freder
ick Law Olmsted devised the garden
effects, but his plans are as yet car
ried out only in part. The streets were
laid out, and at Mr. Stanford's request.
I named them for the early padres,
who led in the missions of California.
Among these are Salvatierra Street,
named for the Jesuit father who first
urged the California missions; Serra
Avenue, fo,r Junipero Serra, the Fran
ciscan who first began the work of
building them, performing marvels of
energy and patience in long marches up
and down the coast from La Paz to
Monterey, and in dealing with the be
setting Indians for whose salvation,
temporal and spiritual, the missions
themselves were planned. Lasuen
street is named for Firmin Lasuen, the
wise and self-contained successor to
the impulsive and enthusiastic Padre
Serra. Po.rtola, Arguello, and Alvara
do were the first governors of Califor
nia; Crespi its first historian, Costan
zo its first civil engineer. These with
Ortega, Rivera, and the rest, were
members of Portola's party of explora
tion who first saw the Golden Gate
and the bay belvnd it. They likened it
to a "Mediterranean Sea," and they
named it for their patron saint, San
Francisco of Assisi, who knew the lan
guage of the birds and even that of
the fishes. Meanwhile, and with char
acteristic energy, Mr. Stanford set out
to make his vision into fact. Articles
of endowment were drawn up, and
buildings we.re provided. A president
was found and he was sent forth to
choose fifteen professors. It was not
wise to have too many professors till
we knew whether students would
come. The press notices were not en
thusiastic. The New York Mail and
Express said: "There is as much need
of a university in California as there
is in Switzerland for an asylum for de
cayed sea-captains." And it was
prophesied that even the fifteen would
for years "lecture in marble halls to
empty benches." Rut the benches
were not empty, as we all know; the
never to be forgotten pioneers of '95
were all there, altogether to the num
ber of 465, and on the first of Octob
er, with all bright auspices of earth
and sky. of wealth and generosity, the
University began. Of the fifteen pro
fessors, oldest of the old guard, par
takers in all joy, worry and success,
ten still remain,—Branner, Stillman,
Marx, Jenkins, Sanford, Campbell. An
derson, Gilbert, G.riffin, and Elliott.
Meanwhile, these were the ideas or
the Founder, as he gave them to me in
many evenings together, the
stones of the quadrangle were leaping
to find their places.
How I came in the matter you will
find in the autobiography of President
White, of Cornell, if you are interested
to read.
Possibilities of Knowledge.
The need to train his own son first
turned Mr. Stanford's thoughts to edu
cational matters. His early acquaint
ance with Professor Agassiz, perhaps
the greatest of American teachers, di
rected his thought into channels of
wisdom. From Agassiz he derived a
realizing sense of the possibilities of
human knowledge and the impelling
force of man's intellectual needs, —
that "hunger and thi.rst after truth
which only the destitute student
knows." "Man's physical needs are
slight," he said, "but his intellectual
needs are hounded only by his capacity
to receive.'
Major System Valued.
The major-subject system, especially
characteristic of Stanford, but later
taken in part by several other univer
sities, among them Harvard, may be
traced in some degree back to Agassiz.
It was first devised in Indiana,, in
1887, by a committee of three, D,r. Bry
an. now president of Indiana, Dr. von
Jagemann. now professor in Harvard,
and myself. In framing the plan I
had in mind the oft repeated words of
Atrassiz: "A spec'alty is the backbone
of education." "The mind is made
strong by the thorough possession of
something." And those of us who be
lieved with President White in the de
mocracy of the mental powers, realized
that in the higher education of a stu
dent it is the man himself who can
best choose what the backbone of his
training should be. For in making a
student, there are but two types of im
pulses strong enough to count, to love

the work itself and to know how the
work is related to his future life.
Mr. Stanford believed that an essen
tial part of education was thorough
knowledge in some one line, so firmly
held as to be effective for practical re
sults. He believed in early choice of
profession. The course of study, how
ever broad and however long, should
in all its parts look toward effective
1 fe. The profession chosen early gives
a purpose and stimulus to all the in
termediate training. He saw clearly
the need of individualism in education,
and that the course of study should be
built around the individual man he is.
The supposed needs of the average
man, developed by a consensus of edu
cational philosophers do not suffice for
the actual man in actual life. We must
be fed with the food that is good for
us. It is for 11s that it must be adap
ted, not for some average man in some
overage age. The ready-made curri
culum belongs to the same category
as ready-made clothing. It is some
thing cheap and easy for the man with
out individual needs.
Democracy and Knowledge.
No other university has recognized
so distinctly as ours the absolute de
mocracy of knowledge. The earlier
traditions of Cornell pointed in this di
rection, and for this reason Mr. Stan
ford found in Cornell, rather than in
Harvard Yale, or Michigan, the
nearest existing approach to his
own ideal. It was Ezra Cornell's
hope "to found an institution where
any person could find instruction in
any study." Cornell and Stanford, in
so far as they are loyal to these tra
ditions, know neither favored students
nor favored studies. No class of men
is chosen to the exclusion of others,
and no class of studies is given a fal
lacious importance through force of
academic pressure or through inertia
of academic tradition. While various
kinds of knowledge are of varying
worth td different persons, each has
its own value to the world, and the
value to the individual must he de
termined in each case by itself. The
university should be no respecter of
persons. It is not called on to approve
or condemn the\various orders of ge
nius that come to it for training.
There has been no greater hindrance
to educational progress than the hler
rchy of studies, the fiction that certain
kinds of work had an invisible value
not to be measured by tangible results.
That the work of a university should
be essentially specialized, fitting the
individual for definite forms of higher
usefulness, was an idea constantly pre
sent with Mr. Stanford. He had no
interest in general education as an end
in itself. He had no desire to fit men
for a life of leisure, or for any life
which did not involve a close adaption
of means to ends.
No Educational Millinery.
As a practical man, accustomed to
go to the heart of things, Mr. Stanford
had little respect for educational mil
l'nery and for the conventionalities
which have grown up about the great
institutions of the Old World. He saw
clearly the value of thoroughness, the
need of freedom, the individuality of
development, but cared little for the
machinery by which these ends were
achieved. So it was decreed that tho
new university should be simple in its
organization, with only those details
of structure which the needs of the
times should develop within it. If it
must have precedents and traditions,
it must make its own. "I would have
this institution," he said, "help to fit.
men and women for usefulness in this
life, by 'ncreasing their individual
power of production, and by making
them good company for themselves and
others." Or, in my own words to
young men, spoken in this same time:
"The whole of your life must be spent
in your own company, and only the
educated man is good company for
himself."
And besides, "The world turns asid<>
to let any man pass who knows whi
ther he is going."
In proportion to the extent to which
it widens the range of human know
ledge and of human power, in that de

gree does an institution deserve the
name of university. A man content
with the truth that now is, and without
ambition to venture into the unknown,
is not the proper man to be a university
professor. The truth that now is be
longs to the lower schools. The value
of its original work is the best single
test by wh'ch a university may be
judged; and as it is the best, so is it
also the severest. The incentive for
research should be from within. It
cannot be applied from without.
In its public relations, the university
stands for infinite patience, the calm
tasting of ideas and ideals. It con
ducts no propaganda, it controls no
affairs of business. There is no one
it wishes to elect to office. It is the
judge of the principles of wisdom and
the ways of nature. The details of
action it must leave to men whose
business it is to guide the currents of
the moment.
Freedom and Truth.
It was our hope that we might give
to our students the priceless legacy of
the educated man, the power of know
ing what really is. The higher edu
cation should bring men into direct
contact with truth. It should help to
free them from the dead hands of old
traditions and to enable them to form
opinions worthy of the new evidence
each new day brings before them. An
educated man should not be the slave
of the past, not a copy of men who
have gone before him. He must be in
some degree the founder of a new in
tellectual dynasty; for each new think
er is a new type of man. Whatever
is true is the truest thing in the uni
verse, and mental and moral strength
alike come from our contact with it.
And so wo believed that influence that
gees out from these halls should em
phasize the value of truth. The es
sence of scholarship is to know some
thing which is absolutely true; to
have, in the words of Huxley, "some
knowledge to the certainty of which
no authority could add nor take away
one jot or tittle, and to which the
tradition of a thousand years is but
as the hearsay of yesterday." The
scholar, as was once said of our great
chemist, Benjamin Silliman, must have
"faith in truth as truth, faith that
there is a power in the universe good
enough to make trutli-telling safe and
strong enough to make truth-telling ef
fective." The personal influence of gen
uineness, as embodied in the life of a
teacher, is one of the strongest moral
forces which the school can bring to
its aid; for moral training comes not
mainly by precept, but by practice.
We may teach the value of truth to
our students by showing that we value
it ourselves.
Educational Instrument.
Mr. Stanford insisted as a vital prin
ciple that the university exists for
the benefit of the students, present,
past, and future. It has no exist
ence or function save as an instru
ment of education. To this principle
all others should be subordinate. In
his opening address, he said to the
students of the Pioneer Class: "You
are the most important factor in this
university. It is for your benefit that
it has been established."
No Test in Numbers.
That the new university would in
time attract great numbers of stu
dents, Mr. Stanford believed as a mat
ter of course, although he found In
California few who shared his optim
ism. But he was never deceived with
the cheap test of numbers in estimat
ing the value of institutions. He knew
that a few hundred men well trained
under high influences would count for
more than as many thousand, hurried
in droves over a ready-made curricu
lum by young tutors, themselves
scarcely out of college. So it was de
creed that numbers for numbers' sake
should never be a goal of Stanford
University. And he further made the
practical request that not one dollar
directly or indirectly should be spent
in advertising. The university has no
goods for which it is anxious to find
customers.
The greatest nepd of the student is
the teacher Mr. Stanford said: "In

order that the president may have the
assistance of a competent staff of pro
fessors, we have provided that the
best talent obtainable shall be pro
cured and that liberal compensation
shall always lie offered." Again lie
said: "Ample endowment may have
been provided, intelligent management
may secure large income, students
may present themselves In numbers,
but in the end the faculty makes or
mars the university."
Facility (Greatest Need.
Compared with the character of the
faculty, every other element in the
university is of relatively little im
portance. The chief duty of the col
lege president is the choice of teach
ers. If he lias learned the art of sur
rounding himself with men who are
clean, sane, and scholarly, most other
matters of university administration
will take care of themselves, lie can
not fail if he has good men around
him. And in the choice of teachers
the element of personal sanity seemed
of first importance to Mr. Stanford—
the ability to see things as they are.
The university chai.r should be a cen
ter of clear-seeing from which right
acting should rad ate.
Mr. Stanford said, "I hope the Uni
versity may begin where the State
University leaves off." By this he
meant to lay stress on technical, pro
fessional. and research work, activi
ties which were at that time very lit
tle developed at the State University.
He spoke approvingly of an institu
tion which should combine the special
features of Johns Hopkins and Cor
nell.
A professor to whom original in
vestigation is unknown should have
no place in a university. Men of com
monplace or second-hand scholarship
are of necsssity men of low ideals,
however much the fact may be dis
guised. A man of high ideals must be
an investigator. He must know and
think for himself. Only such as do
this can be really great as teachers.
Universities already begin to recog
nize that their most important profes
sors may be men who teach not in
classes, but only by contact with indiv
iduals, devoting time and strength to
advanced research. The presence and
example of the men who really know
may be worth to the student body a
hundred-fold more than the precepts
and drill of the others. They set
standards of thought. They help to
create the university spirit, without
which any college is but a grammar
school of a little higher pretensions.
University Atmosphere.
In the address on the first day in the
old quadrangle, I said: "If our work
is successful, our ideals will appear in
the daily life of the school. In a
school, as in a fortress, it is not the
form of the building, but the strength
of the materials, which determine its
effectiveness. With a garrison of
hearts of oak, it may not matter even
whether there be a fortress. What
ever its form, or its organization, or
its pretensions, the character of the
university is fixed by the men who
teach. "Have a university in shan
ties, nay in tents," Cardinal Newman
has said, "but have great teachers in
it." The university spirit flows oik
from these teachers, and its organiza
tion serves mainly to bring them to
gether. "Colleges only serve us," says
Emerson, "when their aim is not. to
drill, but to create; when they gath
er from afar every ray of various
genius to their hospitable halls, and
by their concentrated fires set the
heart of their youth in flames."
Strong men make universities strong.
A great man never fails to leave a
ureat mark on every youth with whom
he conies in contact. Too much em
phasis cannot be laid on this: that
the real purpose of the university or
ganization is to produce a university
atmosphere—such an atmosphere as
gathered itself around Arnold at Rug
b.v. around Dollinge.r at Munich,
around Linnaeus at Upsaln. around
Werner at Freiberg, around Agassiz
at Cambridge, around Hopkins at Wil
liamstown, around White at Ithaca,
around all great teachers everywhere.
Agassi/, once said: "The physical
suffering of humanity, the wants of
the poor, the craving of the hungry
and naked, appeal to the sympathies
of every one who has a human heart.
Hut there are necessities which only
the destitute student knows. There is
a hunger and thirst which only the
highest charity can understand and re
lieve; and 011 this solemn occasion
let me say that every dollar given for
higher education, in whatever depart
ment of knowledge, is l'kely to have
a greater influence on the future char
acter of our nation than even the
thousands, the hundred thousands,
and millions which'we have spent, or
are spending, to raise the many to ma
terial ease and comfort."
Presidential Powers.
Mr. Stanford laid much stress on
the work of the President of the Uni
versity. The hoard of trustees were
directed to give to him such powers
as would enable him, with his col
leagues. to control all educational pol
icies, and such that for their success
he might justly lie held responsible.
At some future time the presidency
of the American university may lie an
outworn office, its function to he taKOn
by a committee from the faculty, as
some now urge that it should be.
Hut this cannot be done in the period
of formation of the American univer
s'ty, and no American university has
yet passed its period of youth and
growth. In that lies its strength. Its
hope lies in its imperfection. It is
not born full-grown, as the German
universities have claimed to be. With
perfection, decline sets in, as these
univers'ties have clearly shown. Ev
ery forward movement needs a lead
er. "An institution is but the length
ened shadow of a man."
It is for the president to take the
initiative in all educational affairs, to
give the university its color and its
personality. lie must know how to
take advice and how to value it. The
more checks and balances on his ac
tion the better, but none should de
prive him of his initiative. It is for
him to seek and develop those rare
elements of feeling and character by
which one university is known from
another. And in our University we
tried to weld together such elements
to form what we fondly hoped men
would call the "Stanford Spirit."
Value of Keonomy.
It was the idea of the founders that
each student should be taught the
value of economy—that lavish expen
ditures bring neither happiness nor
success. "A student," it was said by
one of the founders, "will lie better
fitted to battle with the trials and trib
ulations of life, if he lias been taught
the worth of money, the necessity of
saving and of overcoming a desire to
imitate those who are better off in the
world's goods. For, when he has
learned how to save and how to con
trol inordinate desires, be will be rel
atively rich During the past three
and a half years of close observation
on my part, the importance of econ
uniy bas impressed itself forcibly up
on me, and I wish it to be taught to
all students of the university. Na
ture has made the surroundings of
the university beautiful, and the sub
stantial character of the buildings
gives them an appearance of luxury.
I wish this natural beauty and com
parative luxury to impress upon the
students the necessity of their preser
vation for the generations that are to
follow. The lesson thus taught will
remain with them through life and
help them to teach the lesson to
ethers. The un'versitv buildings and
grounds are for their use while stu
dents. in trust for students to come."
\i*l of
The value of the study of political
and social science as a remedy for
defects of government was clearly
seen by Mr. Stanford. "All govern
ments." he said, "at" governments by
public opinion, and in the long run
ever', people is a■ well governed as it
deserves." Hence increase of knowl
edge brin-'s about bett r government.
For help in such matters the people
bavr a ri hi to look to their un ! ', : r

sities and university men. It was his
theory that the art of government is
still in its infancy. "Legislation lias
not, as a rule, been a ainst the peo
ple, but it has not done the good tli it
it might." "No greater biow can be
struck at labor than that which ren
ders ts products insecure." In the
externum of volir't irv co-operation,
he saw a remedy for many present ills,
as lie siw in the lav ef mutual help
the essence of i ur Christian civiliza
tion. He said, in laying the corner
stone: "Out of these suggestions
urows the consider tion of the great
advantages, especially to the laboring
man, of cooperation, by which each
individual has the benefit of the intel
lectual and physical forces of his as
sociates. It is I \ tli • intelligent ap
plication of these |) j c'iiles that there
will le found th? greatest lever *.o
elevate the mass o r humanity, and
laws should h< f:;iincd to protect and
develop co-operat ve associations. . . .
They will accomplish all that is

sought to lie secured by labor leagues,
trades unions and other federations of
workmen, and will be free from the
objection of even impliedly attempt
i 11 to take the unauthorised 01
wrongful control ( 112 the property,
capital, or time of others."
li<>>:ilt > and Co-ojicmtieii,
One result of voluntary co-opera
tion, in .Mr. Stanford's view, would bo
the development of the spirit of loy
> alty. the most precious attribute of
[ the laboring man in any grade, in any
j field, to the interest or cause which
' he serves. One great evil of the pres
ent era of gigantic industrial organ
izations is that it takes no account of
the spirit of loyalty, without which
no man can do li s best work. The
huge trust does away with tlie feeling
of personal association. The equally
huge trades union, in many of its op
erations. strikes directly at the per
sonality of the individual workman.
It makes him merely a pawn to be
moved hither and thither in the game
of industrial war. In the long run,
j no enterprise can flourish, unless
' those who carry it on throw them
selvi s, heart and soul,' into its ser
vice. On the other hand..no one can
do a greater injury to the cause of
labor than to take loyalty out of the
category of working virtues. IJ is one
if the traditional good traits of ihr
healthy college man to be loyal to bis
j t'ollege. This virtue Mr. Stanford
would have cultivated in all effective
ways, and in loyalty on both sides lie
would find a practical < lution of most

112 the la! or troubles of today. That
he carried his ideas into his own prac
tice ir shown by the unflinching devo
tion of all his own employees of what
ever grad j throughout his life. They
were taught to bel eve in him. to be
lieve in th > worth of their own work,
a: d thi s to have respect for tliem
selw-. Much of the dheont ill of the
day has its origin in lack of self-re
spect. The pawn that is moved in the
game of sympathetic strike lias no
control over his own actions, and
then f< re : o respect for his own mo
tives. Th <!< veiop rent of intelligent,
vclur.tary co-i.peration. n the long
r ni, lrakeg the wtvkman more than a
machi '.e. If lie is such, in the long
rti" again, ho will re e've whatever
he deserves. 11 1 will be a factor in
c'vi'i r ior, when the unskilled, un
thinking laborer is not.
\\ iisi < i I abor.
\he - ■ it economic waste in labor
oft m engaged Mr. Stanford's atton
t'on, avd he found its remedy in edu-

•'tin". "Orce," ho faid, "tho great
"n )o c:f labor was to supply the
necessities of life; now, hut a small
portion of our people are so engaged.
' o: d. clothing and shelt.fr are com
non in our country to every provident
'lerscn, excepting, of course, in occa
sional accidental cases. The great
demard for I ilor is to supply what
may he termed Intellectual wants, to
which there is no limit, except that
of intelligence to conceive. If all the
j relations and obligations of man
j were properly understood, it would
I net he nec«vsary for people to make a
| burden of labor. Th > great masses of
I the toilers are now compelled to per
form such an amount of labor as
makes life often wearisome. \n intel
ligent system of education would cor
rect. this inequality. It would make
I
the humblest laborer's work more
I valuable, it would increase both the
| demand and supply for skilled labor,
and reduce the number of the non
producing class. It would dignify la
hor, and ultimately would go far to
wipe out the mere distinctions of
wealth and ancestry. It would achieve
| a. bloodless revolution and establish
j a republic of industry, merit and
; learning.
"Ilow near to that state we may be,
j or how far from it, we cannot tell. It
■ stents very far when we contemplate
the great standing a litres of Europe,
where over five millions of men (or
about one for every twelve adult
male i are marching about with gnus
on their shoulders to preserve the
•tea(' • of nations, while hovering near

them is an innumerable force of po
lice to preserve the peace of individ
uals; but when we remember the pos
sibilities of e vilizution and the power
of education, we can foresee ;i time
when these soldiers and policemen
shall be changed to useful, producing
citizens, engaged in lilting the bur
dens of the people instead of increas
ing them. And yet. extravagant as are
the nations of Europe in standing ar
mies and preparations for war, their
xtravagance in the waste of labor is
still greater. Education, by teaching
the intelligent use of machinery, is
the only remedy for such waste."
Education a Itirtbriglit.
Mr. Stanford believed that no edu
cational system could be complete in
which entrance to the university was
a detached privilege of the chosen
few. lie believed in the unbroken lad
der from the kindergarten to the uni
versity, a ladder that, each one should
be free to climb, as far as his ability
or energy should permit. He believed,
with lan Maclaren. in keeping the
path well trodden from the farmhouse
to the university, lie asked that this
sentence from the president's first, ad
dress be placed on the University Reg
ister: "A generous education is the
birthright of every man and woman in
America." In Emerson's words:
"America means opportunity," and
opportunity comes through training to
receive it. To have such a train'ng
is to be truly free born, and this is
the birthright of each child of the re
public.
A friend at Aix-les-Mains once ar
gued with him that there is already
too much education, and that to in
crease it further ! s simply to swell the
volume of discontent. "I insisted."
Mr. Stanford said, "that there can not
be too much education any more than
too much health or intelligence. Do
you happen to know any man who has
been too well educated. Where does
he live? What is his address? If you
cannot find such a man, you cannot
speak of overeducation." There has
been unwise education or misfit, edu
cation. Some highly educated men
are neither wise nor lit, and there is a
kind of education that comes from
experience and not from books. But
with all this, too thorough or too
good a training no one ever had. Ig
norance is shadow. Education is light.
Nothing is more unpractical than
darkness, nothing is more practical
than sunshine.
Secret of Human Power.
Science is knowledge tested and set
in order, and each advance in knowl
<l ge cirrics with it a corresponding
increment of power. A machine, to
Mr. Stanford, was not a mere saver of
lal or. but an aid to labor, increasing
its efficiency and therefore adding to
the value of men. Hv greater knowl
edge of the forces of nature we ac
quire greater skill in turning these
forces '11 to man's service through the
harness of machinery. In increase of
scientific knowledge he found the se
cret of human power. An education
which does not disclose the secret of
power is unworthy the name. "We
may always advance toward the infi
nite," was a favorite saying of his.
He could find no limit to the develop
in lit of civilization. The possibilities
of human progress expressed to him
the measure of infinite goodness, in
his own words: "The beneficence of
the Creator toward man on earth, and
the possibilities of humanity, are one
and the same."
But in his forecast of the myriad
triumphs of applied science, he did not
forget that knowledge itself must pre
cede any use man can make of it.
Pure science must always go before
applied science. The higher forms of
thought have their place in mental
growth as necessities in the concrete
preparation for action,
In the new university he decreed
that "the work in applied science::
he decreed that "the work in applied
shall be carried along with that
in the pure sciences and the hu
manities. and that, so far as may be.
all lines of work included in the plan
of the university shall be equally fos
tered."
Itcnct'itN el' Vsseeialion.
Mr. Stanford's belief that literature
and engineering should be pursued
side by side was shown by his wish
to provide for each with equal gene.r

osity. And the students of each are
tlii' gainers by this relation. The de
votee of classical culture is strength
ened by his association with men to
whom their college work is part of
the serious duty of life. The student
of engineering stands with both feet
on tlie ground, li s success in life
depends on the exactness of his
knowledge of machinery and of the
basic principles of mechanics and
maihematics. He must be in dead
earnest if lie would succeed at all. On
the other hand, the student of realities
uains by his association with the poet,
the philosopher and the artist. The
finer aspects of life are brought to his
notice, and from this association re
sults tolerance and breadth of sym
( oeditcationa! \(ha»t:iges.
That worn n should receive higher
education as well as men was an ax
iom 'o Mr. Stanford. Coeducation was
taken for granted from the first, pud
the young women of Stanford have
■ ( v ;■ had to question the friendliness
I their welcome. "We have provid
ed." Mr. Stanford says"in the articles
of endowment, that the education of
tlie sexes shall be equal—deeming it.
of special importance that those who
are to be mothers of the future gen
eration shall be fitted to mold and di
rect th,' infantile mind at its most crit
ical period."
The leading argument for coeduca
tion is akin to one just indicated for
the uiron in one institution of the
various lines of literature, art, sci
ence. and applied technology.
In women's education, as planned
for women alone, the tendency is to
ward (he study of beauty and order.
Literature and language take prece
dence over science. Expression is
valued more highly than action. In
carrying this to an extreme, the ne
c ssary relat on of thought to action
becomes obscured. The scholarship
developed tends to be ineffective, be
cause it is not related to life. The
educated women are likely to master
technique, rather than art; method
than substance. She may know a
good deal, but be able to do nothing.
Often her views of life must undergo
nainful changes before she can find
her place in the world.
In schools for men alone, the re
verse condition often obtains. The
::cnse of reality obscures the element
of beauty and fitness. It is of great
advantage to both men and women to
meet on a plane of equality in edu
cation. Women are brought into con
tact, with men who can do things—
men in whom the sense of reality is
strong, and who have definite views in
life. This influence affects them for
good. It turns them away from sen
timentalism. It is opposed to un
wholesome forms of hysterical friend
ship. It. gives tone to their religious
thoughts and impulses. Above all, it
tends to encourage action governed
by ideals, as opposed to that resting
on caprice. It gives them better
standards of what is possible and im
possible, when the responsibility for
action is thrown upon them.
In like manner, the association
with wise, sane and healthy women
has its value for young men. This
value has never been fully realized,
even by the strongest advocates of
coeducation. It raises their ideals of
womanhood, and the highest manhood
must bp associated with such an ideal.
Meanly and Kitnes*.
While the work of the teachers must
make the kernel of the university, we
must rejoice that here at Palo Alto
even the husks are beautiful. Reality
and fitness are great forces in educa
tion. Every object with which the
young mind comes iti contact leaves
on it. its trace. "Nothing is unim
portant in the life of man," and the
least feature of our surroundings has
its influence, greater or less. "There
was a child went forth every day,"
Walt Whitman tells us. "and the first
object that it looked upon, that ob
lect it became." It may be for a mo
ment or an hour, or "for changing
vcb s of years." The essence of civ
'Mv.ation is exposure to vfiilnc: ami
humanizing influence " ' n- in
i university," ♦ "o <>-. "is
ivnrth more than a dol'ar ' ■' '" ,1 "and
" ery dollar spent in tinker n nuiv< r
itv beautiful will be i en,aid with in


( liancellor David Starr .lonian.
terest in the enriching of the students'
lives.
It has been a reproach to America
that for the best of her sons and
daughters she has done the least. She
lias built palaces for lunatics, idiots,
crippled and blind, —nay, even for
criminals and paupers. But the col
lege students —"the young men of
sound mind and earnest purposes, the
noblest treasures of the State," to
quote the words of President White,
"she has housed in vile barracks."
The student has no need for luxury.
Plain living has ever gone with high
thinking. But grace and fitness have
an educative power too often forgot
ten in this utilitarian age. These
long corridors with their stately
arches, these circles of waving palms,
will have their part in the students'
training as surely as the chemical lab
oratory or the seminary-room. Each
stone in the quadrangle shall teach its
lesson of grace and genuineness, and
this Valley of Santa Clara shall occu
py a warm place in every student's
heart. Pictures of this fair region will
cling to his memory amid the figures
of the draughting-room. He will not
forget the fine waves of our two moun
tain ranges, overarched by a soft blue
Grecian sky, nor the ancient oak trees,
nor the gently sloping fields, changing
from vivid green to richest yellow, as
the seasons change. The noble jnllars
of the gallery of art, its rich treas
ures, the choicest remains of the
ideals of past ages—all these, and a
hundred other things which each one
will find out for himself, shall fill his
mind with bright pictures, never to be
rubbed out in the wea,r of life. Thus
in the character of every student shall
be left some imperishable trace of the
beauty of the Stanford farm, the estate
of Palo Alto.
Influence of Character.
Above and beyond all learning is
the influence of character, the impulse
to virtue and piety which comes from
men whose lives show that virtue and
piety really exist. For the life of the
most exalted as well as the humblest
of men, there can be no nobler motto
than that inscribed by the great
scholar of the last century over his
home in Hammarby: "Innocue vivito;
numen adest." Live blameless; God
is near. "This," said Linnaeus, "is
the wisdom of my life."
Religious Freedom.
Whsn the University was founded,
it was provided that in its religious
life, as in its scientific investigations,
it should be wholly free from outside
control. No religious sect or organi
zation and no group of organizations
should have dominion over it. The
University should exist for its own
sake, to carry out its own purposes,
and to bring out its own results in
its own way.
In this regard the die is cast, once
for all. The choice of the founders
of the University was deliberate and
final. They chose the path of intel
lectual and religious freedom, in the
very interest of religion itself. Re
ligion is devotion in action. In its
higher reaches it must be individual,
because it is a function of the indiv
idual soul which must stand in per
petual protest against the religion
that finds its end in forms and cere
monies and organizations.
The .requirement was a simple re
flection of Mr. Stanford's own relig
ious character, as expressed in the
words of one very near to him: "If
a firm belief in a beneficent Creator,
a profound admiration for Jesus of
Nazareth and His teachings, and the
certainty of a personal life hereafter,
constitute religion, then Leland Stan
ford was a religious man. The nar
row walls of a creed could not confine
him; therefore, he was not a pro
fessed member of any church, for in
each confession of faith he found
something to which he could not sub
scribe. But for the principles of re
ligion he hijd a profound veneration;
in h's heart were the true sentiments
of Christianity, and ho often said that
in his opinion the Golden Rule was
the cornerstone of all religion."
RelMon must form the axis of per
sonal character, and its prime import

ance the university cannot ignore. To
attain its culture it may use indirect
rather than direct means, the influ
ence of effort and character rather
than the imposition of forms. To ac
cept ecclesiastical help is to invite
ecclesiastical control toward ecclesi
astical ends. In the grant of endow
ment it was required that the trustees
should "prohibit sectarian instruction,
but have taught in the university the
immortality of the soul, the existence
of an all-wise and benevolent Crea
tor. and that obedience to His laws
is the highest duty of man."
The founders believed truly that
freedom of thought and action would
promote morality and religion, that a
deeper, fuller religious life would
arise from the growth of the individ
ual, that only where the "winds of
freedom blow" will spring up the
highest type of religious development.
For character is formed from within
by the efforts and strivings and as
pirations of the individual. It can
never be imposed from without. The
will is made strong from choosing
the right, not from having right ac
tion enforced upon it. The life of man
is "made beautiful and sweet through
self-devotion and through self-re
straint." But this must be chosen
voluntarily, else it fails of its purpose.
Growth Through Ages.
It was Mr. Stanford's hope to leave
the University free to grow through
the coming ages. He would extend
no dead hand from the grave to limit
its activities or to control its move
ments. The deed of gift is in favor
of education pure and simple. It has
no hampering clause, and the only end
in view is that of the help of human
ity through the extension of knowl
edge. "We hope," he said, "that this
institution will endure through long
ages. Provisions regarding details of
management, however wise they may
be at present, might prove to be mis
chievous under conditions which may
arise in the future."
The growth of the University must
remain the best evidence of the
founder's wisdom. He had the sagac
ity to recognize the value of higher
education and the patriotism to give
the rewards of a successful life to its
advancement. He had the rare wis
dom to discriminate between the real
and the temporary in university organ
ization and management, and his pro
vision is for the genuine and the per
manent, not for that "which speedily
passes away." Still more rare, he had
the forethought to leave to each suc
ceeding generation, the duty of adapt
ing its details of administration and
methods to the needs of the time.
If the founders had said: "We will
found a university so strong that it
may endure for all the centuries,
whose organization shall be so free
and flexible that in each age it shall
reflect the best spirit of the time,"
they could not have given it greater
freedom of development than it has
today. For the glory of the univer
sity must lie in its freedom, in that
freedom which cannot fall into li
cense, nor lose itself in waywardness
—that freedom which knows but one
bond of control, the eternal truth of
God.
Perpetual Power.
When the University opened its
doors in 1891, Millicent Shinn printed
these words of prophecy: "Greater
than the achievement of lasting hon
or among one's fellow-men of later
generations, is it to become a living
power among them forever. It rarely
happens to one man and woman to
have both the power and the skill to
thus live after death, working and
shaping beneficently in the lives of
many—not of tens nor of hundreds,
but of thousands and tens of thou
sands, as the generations follow on.
Herein is the wisdom of money spent
in education, that each recipient of in
fluence becomes in his time a center
to transmit the same in every direc
tion. so that it multiplies forever in
geometric .ratio. The power to mold
unborn generations for good, to keen
one's hards mightily on human af
fairs after the flesh has been dust for
years, seems not onlv more than mor

tal, but more than man. Thus does
man become co-worker with God in
the shaping of the world to a good
outcome."
And this I said in my opening day
address, "The Golden Age of Califor
nia begins when its gold is used for
purposes like this. From such deeds
must rise the new California of the
coming century, no longer the Califor
nia of the gold-seeker and the adven
turer, but the abode of high-minded
men and women, trained in the wis
dom of the ages, and imbued with the
love of nature, the love of man, and
the love of God. And bright indeed
will be the future of our State if in
the usefulness every hope and prayer
of the founders shall be realized."
University Life
With those words of mine, spoken
twenty-four years ago, the University
began. "We come together today," I
said, "for the first time as teacher and
students. With this relation, the life
of the University begins. It is such
personal contact of young men and
young women with scholars and in
vestigators which constitutes the life
of the University. It is for us as
teachers and students in the Univer
sity's first year to lay the foundations
of a school which may last as long as
human civilization. Ours is the
youngest of the universities, but it is
heir to the wisdom of all the ages,
and with this inheritance it has the
promise of a rapid and sturdy growth
"But the future, with its glories and
responsibilities, will be in other
hands. It is ours at the beginning to
give the University its form, its ten
dencies, its customs. The power of
precedent will cause to be repeated
over again everything that we do —
our errors as well as our wisdom, it
becomes us, then, to begin work mod
estly, as under the eye of the coming
ages. We must lay the foundations
broad and firm, so as to give full sup
port to whatever edifice the future
may build. Ours is the humbler task,
but not the least in importance, and
our work will not be in vain if all we
do is done in sincerity. As sound as
the rocks from which these walls are
hewn should be the work of every
teacher who comes within them. To
the extent that this is true will the
University be successful. Unless its
work be thus 'wrought in sad sincer
ity' nothing can redeem it from fail
ure. In this feeling, and realizing,
too, that only the help we give to the
men and women whose lives we reach
can justify our presence here, we are
ready to begin our work.
"Our University has no history to
fall back upon; no memories of great
teachers to haunt its corridors; in
none of its rooms appear the traces
which show where a great man has
lived and worked. No tender asso
ciations cling, ivv-like, to its fresh,
new halls. It is hallowed by no tra
dition. it is hampered by none.
Traditions and associations it is ours
to make. From our work the future
of the University will grow, as the
splendid lily from the modest bulb."
Dr. Jordan delivered the annual
Founders' Day address in the Assem
bly Hall this morning upon the sub
ject of "The Foundation Ideals of Stan
ford University."
From an historical as well as a per
sonal viewpoint it is eminently fit
ting that Dr. Jordan should discourse
upon this theme, which will farm a
companion piece to the Chancellor's
"The Story of a Good Woman." The
latter also first appeared as a Found
ers' Day address, and was a eulogy
of the life of Mrs. Jane Lathrop Stan
ford, and a narrative of the history
of the University during the so-called
"dark days" between 1893 and 1899,
when the ultimate fate of the institu
tion was in constant doubt.
In treating his subject this morning
Dr. Jordan gave expression to the
ideals which inspired Senator Leland
Stanford in his conception of Stanford
University. Selecting the successful
system then in practice at Cornell
University as the most suitable for the
needs of Stanford, the Senator called
upon Andrew D. White, who was
mainly responsible for the efficiency
of Cornell, where he was then acting
president, to assume the duties of
chief executive at Stanford. In declin
ing White .recommended David Stan-
Jordan, then president of the Universi
ty of Indiana, for the position.
When the present Chancellor name
to Stanford he was the youngest uni
versity president, in po'nt of years, in
the country, and when he resigned he
was the oldest in point of service, a
fact of no little significance.
The important share which Dr.
David Starr Jordan had in forming, di
recting. and developing the "founda
tion 'deals" of Stanford University
need no comment.
The address of Dr. Jordan follows:
I)r. Jordan Introduces Speech.
When Charles Darwin felt himself
growing old, he sat down in his home
in Kent to write the story of his life —
fo.r his children. He wrote, he said, as
might a spirit from another world,
looking down on this one. not swayed
by any emotion, of hope, of fear, or
eagerness or uncertainty as to the
final end. And so, today, T wish in
some such disembodied fashion to tell
the story of the founding of a univer
sity, and of the purposes and ideas
with which it started out.

Twenty-four years is a short time
in the history of a nation or a univer
sity, which is a small and swiftly
changing nation within itself. It is a
long time in the life of a man, as those
who with me have spanned it can tes
tify.
The story of today will not go far
beyond the first day of October, 1891,
when we gathered in the northwest
gate of the quadrangle for the open
ing day.
Founder and President.
Purpose must come before action,
and in the very beginning there were
only two to frame this purpose, the
founder and the president. Leland
Stanford was then scarcely older than
I am now, and I was a mere "youth
of promise," from the simple-minded
east, a "new man," as the San Francis
co journals kindly put it, and Mr.
Stanford had a reputation wider than
the nation, a philosopher and a lover
of li s kind as well as a business man
and a statesman.
A ('auspicious Figure.
Leland Stanford had been for a gen
eration the most conspicious figure in
California. He was a .rich man, weal
thy through his own effort, and he
hoped to leave humanity better for his
riches. Especially he wished to bring
to the California he loved, and who, af
ter California's fash-on, ha.l f'nst, loved
him, the abundance of life, which is
the best gift of the University. Leland
Stanford had held many relations with
California. He was an actual pion
eer. When the Civil War broke out he
had no doubt of his position and he
stood for free speech in Sacramento,
when freedom was dangerous. He was
the war governor of the state, trusted
by Lincoln, and like Lincoln, he knew
how to count the cost in a difficult
crisis. He had been one of the four
men of Sacramento who saw the vision
of a railway over the Sierras. In 1891
he was United States Senator from
California, known to every one and be
loved by all who came near him.
Typically American.
His wide influence did not rise from
his wealth. Wealth and influence
sprang alike from his personality. He
was broad-minded and long-headed,
and his simplicity of life kept him al
ways in touch with the people. "He
was active," it was said, "when other

men were idle; he was generous when
other men were grasping; he was lof
ty when other men were base." He
was thoroughly a man, and a man of
the type we like to call American.
One word of praise of Stanford
clings to my memory. At his funeral
in 1893, Horatio Stebbins in his state
ly fashion told how the Greeks did
honor to a slain hero. Then turning
to the pallbearers, stalwart men from
the Southern Pacific, he said: "Gentle
up your strength a little, for 'tis a man
ye bear."
University Idealized.
The story of the death of the only
son is known to Stanford people. The
boy, young Leland, fell ill in Rome
from the mosquito-borne Roman fever.
After coming back to Florence while
convalescent, he died of failure of the
heart. After the long vigil of a dreary
night, Mr. Stanford awoke one morn
ing with these words on his lips: "The
children of California shall be my chil
dren." And this thought grew crystal
line as the dream of a great universi
ty. And in this plan, nis wife, Jane La
throp Stanford, gave him most loyal
service, which continued unshaken
throughout twelve years of lonely wid
owhood. The story of her love and de
votion I have told as well as I could on
another occasion, the parallel to this.
< aliforiiia tlie .Motif.
So the decision was made that the
beloved Palo Alto farm —famed for the
finest horses in the world —should be
come a university campus. The Uni
versity buildings should have a motif
from California. To this end the old
mission of San Juan Capistrano, near
the seashore above San Diego, founded
by Father Junlpero Serra more than a
century before, was chosen to give the
University its form. Appeal was made
to the greatest living architects, Henry
Hobson Richardson, of Boston, for
the best was none too good for the new
University. Richardson died before
any work was begun, but his partners,
Shepley, Rutan and Coolidge, took up
the plans in all essential respects just
as we see them now in stone. Freder
ick Law Olmsted devised the garden
effects, but his plans are as yet car
ried out only in part. The streets were
laid out, and at Mr. Stanford's request.
I named them for the early padres,
who led in the missions of California.
Among these are Salvatierra Street,
named for the Jesuit father who first
urged the California missions; Serra
Avenue, fo,r Junipero Serra, the Fran
ciscan who first began the work of
building them, performing marvels of
energy and patience in long marches up
and down the coast from La Paz to
Monterey, and in dealing with the be
setting Indians for whose salvation,
temporal and spiritual, the missions
themselves were planned. Lasuen
street is named for Firmin Lasuen, the
wise and self-contained successor to
the impulsive and enthusiastic Padre
Serra. Po.rtola, Arguello, and Alvara
do were the first governors of Califor
nia; Crespi its first historian, Costan
zo its first civil engineer. These with
Ortega, Rivera, and the rest, were
members of Portola's party of explora
tion who first saw the Golden Gate
and the bay belvnd it. They likened it
to a "Mediterranean Sea," and they
named it for their patron saint, San
Francisco of Assisi, who knew the lan
guage of the birds and even that of
the fishes. Meanwhile, and with char
acteristic energy, Mr. Stanford set out
to make his vision into fact. Articles
of endowment were drawn up, and
buildings we.re provided. A president
was found and he was sent forth to
choose fifteen professors. It was not
wise to have too many professors till
we knew whether students would
come. The press notices were not en
thusiastic. The New York Mail and
Express said: "There is as much need
of a university in California as there
is in Switzerland for an asylum for de
cayed sea-captains." And it was
prophesied that even the fifteen would
for years "lecture in marble halls to
empty benches." Rut the benches
were not empty, as we all know; the
never to be forgotten pioneers of '95
were all there, altogether to the num
ber of 465, and on the first of Octob
er, with all bright auspices of earth
and sky. of wealth and generosity, the
University began. Of the fifteen pro
fessors, oldest of the old guard, par
takers in all joy, worry and success,
ten still remain,—Branner, Stillman,
Marx, Jenkins, Sanford, Campbell. An
derson, Gilbert, G.riffin, and Elliott.
Meanwhile, these were the ideas or
the Founder, as he gave them to me in
many evenings together, the
stones of the quadrangle were leaping
to find their places.
How I came in the matter you will
find in the autobiography of President
White, of Cornell, if you are interested
to read.
Possibilities of Knowledge.
The need to train his own son first
turned Mr. Stanford's thoughts to edu
cational matters. His early acquaint
ance with Professor Agassiz, perhaps
the greatest of American teachers, di
rected his thought into channels of
wisdom. From Agassiz he derived a
realizing sense of the possibilities of
human knowledge and the impelling
force of man's intellectual needs, —
that "hunger and thi.rst after truth
which only the destitute student
knows." "Man's physical needs are
slight," he said, "but his intellectual
needs are hounded only by his capacity
to receive.'
Major System Valued.
The major-subject system, especially
characteristic of Stanford, but later
taken in part by several other univer
sities, among them Harvard, may be
traced in some degree back to Agassiz.
It was first devised in Indiana,, in
1887, by a committee of three, D,r. Bry
an. now president of Indiana, Dr. von
Jagemann. now professor in Harvard,
and myself. In framing the plan I
had in mind the oft repeated words of
Atrassiz: "A spec'alty is the backbone
of education." "The mind is made
strong by the thorough possession of
something." And those of us who be
lieved with President White in the de
mocracy of the mental powers, realized
that in the higher education of a stu
dent it is the man himself who can
best choose what the backbone of his
training should be. For in making a
student, there are but two types of im
pulses strong enough to count, to love

the work itself and to know how the
work is related to his future life.
Mr. Stanford believed that an essen
tial part of education was thorough
knowledge in some one line, so firmly
held as to be effective for practical re
sults. He believed in early choice of
profession. The course of study, how
ever broad and however long, should
in all its parts look toward effective
1 fe. The profession chosen early gives
a purpose and stimulus to all the in
termediate training. He saw clearly
the need of individualism in education,
and that the course of study should be
built around the individual man he is.
The supposed needs of the average
man, developed by a consensus of edu
cational philosophers do not suffice for
the actual man in actual life. We must
be fed with the food that is good for
us. It is for 11s that it must be adap
ted, not for some average man in some
overage age. The ready-made curri
culum belongs to the same category
as ready-made clothing. It is some
thing cheap and easy for the man with
out individual needs.
Democracy and Knowledge.
No other university has recognized
so distinctly as ours the absolute de
mocracy of knowledge. The earlier
traditions of Cornell pointed in this di
rection, and for this reason Mr. Stan
ford found in Cornell, rather than in
Harvard Yale, or Michigan, the
nearest existing approach to his
own ideal. It was Ezra Cornell's
hope "to found an institution where
any person could find instruction in
any study." Cornell and Stanford, in
so far as they are loyal to these tra
ditions, know neither favored students
nor favored studies. No class of men
is chosen to the exclusion of others,
and no class of studies is given a fal
lacious importance through force of
academic pressure or through inertia
of academic tradition. While various
kinds of knowledge are of varying
worth td different persons, each has
its own value to the world, and the
value to the individual must he de
termined in each case by itself. The
university should be no respecter of
persons. It is not called on to approve
or condemn the\various orders of ge
nius that come to it for training.
There has been no greater hindrance
to educational progress than the hler
rchy of studies, the fiction that certain
kinds of work had an invisible value
not to be measured by tangible results.
That the work of a university should
be essentially specialized, fitting the
individual for definite forms of higher
usefulness, was an idea constantly pre
sent with Mr. Stanford. He had no
interest in general education as an end
in itself. He had no desire to fit men
for a life of leisure, or for any life
which did not involve a close adaption
of means to ends.
No Educational Millinery.
As a practical man, accustomed to
go to the heart of things, Mr. Stanford
had little respect for educational mil
l'nery and for the conventionalities
which have grown up about the great
institutions of the Old World. He saw
clearly the value of thoroughness, the
need of freedom, the individuality of
development, but cared little for the
machinery by which these ends were
achieved. So it was decreed that tho
new university should be simple in its
organization, with only those details
of structure which the needs of the
times should develop within it. If it
must have precedents and traditions,
it must make its own. "I would have
this institution," he said, "help to fit.
men and women for usefulness in this
life, by 'ncreasing their individual
power of production, and by making
them good company for themselves and
others." Or, in my own words to
young men, spoken in this same time:
"The whole of your life must be spent
in your own company, and only the
educated man is good company for
himself."
And besides, "The world turns asid<>
to let any man pass who knows whi
ther he is going."
In proportion to the extent to which
it widens the range of human know
ledge and of human power, in that de

gree does an institution deserve the
name of university. A man content
with the truth that now is, and without
ambition to venture into the unknown,
is not the proper man to be a university
professor. The truth that now is be
longs to the lower schools. The value
of its original work is the best single
test by wh'ch a university may be
judged; and as it is the best, so is it
also the severest. The incentive for
research should be from within. It
cannot be applied from without.
In its public relations, the university
stands for infinite patience, the calm
tasting of ideas and ideals. It con
ducts no propaganda, it controls no
affairs of business. There is no one
it wishes to elect to office. It is the
judge of the principles of wisdom and
the ways of nature. The details of
action it must leave to men whose
business it is to guide the currents of
the moment.
Freedom and Truth.
It was our hope that we might give
to our students the priceless legacy of
the educated man, the power of know
ing what really is. The higher edu
cation should bring men into direct
contact with truth. It should help to
free them from the dead hands of old
traditions and to enable them to form
opinions worthy of the new evidence
each new day brings before them. An
educated man should not be the slave
of the past, not a copy of men who
have gone before him. He must be in
some degree the founder of a new in
tellectual dynasty; for each new think
er is a new type of man. Whatever
is true is the truest thing in the uni
verse, and mental and moral strength
alike come from our contact with it.
And so wo believed that influence that
gees out from these halls should em
phasize the value of truth. The es
sence of scholarship is to know some
thing which is absolutely true; to
have, in the words of Huxley, "some
knowledge to the certainty of which
no authority could add nor take away
one jot or tittle, and to which the
tradition of a thousand years is but
as the hearsay of yesterday." The
scholar, as was once said of our great
chemist, Benjamin Silliman, must have
"faith in truth as truth, faith that
there is a power in the universe good
enough to make trutli-telling safe and
strong enough to make truth-telling ef
fective." The personal influence of gen
uineness, as embodied in the life of a
teacher, is one of the strongest moral
forces which the school can bring to
its aid; for moral training comes not
mainly by precept, but by practice.
We may teach the value of truth to
our students by showing that we value
it ourselves.
Educational Instrument.
Mr. Stanford insisted as a vital prin
ciple that the university exists for
the benefit of the students, present,
past, and future. It has no exist
ence or function save as an instru
ment of education. To this principle
all others should be subordinate. In
his opening address, he said to the
students of the Pioneer Class: "You
are the most important factor in this
university. It is for your benefit that
it has been established."
No Test in Numbers.
That the new university would in
time attract great numbers of stu
dents, Mr. Stanford believed as a mat
ter of course, although he found In
California few who shared his optim
ism. But he was never deceived with
the cheap test of numbers in estimat
ing the value of institutions. He knew
that a few hundred men well trained
under high influences would count for
more than as many thousand, hurried
in droves over a ready-made curricu
lum by young tutors, themselves
scarcely out of college. So it was de
creed that numbers for numbers' sake
should never be a goal of Stanford
University. And he further made the
practical request that not one dollar
directly or indirectly should be spent
in advertising. The university has no
goods for which it is anxious to find
customers.
The greatest nepd of the student is
the teacher Mr. Stanford said: "In

order that the president may have the
assistance of a competent staff of pro
fessors, we have provided that the
best talent obtainable shall be pro
cured and that liberal compensation
shall always lie offered." Again lie
said: "Ample endowment may have
been provided, intelligent management
may secure large income, students
may present themselves In numbers,
but in the end the faculty makes or
mars the university."
Facility (Greatest Need.
Compared with the character of the
faculty, every other element in the
university is of relatively little im
portance. The chief duty of the col
lege president is the choice of teach
ers. If he lias learned the art of sur
rounding himself with men who are
clean, sane, and scholarly, most other
matters of university administration
will take care of themselves, lie can
not fail if he has good men around
him. And in the choice of teachers
the element of personal sanity seemed
of first importance to Mr. Stanford—
the ability to see things as they are.
The university chai.r should be a cen
ter of clear-seeing from which right
acting should rad ate.
Mr. Stanford said, "I hope the Uni
versity may begin where the State
University leaves off." By this he
meant to lay stress on technical, pro
fessional. and research work, activi
ties which were at that time very lit
tle developed at the State University.
He spoke approvingly of an institu
tion which should combine the special
features of Johns Hopkins and Cor
nell.
A professor to whom original in
vestigation is unknown should have
no place in a university. Men of com
monplace or second-hand scholarship
are of necsssity men of low ideals,
however much the fact may be dis
guised. A man of high ideals must be
an investigator. He must know and
think for himself. Only such as do
this can be really great as teachers.
Universities already begin to recog
nize that their most important profes
sors may be men who teach not in
classes, but only by contact with indiv
iduals, devoting time and strength to
advanced research. The presence and
example of the men who really know
may be worth to the student body a
hundred-fold more than the precepts
and drill of the others. They set
standards of thought. They help to
create the university spirit, without
which any college is but a grammar
school of a little higher pretensions.
University Atmosphere.
In the address on the first day in the
old quadrangle, I said: "If our work
is successful, our ideals will appear in
the daily life of the school. In a
school, as in a fortress, it is not the
form of the building, but the strength
of the materials, which determine its
effectiveness. With a garrison of
hearts of oak, it may not matter even
whether there be a fortress. What
ever its form, or its organization, or
its pretensions, the character of the
university is fixed by the men who
teach. "Have a university in shan
ties, nay in tents," Cardinal Newman
has said, "but have great teachers in
it." The university spirit flows oik
from these teachers, and its organiza
tion serves mainly to bring them to
gether. "Colleges only serve us," says
Emerson, "when their aim is not. to
drill, but to create; when they gath
er from afar every ray of various
genius to their hospitable halls, and
by their concentrated fires set the
heart of their youth in flames."
Strong men make universities strong.
A great man never fails to leave a
ureat mark on every youth with whom
he conies in contact. Too much em
phasis cannot be laid on this: that
the real purpose of the university or
ganization is to produce a university
atmosphere—such an atmosphere as
gathered itself around Arnold at Rug
b.v. around Dollinge.r at Munich,
around Linnaeus at Upsaln. around
Werner at Freiberg, around Agassiz
at Cambridge, around Hopkins at Wil
liamstown, around White at Ithaca,
around all great teachers everywhere.
Agassi/, once said: "The physical
suffering of humanity, the wants of
the poor, the craving of the hungry
and naked, appeal to the sympathies
of every one who has a human heart.
Hut there are necessities which only
the destitute student knows. There is
a hunger and thirst which only the
highest charity can understand and re
lieve; and 011 this solemn occasion
let me say that every dollar given for
higher education, in whatever depart
ment of knowledge, is l'kely to have
a greater influence on the future char
acter of our nation than even the
thousands, the hundred thousands,
and millions which'we have spent, or
are spending, to raise the many to ma
terial ease and comfort."
Presidential Powers.
Mr. Stanford laid much stress on
the work of the President of the Uni
versity. The hoard of trustees were
directed to give to him such powers
as would enable him, with his col
leagues. to control all educational pol
icies, and such that for their success
he might justly lie held responsible.
At some future time the presidency
of the American university may lie an
outworn office, its function to he taKOn
by a committee from the faculty, as
some now urge that it should be.
Hut this cannot be done in the period
of formation of the American univer
s'ty, and no American university has
yet passed its period of youth and
growth. In that lies its strength. Its
hope lies in its imperfection. It is
not born full-grown, as the German
universities have claimed to be. With
perfection, decline sets in, as these
univers'ties have clearly shown. Ev
ery forward movement needs a lead
er. "An institution is but the length
ened shadow of a man."
It is for the president to take the
initiative in all educational affairs, to
give the university its color and its
personality. lie must know how to
take advice and how to value it. The
more checks and balances on his ac
tion the better, but none should de
prive him of his initiative. It is for
him to seek and develop those rare
elements of feeling and character by
which one university is known from
another. And in our University we
tried to weld together such elements
to form what we fondly hoped men
would call the "Stanford Spirit."
Value of Keonomy.
It was the idea of the founders that
each student should be taught the
value of economy—that lavish expen
ditures bring neither happiness nor
success. "A student," it was said by
one of the founders, "will lie better
fitted to battle with the trials and trib
ulations of life, if he lias been taught
the worth of money, the necessity of
saving and of overcoming a desire to
imitate those who are better off in the
world's goods. For, when he has
learned how to save and how to con
trol inordinate desires, be will be rel
atively rich During the past three
and a half years of close observation
on my part, the importance of econ
uniy bas impressed itself forcibly up
on me, and I wish it to be taught to
all students of the university. Na
ture has made the surroundings of
the university beautiful, and the sub
stantial character of the buildings
gives them an appearance of luxury.
I wish this natural beauty and com
parative luxury to impress upon the
students the necessity of their preser
vation for the generations that are to
follow. The lesson thus taught will
remain with them through life and
help them to teach the lesson to
ethers. The un'versitv buildings and
grounds are for their use while stu
dents. in trust for students to come."
\i*l of
The value of the study of political
and social science as a remedy for
defects of government was clearly
seen by Mr. Stanford. "All govern
ments." he said, "at" governments by
public opinion, and in the long run
ever', people is a■ well governed as it
deserves." Hence increase of knowl
edge brin-'s about bett r government.
For help in such matters the people
bavr a ri hi to look to their un ! ', : r

sities and university men. It was his
theory that the art of government is
still in its infancy. "Legislation lias
not, as a rule, been a ainst the peo
ple, but it has not done the good tli it
it might." "No greater biow can be
struck at labor than that which ren
ders ts products insecure." In the
externum of volir't irv co-operation,
he saw a remedy for many present ills,
as lie siw in the lav ef mutual help
the essence of i ur Christian civiliza
tion. He said, in laying the corner
stone: "Out of these suggestions
urows the consider tion of the great
advantages, especially to the laboring
man, of cooperation, by which each
individual has the benefit of the intel
lectual and physical forces of his as
sociates. It is I \ tli • intelligent ap
plication of these |) j c'iiles that there
will le found th? greatest lever *.o
elevate the mass o r humanity, and
laws should h< f:;iincd to protect and
develop co-operat ve associations. . . .
They will accomplish all that is

sought to lie secured by labor leagues,
trades unions and other federations of
workmen, and will be free from the
objection of even impliedly attempt
i 11 to take the unauthorised 01
wrongful control ( 112 the property,
capital, or time of others."
li<>>:ilt > and Co-ojicmtieii,
One result of voluntary co-opera
tion, in .Mr. Stanford's view, would bo
the development of the spirit of loy
> alty. the most precious attribute of
[ the laboring man in any grade, in any
j field, to the interest or cause which
' he serves. One great evil of the pres
ent era of gigantic industrial organ
izations is that it takes no account of
the spirit of loyalty, without which
no man can do li s best work. The
huge trust does away with tlie feeling
of personal association. The equally
huge trades union, in many of its op
erations. strikes directly at the per
sonality of the individual workman.
It makes him merely a pawn to be
moved hither and thither in the game
of industrial war. In the long run,
j no enterprise can flourish, unless
' those who carry it on throw them
selvi s, heart and soul,' into its ser
vice. On the other hand..no one can
do a greater injury to the cause of
labor than to take loyalty out of the
category of working virtues. IJ is one
if the traditional good traits of ihr
healthy college man to be loyal to bis
j t'ollege. This virtue Mr. Stanford
would have cultivated in all effective
ways, and in loyalty on both sides lie
would find a practical < lution of most

112 the la! or troubles of today. That
he carried his ideas into his own prac
tice ir shown by the unflinching devo
tion of all his own employees of what
ever grad j throughout his life. They
were taught to bel eve in him. to be
lieve in th > worth of their own work,
a: d thi s to have respect for tliem
selw-. Much of the dheont ill of the
day has its origin in lack of self-re
spect. The pawn that is moved in the
game of sympathetic strike lias no
control over his own actions, and
then f< re : o respect for his own mo
tives. Th <!< veiop rent of intelligent,
vclur.tary co-i.peration. n the long
r ni, lrakeg the wtvkman more than a
machi '.e. If lie is such, in the long
rti" again, ho will re e've whatever
he deserves. 11 1 will be a factor in
c'vi'i r ior, when the unskilled, un
thinking laborer is not.
\\ iisi < i I abor.
\he - ■ it economic waste in labor
oft m engaged Mr. Stanford's atton
t'on, avd he found its remedy in edu-

•'tin". "Orce," ho faid, "tho great
"n )o c:f labor was to supply the
necessities of life; now, hut a small
portion of our people are so engaged.
' o: d. clothing and shelt.fr are com
non in our country to every provident
'lerscn, excepting, of course, in occa
sional accidental cases. The great
demard for I ilor is to supply what
may he termed Intellectual wants, to
which there is no limit, except that
of intelligence to conceive. If all the
j relations and obligations of man
j were properly understood, it would
I net he nec«vsary for people to make a
| burden of labor. Th > great masses of
I the toilers are now compelled to per
form such an amount of labor as
makes life often wearisome. \n intel
ligent system of education would cor
rect. this inequality. It would make
I
the humblest laborer's work more
I valuable, it would increase both the
| demand and supply for skilled labor,
and reduce the number of the non
producing class. It would dignify la
hor, and ultimately would go far to
wipe out the mere distinctions of
wealth and ancestry. It would achieve
| a. bloodless revolution and establish
j a republic of industry, merit and
; learning.
"Ilow near to that state we may be,
j or how far from it, we cannot tell. It
■ stents very far when we contemplate
the great standing a litres of Europe,
where over five millions of men (or
about one for every twelve adult
male i are marching about with gnus
on their shoulders to preserve the
•tea(' • of nations, while hovering near

them is an innumerable force of po
lice to preserve the peace of individ
uals; but when we remember the pos
sibilities of e vilizution and the power
of education, we can foresee ;i time
when these soldiers and policemen
shall be changed to useful, producing
citizens, engaged in lilting the bur
dens of the people instead of increas
ing them. And yet. extravagant as are
the nations of Europe in standing ar
mies and preparations for war, their
xtravagance in the waste of labor is
still greater. Education, by teaching
the intelligent use of machinery, is
the only remedy for such waste."
Education a Itirtbriglit.
Mr. Stanford believed that no edu
cational system could be complete in
which entrance to the university was
a detached privilege of the chosen
few. lie believed in the unbroken lad
der from the kindergarten to the uni
versity, a ladder that, each one should
be free to climb, as far as his ability
or energy should permit. He believed,
with lan Maclaren. in keeping the
path well trodden from the farmhouse
to the university, lie asked that this
sentence from the president's first, ad
dress be placed on the University Reg
ister: "A generous education is the
birthright of every man and woman in
America." In Emerson's words:
"America means opportunity," and
opportunity comes through training to
receive it. To have such a train'ng
is to be truly free born, and this is
the birthright of each child of the re
public.
A friend at Aix-les-Mains once ar
gued with him that there is already
too much education, and that to in
crease it further ! s simply to swell the
volume of discontent. "I insisted."
Mr. Stanford said, "that there can not
be too much education any more than
too much health or intelligence. Do
you happen to know any man who has
been too well educated. Where does
he live? What is his address? If you
cannot find such a man, you cannot
speak of overeducation." There has
been unwise education or misfit, edu
cation. Some highly educated men
are neither wise nor lit, and there is a
kind of education that comes from
experience and not from books. But
with all this, too thorough or too
good a training no one ever had. Ig
norance is shadow. Education is light.
Nothing is more unpractical than
darkness, nothing is more practical
than sunshine.
Secret of Human Power.
Science is knowledge tested and set
in order, and each advance in knowl
<l ge cirrics with it a corresponding
increment of power. A machine, to
Mr. Stanford, was not a mere saver of
lal or. but an aid to labor, increasing
its efficiency and therefore adding to
the value of men. Hv greater knowl
edge of the forces of nature we ac
quire greater skill in turning these
forces '11 to man's service through the
harness of machinery. In increase of
scientific knowledge he found the se
cret of human power. An education
which does not disclose the secret of
power is unworthy the name. "We
may always advance toward the infi
nite," was a favorite saying of his.
He could find no limit to the develop
in lit of civilization. The possibilities
of human progress expressed to him
the measure of infinite goodness, in
his own words: "The beneficence of
the Creator toward man on earth, and
the possibilities of humanity, are one
and the same."
But in his forecast of the myriad
triumphs of applied science, he did not
forget that knowledge itself must pre
cede any use man can make of it.
Pure science must always go before
applied science. The higher forms of
thought have their place in mental
growth as necessities in the concrete
preparation for action,
In the new university he decreed
that "the work in applied science::
he decreed that "the work in applied
shall be carried along with that
in the pure sciences and the hu
manities. and that, so far as may be.
all lines of work included in the plan
of the university shall be equally fos
tered."
Itcnct'itN el' Vsseeialion.
Mr. Stanford's belief that literature
and engineering should be pursued
side by side was shown by his wish
to provide for each with equal gene.r

osity. And the students of each are
tlii' gainers by this relation. The de
votee of classical culture is strength
ened by his association with men to
whom their college work is part of
the serious duty of life. The student
of engineering stands with both feet
on tlie ground, li s success in life
depends on the exactness of his
knowledge of machinery and of the
basic principles of mechanics and
maihematics. He must be in dead
earnest if lie would succeed at all. On
the other hand, the student of realities
uains by his association with the poet,
the philosopher and the artist. The
finer aspects of life are brought to his
notice, and from this association re
sults tolerance and breadth of sym
( oeditcationa! \(ha»t:iges.
That worn n should receive higher
education as well as men was an ax
iom 'o Mr. Stanford. Coeducation was
taken for granted from the first, pud
the young women of Stanford have
■ ( v ;■ had to question the friendliness
I their welcome. "We have provid
ed." Mr. Stanford says"in the articles
of endowment, that the education of
tlie sexes shall be equal—deeming it.
of special importance that those who
are to be mothers of the future gen
eration shall be fitted to mold and di
rect th,' infantile mind at its most crit
ical period."
The leading argument for coeduca
tion is akin to one just indicated for
the uiron in one institution of the
various lines of literature, art, sci
ence. and applied technology.
In women's education, as planned
for women alone, the tendency is to
ward (he study of beauty and order.
Literature and language take prece
dence over science. Expression is
valued more highly than action. In
carrying this to an extreme, the ne
c ssary relat on of thought to action
becomes obscured. The scholarship
developed tends to be ineffective, be
cause it is not related to life. The
educated women are likely to master
technique, rather than art; method
than substance. She may know a
good deal, but be able to do nothing.
Often her views of life must undergo
nainful changes before she can find
her place in the world.
In schools for men alone, the re
verse condition often obtains. The
::cnse of reality obscures the element
of beauty and fitness. It is of great
advantage to both men and women to
meet on a plane of equality in edu
cation. Women are brought into con
tact, with men who can do things—
men in whom the sense of reality is
strong, and who have definite views in
life. This influence affects them for
good. It turns them away from sen
timentalism. It is opposed to un
wholesome forms of hysterical friend
ship. It. gives tone to their religious
thoughts and impulses. Above all, it
tends to encourage action governed
by ideals, as opposed to that resting
on caprice. It gives them better
standards of what is possible and im
possible, when the responsibility for
action is thrown upon them.
In like manner, the association
with wise, sane and healthy women
has its value for young men. This
value has never been fully realized,
even by the strongest advocates of
coeducation. It raises their ideals of
womanhood, and the highest manhood
must bp associated with such an ideal.
Meanly and Kitnes*.
While the work of the teachers must
make the kernel of the university, we
must rejoice that here at Palo Alto
even the husks are beautiful. Reality
and fitness are great forces in educa
tion. Every object with which the
young mind comes iti contact leaves
on it. its trace. "Nothing is unim
portant in the life of man," and the
least feature of our surroundings has
its influence, greater or less. "There
was a child went forth every day,"
Walt Whitman tells us. "and the first
object that it looked upon, that ob
lect it became." It may be for a mo
ment or an hour, or "for changing
vcb s of years." The essence of civ
'Mv.ation is exposure to vfiilnc: ami
humanizing influence " ' n- in
i university," ♦ "o <>-. "is
ivnrth more than a dol'ar ' ■' '" ,1 "and
" ery dollar spent in tinker n nuiv< r
itv beautiful will be i en,aid with in


( liancellor David Starr .lonian.
terest in the enriching of the students'
lives.
It has been a reproach to America
that for the best of her sons and
daughters she has done the least. She
lias built palaces for lunatics, idiots,
crippled and blind, —nay, even for
criminals and paupers. But the col
lege students —"the young men of
sound mind and earnest purposes, the
noblest treasures of the State," to
quote the words of President White,
"she has housed in vile barracks."
The student has no need for luxury.
Plain living has ever gone with high
thinking. But grace and fitness have
an educative power too often forgot
ten in this utilitarian age. These
long corridors with their stately
arches, these circles of waving palms,
will have their part in the students'
training as surely as the chemical lab
oratory or the seminary-room. Each
stone in the quadrangle shall teach its
lesson of grace and genuineness, and
this Valley of Santa Clara shall occu
py a warm place in every student's
heart. Pictures of this fair region will
cling to his memory amid the figures
of the draughting-room. He will not
forget the fine waves of our two moun
tain ranges, overarched by a soft blue
Grecian sky, nor the ancient oak trees,
nor the gently sloping fields, changing
from vivid green to richest yellow, as
the seasons change. The noble jnllars
of the gallery of art, its rich treas
ures, the choicest remains of the
ideals of past ages—all these, and a
hundred other things which each one
will find out for himself, shall fill his
mind with bright pictures, never to be
rubbed out in the wea,r of life. Thus
in the character of every student shall
be left some imperishable trace of the
beauty of the Stanford farm, the estate
of Palo Alto.
Influence of Character.
Above and beyond all learning is
the influence of character, the impulse
to virtue and piety which comes from
men whose lives show that virtue and
piety really exist. For the life of the
most exalted as well as the humblest
of men, there can be no nobler motto
than that inscribed by the great
scholar of the last century over his
home in Hammarby: "Innocue vivito;
numen adest." Live blameless; God
is near. "This," said Linnaeus, "is
the wisdom of my life."
Religious Freedom.
Whsn the University was founded,
it was provided that in its religious
life, as in its scientific investigations,
it should be wholly free from outside
control. No religious sect or organi
zation and no group of organizations
should have dominion over it. The
University should exist for its own
sake, to carry out its own purposes,
and to bring out its own results in
its own way.
In this regard the die is cast, once
for all. The choice of the founders
of the University was deliberate and
final. They chose the path of intel
lectual and religious freedom, in the
very interest of religion itself. Re
ligion is devotion in action. In its
higher reaches it must be individual,
because it is a function of the indiv
idual soul which must stand in per
petual protest against the religion
that finds its end in forms and cere
monies and organizations.
The .requirement was a simple re
flection of Mr. Stanford's own relig
ious character, as expressed in the
words of one very near to him: "If
a firm belief in a beneficent Creator,
a profound admiration for Jesus of
Nazareth and His teachings, and the
certainty of a personal life hereafter,
constitute religion, then Leland Stan
ford was a religious man. The nar
row walls of a creed could not confine
him; therefore, he was not a pro
fessed member of any church, for in
each confession of faith he found
something to which he could not sub
scribe. But for the principles of re
ligion he hijd a profound veneration;
in h's heart were the true sentiments
of Christianity, and ho often said that
in his opinion the Golden Rule was
the cornerstone of all religion."
RelMon must form the axis of per
sonal character, and its prime import

ance the university cannot ignore. To
attain its culture it may use indirect
rather than direct means, the influ
ence of effort and character rather
than the imposition of forms. To ac
cept ecclesiastical help is to invite
ecclesiastical control toward ecclesi
astical ends. In the grant of endow
ment it was required that the trustees
should "prohibit sectarian instruction,
but have taught in the university the
immortality of the soul, the existence
of an all-wise and benevolent Crea
tor. and that obedience to His laws
is the highest duty of man."
The founders believed truly that
freedom of thought and action would
promote morality and religion, that a
deeper, fuller religious life would
arise from the growth of the individ
ual, that only where the "winds of
freedom blow" will spring up the
highest type of religious development.
For character is formed from within
by the efforts and strivings and as
pirations of the individual. It can
never be imposed from without. The
will is made strong from choosing
the right, not from having right ac
tion enforced upon it. The life of man
is "made beautiful and sweet through
self-devotion and through self-re
straint." But this must be chosen
voluntarily, else it fails of its purpose.
Growth Through Ages.
It was Mr. Stanford's hope to leave
the University free to grow through
the coming ages. He would extend
no dead hand from the grave to limit
its activities or to control its move
ments. The deed of gift is in favor
of education pure and simple. It has
no hampering clause, and the only end
in view is that of the help of human
ity through the extension of knowl
edge. "We hope," he said, "that this
institution will endure through long
ages. Provisions regarding details of
management, however wise they may
be at present, might prove to be mis
chievous under conditions which may
arise in the future."
The growth of the University must
remain the best evidence of the
founder's wisdom. He had the sagac
ity to recognize the value of higher
education and the patriotism to give
the rewards of a successful life to its
advancement. He had the rare wis
dom to discriminate between the real
and the temporary in university organ
ization and management, and his pro
vision is for the genuine and the per
manent, not for that "which speedily
passes away." Still more rare, he had
the forethought to leave to each suc
ceeding generation, the duty of adapt
ing its details of administration and
methods to the needs of the time.
If the founders had said: "We will
found a university so strong that it
may endure for all the centuries,
whose organization shall be so free
and flexible that in each age it shall
reflect the best spirit of the time,"
they could not have given it greater
freedom of development than it has
today. For the glory of the univer
sity must lie in its freedom, in that
freedom which cannot fall into li
cense, nor lose itself in waywardness
—that freedom which knows but one
bond of control, the eternal truth of
God.
Perpetual Power.
When the University opened its
doors in 1891, Millicent Shinn printed
these words of prophecy: "Greater
than the achievement of lasting hon
or among one's fellow-men of later
generations, is it to become a living
power among them forever. It rarely
happens to one man and woman to
have both the power and the skill to
thus live after death, working and
shaping beneficently in the lives of
many—not of tens nor of hundreds,
but of thousands and tens of thou
sands, as the generations follow on.
Herein is the wisdom of money spent
in education, that each recipient of in
fluence becomes in his time a center
to transmit the same in every direc
tion. so that it multiplies forever in
geometric .ratio. The power to mold
unborn generations for good, to keen
one's hards mightily on human af
fairs after the flesh has been dust for
years, seems not onlv more than mor

tal, but more than man. Thus does
man become co-worker with God in
the shaping of the world to a good
outcome."
And this I said in my opening day
address, "The Golden Age of Califor
nia begins when its gold is used for
purposes like this. From such deeds
must rise the new California of the
coming century, no longer the Califor
nia of the gold-seeker and the adven
turer, but the abode of high-minded
men and women, trained in the wis
dom of the ages, and imbued with the
love of nature, the love of man, and
the love of God. And bright indeed
will be the future of our State if in
the usefulness every hope and prayer
of the founders shall be realized."
University Life
With those words of mine, spoken
twenty-four years ago, the University
began. "We come together today," I
said, "for the first time as teacher and
students. With this relation, the life
of the University begins. It is such
personal contact of young men and
young women with scholars and in
vestigators which constitutes the life
of the University. It is for us as
teachers and students in the Univer
sity's first year to lay the foundations
of a school which may last as long as
human civilization. Ours is the
youngest of the universities, but it is
heir to the wisdom of all the ages,
and with this inheritance it has the
promise of a rapid and sturdy growth
"But the future, with its glories and
responsibilities, will be in other
hands. It is ours at the beginning to
give the University its form, its ten
dencies, its customs. The power of
precedent will cause to be repeated
over again everything that we do —
our errors as well as our wisdom, it
becomes us, then, to begin work mod
estly, as under the eye of the coming
ages. We must lay the foundations
broad and firm, so as to give full sup
port to whatever edifice the future
may build. Ours is the humbler task,
but not the least in importance, and
our work will not be in vain if all we
do is done in sincerity. As sound as
the rocks from which these walls are
hewn should be the work of every
teacher who comes within them. To
the extent that this is true will the
University be successful. Unless its
work be thus 'wrought in sad sincer
ity' nothing can redeem it from fail
ure. In this feeling, and realizing,
too, that only the help we give to the
men and women whose lives we reach
can justify our presence here, we are
ready to begin our work.
"Our University has no history to
fall back upon; no memories of great
teachers to haunt its corridors; in
none of its rooms appear the traces
which show where a great man has
lived and worked. No tender asso
ciations cling, ivv-like, to its fresh,
new halls. It is hallowed by no tra
dition. it is hampered by none.
Traditions and associations it is ours
to make. From our work the future
of the University will grow, as the
splendid lily from the modest bulb."
Dr. Jordan delivered the annual
Founders' Day address in the Assem
bly Hall this morning upon the sub
ject of "The Foundation Ideals of Stan
ford University."
From an historical as well as a per
sonal viewpoint it is eminently fit
ting that Dr. Jordan should discourse
upon this theme, which will farm a
companion piece to the Chancellor's
"The Story of a Good Woman." The
latter also first appeared as a Found
ers' Day address, and was a eulogy
of the life of Mrs. Jane Lathrop Stan
ford, and a narrative of the history
of the University during the so-called
"dark days" between 1893 and 1899,
when the ultimate fate of the institu
tion was in constant doubt.
In treating his subject this morning
Dr. Jordan gave expression to the
ideals which inspired Senator Leland
Stanford in his conception of Stanford
University. Selecting the successful
system then in practice at Cornell
University as the most suitable for the
needs of Stanford, the Senator called
upon Andrew D. White, who was
mainly responsible for the efficiency
of Cornell, where he was then acting
president, to assume the duties of
chief executive at Stanford. In declin
ing White .recommended David Stan-
Jordan, then president of the Universi
ty of Indiana, for the position.
When the present Chancellor name
to Stanford he was the youngest uni
versity president, in po'nt of years, in
the country, and when he resigned he
was the oldest in point of service, a
fact of no little significance.
The important share which Dr.
David Starr Jordan had in forming, di
recting. and developing the "founda
tion 'deals" of Stanford University
need no comment.
The address of Dr. Jordan follows:
I)r. Jordan Introduces Speech.
When Charles Darwin felt himself
growing old, he sat down in his home
in Kent to write the story of his life —
fo.r his children. He wrote, he said, as
might a spirit from another world,
looking down on this one. not swayed
by any emotion, of hope, of fear, or
eagerness or uncertainty as to the
final end. And so, today, T wish in
some such disembodied fashion to tell
the story of the founding of a univer
sity, and of the purposes and ideas
with which it started out.

Twenty-four years is a short time
in the history of a nation or a univer
sity, which is a small and swiftly
changing nation within itself. It is a
long time in the life of a man, as those
who with me have spanned it can tes
tify.
The story of today will not go far
beyond the first day of October, 1891,
when we gathered in the northwest
gate of the quadrangle for the open
ing day.
Founder and President.
Purpose must come before action,
and in the very beginning there were
only two to frame this purpose, the
founder and the president. Leland
Stanford was then scarcely older than
I am now, and I was a mere "youth
of promise," from the simple-minded
east, a "new man," as the San Francis
co journals kindly put it, and Mr.
Stanford had a reputation wider than
the nation, a philosopher and a lover
of li s kind as well as a business man
and a statesman.
A ('auspicious Figure.
Leland Stanford had been for a gen
eration the most conspicious figure in
California. He was a .rich man, weal
thy through his own effort, and he
hoped to leave humanity better for his
riches. Especially he wished to bring
to the California he loved, and who, af
ter California's fash-on, ha.l f'nst, loved
him, the abundance of life, which is
the best gift of the University. Leland
Stanford had held many relations with
California. He was an actual pion
eer. When the Civil War broke out he
had no doubt of his position and he
stood for free speech in Sacramento,
when freedom was dangerous. He was
the war governor of the state, trusted
by Lincoln, and like Lincoln, he knew
how to count the cost in a difficult
crisis. He had been one of the four
men of Sacramento who saw the vision
of a railway over the Sierras. In 1891
he was United States Senator from
California, known to every one and be
loved by all who came near him.
Typically American.
His wide influence did not rise from
his wealth. Wealth and influence
sprang alike from his personality. He
was broad-minded and long-headed,
and his simplicity of life kept him al
ways in touch with the people. "He
was active," it was said, "when other

men were idle; he was generous when
other men were grasping; he was lof
ty when other men were base." He
was thoroughly a man, and a man of
the type we like to call American.
One word of praise of Stanford
clings to my memory. At his funeral
in 1893, Horatio Stebbins in his state
ly fashion told how the Greeks did
honor to a slain hero. Then turning
to the pallbearers, stalwart men from
the Southern Pacific, he said: "Gentle
up your strength a little, for 'tis a man
ye bear."
University Idealized.
The story of the death of the only
son is known to Stanford people. The
boy, young Leland, fell ill in Rome
from the mosquito-borne Roman fever.
After coming back to Florence while
convalescent, he died of failure of the
heart. After the long vigil of a dreary
night, Mr. Stanford awoke one morn
ing with these words on his lips: "The
children of California shall be my chil
dren." And this thought grew crystal
line as the dream of a great universi
ty. And in this plan, nis wife, Jane La
throp Stanford, gave him most loyal
service, which continued unshaken
throughout twelve years of lonely wid
owhood. The story of her love and de
votion I have told as well as I could on
another occasion, the parallel to this.
< aliforiiia tlie .Motif.
So the decision was made that the
beloved Palo Alto farm —famed for the
finest horses in the world —should be
come a university campus. The Uni
versity buildings should have a motif
from California. To this end the old
mission of San Juan Capistrano, near
the seashore above San Diego, founded
by Father Junlpero Serra more than a
century before, was chosen to give the
University its form. Appeal was made
to the greatest living architects, Henry
Hobson Richardson, of Boston, for
the best was none too good for the new
University. Richardson died before
any work was begun, but his partners,
Shepley, Rutan and Coolidge, took up
the plans in all essential respects just
as we see them now in stone. Freder
ick Law Olmsted devised the garden
effects, but his plans are as yet car
ried out only in part. The streets were
laid out, and at Mr. Stanford's request.
I named them for the early padres,
who led in the missions of California.
Among these are Salvatierra Street,
named for the Jesuit father who first
urged the California missions; Serra
Avenue, fo,r Junipero Serra, the Fran
ciscan who first began the work of
building them, performing marvels of
energy and patience in long marches up
and down the coast from La Paz to
Monterey, and in dealing with the be
setting Indians for whose salvation,
temporal and spiritual, the missions
themselves were planned. Lasuen
street is named for Firmin Lasuen, the
wise and self-contained successor to
the impulsive and enthusiastic Padre
Serra. Po.rtola, Arguello, and Alvara
do were the first governors of Califor
nia; Crespi its first historian, Costan
zo its first civil engineer. These with
Ortega, Rivera, and the rest, were
members of Portola's party of explora
tion who first saw the Golden Gate
and the bay belvnd it. They likened it
to a "Mediterranean Sea," and they
named it for their patron saint, San
Francisco of Assisi, who knew the lan
guage of the birds and even that of
the fishes. Meanwhile, and with char
acteristic energy, Mr. Stanford set out
to make his vision into fact. Articles
of endowment were drawn up, and
buildings we.re provided. A president
was found and he was sent forth to
choose fifteen professors. It was not
wise to have too many professors till
we knew whether students would
come. The press notices were not en
thusiastic. The New York Mail and
Express said: "There is as much need
of a university in California as there
is in Switzerland for an asylum for de
cayed sea-captains." And it was
prophesied that even the fifteen would
for years "lecture in marble halls to
empty benches." Rut the benches
were not empty, as we all know; the
never to be forgotten pioneers of '95
were all there, altogether to the num
ber of 465, and on the first of Octob
er, with all bright auspices of earth
and sky. of wealth and generosity, the
University began. Of the fifteen pro
fessors, oldest of the old guard, par
takers in all joy, worry and success,
ten still remain,—Branner, Stillman,
Marx, Jenkins, Sanford, Campbell. An
derson, Gilbert, G.riffin, and Elliott.
Meanwhile, these were the ideas or
the Founder, as he gave them to me in
many evenings together, the
stones of the quadrangle were leaping
to find their places.
How I came in the matter you will
find in the autobiography of President
White, of Cornell, if you are interested
to read.
Possibilities of Knowledge.
The need to train his own son first
turned Mr. Stanford's thoughts to edu
cational matters. His early acquaint
ance with Professor Agassiz, perhaps
the greatest of American teachers, di
rected his thought into channels of
wisdom. From Agassiz he derived a
realizing sense of the possibilities of
human knowledge and the impelling
force of man's intellectual needs, —
that "hunger and thi.rst after truth
which only the destitute student
knows." "Man's physical needs are
slight," he said, "but his intellectual
needs are hounded only by his capacity
to receive.'
Major System Valued.
The major-subject system, especially
characteristic of Stanford, but later
taken in part by several other univer
sities, among them Harvard, may be
traced in some degree back to Agassiz.
It was first devised in Indiana,, in
1887, by a committee of three, D,r. Bry
an. now president of Indiana, Dr. von
Jagemann. now professor in Harvard,
and myself. In framing the plan I
had in mind the oft repeated words of
Atrassiz: "A spec'alty is the backbone
of education." "The mind is made
strong by the thorough possession of
something." And those of us who be
lieved with President White in the de
mocracy of the mental powers, realized
that in the higher education of a stu
dent it is the man himself who can
best choose what the backbone of his
training should be. For in making a
student, there are but two types of im
pulses strong enough to count, to love

the work itself and to know how the
work is related to his future life.
Mr. Stanford believed that an essen
tial part of education was thorough
knowledge in some one line, so firmly
held as to be effective for practical re
sults. He believed in early choice of
profession. The course of study, how
ever broad and however long, should
in all its parts look toward effective
1 fe. The profession chosen early gives
a purpose and stimulus to all the in
termediate training. He saw clearly
the need of individualism in education,
and that the course of study should be
built around the individual man he is.
The supposed needs of the average
man, developed by a consensus of edu
cational philosophers do not suffice for
the actual man in actual life. We must
be fed with the food that is good for
us. It is for 11s that it must be adap
ted, not for some average man in some
overage age. The ready-made curri
culum belongs to the same category
as ready-made clothing. It is some
thing cheap and easy for the man with
out individual needs.
Democracy and Knowledge.
No other university has recognized
so distinctly as ours the absolute de
mocracy of knowledge. The earlier
traditions of Cornell pointed in this di
rection, and for this reason Mr. Stan
ford found in Cornell, rather than in
Harvard Yale, or Michigan, the
nearest existing approach to his
own ideal. It was Ezra Cornell's
hope "to found an institution where
any person could find instruction in
any study." Cornell and Stanford, in
so far as they are loyal to these tra
ditions, know neither favored students
nor favored studies. No class of men
is chosen to the exclusion of others,
and no class of studies is given a fal
lacious importance through force of
academic pressure or through inertia
of academic tradition. While various
kinds of knowledge are of varying
worth td different persons, each has
its own value to the world, and the
value to the individual must he de
termined in each case by itself. The
university should be no respecter of
persons. It is not called on to approve
or condemn the\various orders of ge
nius that come to it for training.
There has been no greater hindrance
to educational progress than the hler
rchy of studies, the fiction that certain
kinds of work had an invisible value
not to be measured by tangible results.
That the work of a university should
be essentially specialized, fitting the
individual for definite forms of higher
usefulness, was an idea constantly pre
sent with Mr. Stanford. He had no
interest in general education as an end
in itself. He had no desire to fit men
for a life of leisure, or for any life
which did not involve a close adaption
of means to ends.
No Educational Millinery.
As a practical man, accustomed to
go to the heart of things, Mr. Stanford
had little respect for educational mil
l'nery and for the conventionalities
which have grown up about the great
institutions of the Old World. He saw
clearly the value of thoroughness, the
need of freedom, the individuality of
development, but cared little for the
machinery by which these ends were
achieved. So it was decreed that tho
new university should be simple in its
organization, with only those details
of structure which the needs of the
times should develop within it. If it
must have precedents and traditions,
it must make its own. "I would have
this institution," he said, "help to fit.
men and women for usefulness in this
life, by 'ncreasing their individual
power of production, and by making
them good company for themselves and
others." Or, in my own words to
young men, spoken in this same time:
"The whole of your life must be spent
in your own company, and only the
educated man is good company for
himself."
And besides, "The world turns asid<>
to let any man pass who knows whi
ther he is going."
In proportion to the extent to which
it widens the range of human know
ledge and of human power, in that de

gree does an institution deserve the
name of university. A man content
with the truth that now is, and without
ambition to venture into the unknown,
is not the proper man to be a university
professor. The truth that now is be
longs to the lower schools. The value
of its original work is the best single
test by wh'ch a university may be
judged; and as it is the best, so is it
also the severest. The incentive for
research should be from within. It
cannot be applied from without.
In its public relations, the university
stands for infinite patience, the calm
tasting of ideas and ideals. It con
ducts no propaganda, it controls no
affairs of business. There is no one
it wishes to elect to office. It is the
judge of the principles of wisdom and
the ways of nature. The details of
action it must leave to men whose
business it is to guide the currents of
the moment.
Freedom and Truth.
It was our hope that we might give
to our students the priceless legacy of
the educated man, the power of know
ing what really is. The higher edu
cation should bring men into direct
contact with truth. It should help to
free them from the dead hands of old
traditions and to enable them to form
opinions worthy of the new evidence
each new day brings before them. An
educated man should not be the slave
of the past, not a copy of men who
have gone before him. He must be in
some degree the founder of a new in
tellectual dynasty; for each new think
er is a new type of man. Whatever
is true is the truest thing in the uni
verse, and mental and moral strength
alike come from our contact with it.
And so wo believed that influence that
gees out from these halls should em
phasize the value of truth. The es
sence of scholarship is to know some
thing which is absolutely true; to
have, in the words of Huxley, "some
knowledge to the certainty of which
no authority could add nor take away
one jot or tittle, and to which the
tradition of a thousand years is but
as the hearsay of yesterday." The
scholar, as was once said of our great
chemist, Benjamin Silliman, must have
"faith in truth as truth, faith that
there is a power in the universe good
enough to make trutli-telling safe and
strong enough to make truth-telling ef
fective." The personal influence of gen
uineness, as embodied in the life of a
teacher, is one of the strongest moral
forces which the school can bring to
its aid; for moral training comes not
mainly by precept, but by practice.
We may teach the value of truth to
our students by showing that we value
it ourselves.
Educational Instrument.
Mr. Stanford insisted as a vital prin
ciple that the university exists for
the benefit of the students, present,
past, and future. It has no exist
ence or function save as an instru
ment of education. To this principle
all others should be subordinate. In
his opening address, he said to the
students of the Pioneer Class: "You
are the most important factor in this
university. It is for your benefit that
it has been established."
No Test in Numbers.
That the new university would in
time attract great numbers of stu
dents, Mr. Stanford believed as a mat
ter of course, although he found In
California few who shared his optim
ism. But he was never deceived with
the cheap test of numbers in estimat
ing the value of institutions. He knew
that a few hundred men well trained
under high influences would count for
more than as many thousand, hurried
in droves over a ready-made curricu
lum by young tutors, themselves
scarcely out of college. So it was de
creed that numbers for numbers' sake
should never be a goal of Stanford
University. And he further made the
practical request that not one dollar
directly or indirectly should be spent
in advertising. The university has no
goods for which it is anxious to find
customers.
The greatest nepd of the student is
the teacher Mr. Stanford said: "In

order that the president may have the
assistance of a competent staff of pro
fessors, we have provided that the
best talent obtainable shall be pro
cured and that liberal compensation
shall always lie offered." Again lie
said: "Ample endowment may have
been provided, intelligent management
may secure large income, students
may present themselves In numbers,
but in the end the faculty makes or
mars the university."
Facility (Greatest Need.
Compared with the character of the
faculty, every other element in the
university is of relatively little im
portance. The chief duty of the col
lege president is the choice of teach
ers. If he lias learned the art of sur
rounding himself with men who are
clean, sane, and scholarly, most other
matters of university administration
will take care of themselves, lie can
not fail if he has good men around
him. And in the choice of teachers
the element of personal sanity seemed
of first importance to Mr. Stanford—
the ability to see things as they are.
The university chai.r should be a cen
ter of clear-seeing from which right
acting should rad ate.
Mr. Stanford said, "I hope the Uni
versity may begin where the State
University leaves off." By this he
meant to lay stress on technical, pro
fessional. and research work, activi
ties which were at that time very lit
tle developed at the State University.
He spoke approvingly of an institu
tion which should combine the special
features of Johns Hopkins and Cor
nell.
A professor to whom original in
vestigation is unknown should have
no place in a university. Men of com
monplace or second-hand scholarship
are of necsssity men of low ideals,
however much the fact may be dis
guised. A man of high ideals must be
an investigator. He must know and
think for himself. Only such as do
this can be really great as teachers.
Universities already begin to recog
nize that their most important profes
sors may be men who teach not in
classes, but only by contact with indiv
iduals, devoting time and strength to
advanced research. The presence and
example of the men who really know
may be worth to the student body a
hundred-fold more than the precepts
and drill of the others. They set
standards of thought. They help to
create the university spirit, without
which any college is but a grammar
school of a little higher pretensions.
University Atmosphere.
In the address on the first day in the
old quadrangle, I said: "If our work
is successful, our ideals will appear in
the daily life of the school. In a
school, as in a fortress, it is not the
form of the building, but the strength
of the materials, which determine its
effectiveness. With a garrison of
hearts of oak, it may not matter even
whether there be a fortress. What
ever its form, or its organization, or
its pretensions, the character of the
university is fixed by the men who
teach. "Have a university in shan
ties, nay in tents," Cardinal Newman
has said, "but have great teachers in
it." The university spirit flows oik
from these teachers, and its organiza
tion serves mainly to bring them to
gether. "Colleges only serve us," says
Emerson, "when their aim is not. to
drill, but to create; when they gath
er from afar every ray of various
genius to their hospitable halls, and
by their concentrated fires set the
heart of their youth in flames."
Strong men make universities strong.
A great man never fails to leave a
ureat mark on every youth with whom
he conies in contact. Too much em
phasis cannot be laid on this: that
the real purpose of the university or
ganization is to produce a university
atmosphere—such an atmosphere as
gathered itself around Arnold at Rug
b.v. around Dollinge.r at Munich,
around Linnaeus at Upsaln. around
Werner at Freiberg, around Agassiz
at Cambridge, around Hopkins at Wil
liamstown, around White at Ithaca,
around all great teachers everywhere.
Agassi/, once said: "The physical
suffering of humanity, the wants of
the poor, the craving of the hungry
and naked, appeal to the sympathies
of every one who has a human heart.
Hut there are necessities which only
the destitute student knows. There is
a hunger and thirst which only the
highest charity can understand and re
lieve; and 011 this solemn occasion
let me say that every dollar given for
higher education, in whatever depart
ment of knowledge, is l'kely to have
a greater influence on the future char
acter of our nation than even the
thousands, the hundred thousands,
and millions which'we have spent, or
are spending, to raise the many to ma
terial ease and comfort."
Presidential Powers.
Mr. Stanford laid much stress on
the work of the President of the Uni
versity. The hoard of trustees were
directed to give to him such powers
as would enable him, with his col
leagues. to control all educational pol
icies, and such that for their success
he might justly lie held responsible.
At some future time the presidency
of the American university may lie an
outworn office, its function to he taKOn
by a committee from the faculty, as
some now urge that it should be.
Hut this cannot be done in the period
of formation of the American univer
s'ty, and no American university has
yet passed its period of youth and
growth. In that lies its strength. Its
hope lies in its imperfection. It is
not born full-grown, as the German
universities have claimed to be. With
perfection, decline sets in, as these
univers'ties have clearly shown. Ev
ery forward movement needs a lead
er. "An institution is but the length
ened shadow of a man."
It is for the president to take the
initiative in all educational affairs, to
give the university its color and its
personality. lie must know how to
take advice and how to value it. The
more checks and balances on his ac
tion the better, but none should de
prive him of his initiative. It is for
him to seek and develop those rare
elements of feeling and character by
which one university is known from
another. And in our University we
tried to weld together such elements
to form what we fondly hoped men
would call the "Stanford Spirit."
Value of Keonomy.
It was the idea of the founders that
each student should be taught the
value of economy—that lavish expen
ditures bring neither happiness nor
success. "A student," it was said by
one of the founders, "will lie better
fitted to battle with the trials and trib
ulations of life, if he lias been taught
the worth of money, the necessity of
saving and of overcoming a desire to
imitate those who are better off in the
world's goods. For, when he has
learned how to save and how to con
trol inordinate desires, be will be rel
atively rich During the past three
and a half years of close observation
on my part, the importance of econ
uniy bas impressed itself forcibly up
on me, and I wish it to be taught to
all students of the university. Na
ture has made the surroundings of
the university beautiful, and the sub
stantial character of the buildings
gives them an appearance of luxury.
I wish this natural beauty and com
parative luxury to impress upon the
students the necessity of their preser
vation for the generations that are to
follow. The lesson thus taught will
remain with them through life and
help them to teach the lesson to
ethers. The un'versitv buildings and
grounds are for their use while stu
dents. in trust for students to come."
\i*l of
The value of the study of political
and social science as a remedy for
defects of government was clearly
seen by Mr. Stanford. "All govern
ments." he said, "at" governments by
public opinion, and in the long run
ever', people is a■ well governed as it
deserves." Hence increase of knowl
edge brin-'s about bett r government.
For help in such matters the people
bavr a ri hi to look to their un ! ', : r

sities and university men. It was his
theory that the art of government is
still in its infancy. "Legislation lias
not, as a rule, been a ainst the peo
ple, but it has not done the good tli it
it might." "No greater biow can be
struck at labor than that which ren
ders ts products insecure." In the
externum of volir't irv co-operation,
he saw a remedy for many present ills,
as lie siw in the lav ef mutual help
the essence of i ur Christian civiliza
tion. He said, in laying the corner
stone: "Out of these suggestions
urows the consider tion of the great
advantages, especially to the laboring
man, of cooperation, by which each
individual has the benefit of the intel
lectual and physical forces of his as
sociates. It is I \ tli • intelligent ap
plication of these |) j c'iiles that there
will le found th? greatest lever *.o
elevate the mass o r humanity, and
laws should h< f:;iincd to protect and
develop co-operat ve associations. . . .
They will accomplish all that is

sought to lie secured by labor leagues,
trades unions and other federations of
workmen, and will be free from the
objection of even impliedly attempt
i 11 to take the unauthorised 01
wrongful control ( 112 the property,
capital, or time of others."
li<>>:ilt > and Co-ojicmtieii,
One result of voluntary co-opera
tion, in .Mr. Stanford's view, would bo
the development of the spirit of loy
> alty. the most precious attribute of
[ the laboring man in any grade, in any
j field, to the interest or cause which
' he serves. One great evil of the pres
ent era of gigantic industrial organ
izations is that it takes no account of
the spirit of loyalty, without which
no man can do li s best work. The
huge trust does away with tlie feeling
of personal association. The equally
huge trades union, in many of its op
erations. strikes directly at the per
sonality of the individual workman.
It makes him merely a pawn to be
moved hither and thither in the game
of industrial war. In the long run,
j no enterprise can flourish, unless
' those who carry it on throw them
selvi s, heart and soul,' into its ser
vice. On the other hand..no one can
do a greater injury to the cause of
labor than to take loyalty out of the
category of working virtues. IJ is one
if the traditional good traits of ihr
healthy college man to be loyal to bis
j t'ollege. This virtue Mr. Stanford
would have cultivated in all effective
ways, and in loyalty on both sides lie
would find a practical < lution of most

112 the la! or troubles of today. That
he carried his ideas into his own prac
tice ir shown by the unflinching devo
tion of all his own employees of what
ever grad j throughout his life. They
were taught to bel eve in him. to be
lieve in th > worth of their own work,
a: d thi s to have respect for tliem
selw-. Much of the dheont ill of the
day has its origin in lack of self-re
spect. The pawn that is moved in the
game of sympathetic strike lias no
control over his own actions, and
then f< re : o respect for his own mo
tives. Th <!< veiop rent of intelligent,
vclur.tary co-i.peration. n the long
r ni, lrakeg the wtvkman more than a
machi '.e. If lie is such, in the long
rti" again, ho will re e've whatever
he deserves. 11 1 will be a factor in
c'vi'i r ior, when the unskilled, un
thinking laborer is not.
\\ iisi < i I abor.
\he - ■ it economic waste in labor
oft m engaged Mr. Stanford's atton
t'on, avd he found its remedy in edu-

•'tin". "Orce," ho faid, "tho great
"n )o c:f labor was to supply the
necessities of life; now, hut a small
portion of our people are so engaged.
' o: d. clothing and shelt.fr are com
non in our country to every provident
'lerscn, excepting, of course, in occa
sional accidental cases. The great
demard for I ilor is to supply what
may he termed Intellectual wants, to
which there is no limit, except that
of intelligence to conceive. If all the
j relations and obligations of man
j were properly understood, it would
I net he nec«vsary for people to make a
| burden of labor. Th > great masses of
I the toilers are now compelled to per
form such an amount of labor as
makes life often wearisome. \n intel
ligent system of education would cor
rect. this inequality. It would make
I
the humblest laborer's work more
I valuable, it would increase both the
| demand and supply for skilled labor,
and reduce the number of the non
producing class. It would dignify la
hor, and ultimately would go far to
wipe out the mere distinctions of
wealth and ancestry. It would achieve
| a. bloodless revolution and establish
j a republic of industry, merit and
; learning.
"Ilow near to that state we may be,
j or how far from it, we cannot tell. It
■ stents very far when we contemplate
the great standing a litres of Europe,
where over five millions of men (or
about one for every twelve adult
male i are marching about with gnus
on their shoulders to preserve the
•tea(' • of nations, while hovering near

them is an innumerable force of po
lice to preserve the peace of individ
uals; but when we remember the pos
sibilities of e vilizution and the power
of education, we can foresee ;i time
when these soldiers and policemen
shall be changed to useful, producing
citizens, engaged in lilting the bur
dens of the people instead of increas
ing them. And yet. extravagant as are
the nations of Europe in standing ar
mies and preparations for war, their
xtravagance in the waste of labor is
still greater. Education, by teaching
the intelligent use of machinery, is
the only remedy for such waste."
Education a Itirtbriglit.
Mr. Stanford believed that no edu
cational system could be complete in
which entrance to the university was
a detached privilege of the chosen
few. lie believed in the unbroken lad
der from the kindergarten to the uni
versity, a ladder that, each one should
be free to climb, as far as his ability
or energy should permit. He believed,
with lan Maclaren. in keeping the
path well trodden from the farmhouse
to the university, lie asked that this
sentence from the president's first, ad
dress be placed on the University Reg
ister: "A generous education is the
birthright of every man and woman in
America." In Emerson's words:
"America means opportunity," and
opportunity comes through training to
receive it. To have such a train'ng
is to be truly free born, and this is
the birthright of each child of the re
public.
A friend at Aix-les-Mains once ar
gued with him that there is already
too much education, and that to in
crease it further ! s simply to swell the
volume of discontent. "I insisted."
Mr. Stanford said, "that there can not
be too much education any more than
too much health or intelligence. Do
you happen to know any man who has
been too well educated. Where does
he live? What is his address? If you
cannot find such a man, you cannot
speak of overeducation." There has
been unwise education or misfit, edu
cation. Some highly educated men
are neither wise nor lit, and there is a
kind of education that comes from
experience and not from books. But
with all this, too thorough or too
good a training no one ever had. Ig
norance is shadow. Education is light.
Nothing is more unpractical than
darkness, nothing is more practical
than sunshine.
Secret of Human Power.
Science is knowledge tested and set
in order, and each advance in knowl
<l ge cirrics with it a corresponding
increment of power. A machine, to
Mr. Stanford, was not a mere saver of
lal or. but an aid to labor, increasing
its efficiency and therefore adding to
the value of men. Hv greater knowl
edge of the forces of nature we ac
quire greater skill in turning these
forces '11 to man's service through the
harness of machinery. In increase of
scientific knowledge he found the se
cret of human power. An education
which does not disclose the secret of
power is unworthy the name. "We
may always advance toward the infi
nite," was a favorite saying of his.
He could find no limit to the develop
in lit of civilization. The possibilities
of human progress expressed to him
the measure of infinite goodness, in
his own words: "The beneficence of
the Creator toward man on earth, and
the possibilities of humanity, are one
and the same."
But in his forecast of the myriad
triumphs of applied science, he did not
forget that knowledge itself must pre
cede any use man can make of it.
Pure science must always go before
applied science. The higher forms of
thought have their place in mental
growth as necessities in the concrete
preparation for action,
In the new university he decreed
that "the work in applied science::
he decreed that "the work in applied
shall be carried along with that
in the pure sciences and the hu
manities. and that, so far as may be.
all lines of work included in the plan
of the university shall be equally fos
tered."
Itcnct'itN el' Vsseeialion.
Mr. Stanford's belief that literature
and engineering should be pursued
side by side was shown by his wish
to provide for each with equal gene.r

osity. And the students of each are
tlii' gainers by this relation. The de
votee of classical culture is strength
ened by his association with men to
whom their college work is part of
the serious duty of life. The student
of engineering stands with both feet
on tlie ground, li s success in life
depends on the exactness of his
knowledge of machinery and of the
basic principles of mechanics and
maihematics. He must be in dead
earnest if lie would succeed at all. On
the other hand, the student of realities
uains by his association with the poet,
the philosopher and the artist. The
finer aspects of life are brought to his
notice, and from this association re
sults tolerance and breadth of sym
( oeditcationa! \(ha»t:iges.
That worn n should receive higher
education as well as men was an ax
iom 'o Mr. Stanford. Coeducation was
taken for granted from the first, pud
the young women of Stanford have
■ ( v ;■ had to question the friendliness
I their welcome. "We have provid
ed." Mr. Stanford says"in the articles
of endowment, that the education of
tlie sexes shall be equal—deeming it.
of special importance that those who
are to be mothers of the future gen
eration shall be fitted to mold and di
rect th,' infantile mind at its most crit
ical period."
The leading argument for coeduca
tion is akin to one just indicated for
the uiron in one institution of the
various lines of literature, art, sci
ence. and applied technology.
In women's education, as planned
for women alone, the tendency is to
ward (he study of beauty and order.
Literature and language take prece
dence over science. Expression is
valued more highly than action. In
carrying this to an extreme, the ne
c ssary relat on of thought to action
becomes obscured. The scholarship
developed tends to be ineffective, be
cause it is not related to life. The
educated women are likely to master
technique, rather than art; method
than substance. She may know a
good deal, but be able to do nothing.
Often her views of life must undergo
nainful changes before she can find
her place in the world.
In schools for men alone, the re
verse condition often obtains. The
::cnse of reality obscures the element
of beauty and fitness. It is of great
advantage to both men and women to
meet on a plane of equality in edu
cation. Women are brought into con
tact, with men who can do things—
men in whom the sense of reality is
strong, and who have definite views in
life. This influence affects them for
good. It turns them away from sen
timentalism. It is opposed to un
wholesome forms of hysterical friend
ship. It. gives tone to their religious
thoughts and impulses. Above all, it
tends to encourage action governed
by ideals, as opposed to that resting
on caprice. It gives them better
standards of what is possible and im
possible, when the responsibility for
action is thrown upon them.
In like manner, the association
with wise, sane and healthy women
has its value for young men. This
value has never been fully realized,
even by the strongest advocates of
coeducation. It raises their ideals of
womanhood, and the highest manhood
must bp associated with such an ideal.
Meanly and Kitnes*.
While the work of the teachers must
make the kernel of the university, we
must rejoice that here at Palo Alto
even the husks are beautiful. Reality
and fitness are great forces in educa
tion. Every object with which the
young mind comes iti contact leaves
on it. its trace. "Nothing is unim
portant in the life of man," and the
least feature of our surroundings has
its influence, greater or less. "There
was a child went forth every day,"
Walt Whitman tells us. "and the first
object that it looked upon, that ob
lect it became." It may be for a mo
ment or an hour, or "for changing
vcb s of years." The essence of civ
'Mv.ation is exposure to vfiilnc: ami
humanizing influence " ' n- in
i university," ♦ "o <>-. "is
ivnrth more than a dol'ar ' ■' '" ,1 "and
" ery dollar spent in tinker n nuiv< r
itv beautiful will be i en,aid with in


( liancellor David Starr .lonian.
terest in the enriching of the students'
lives.
It has been a reproach to America
that for the best of her sons and
daughters she has done the least. She
lias built palaces for lunatics, idiots,
crippled and blind, —nay, even for
criminals and paupers. But the col
lege students —"the young men of
sound mind and earnest purposes, the
noblest treasures of the State," to
quote the words of President White,
"she has housed in vile barracks."
The student has no need for luxury.
Plain living has ever gone with high
thinking. But grace and fitness have
an educative power too often forgot
ten in this utilitarian age. These
long corridors with their stately
arches, these circles of waving palms,
will have their part in the students'
training as surely as the chemical lab
oratory or the seminary-room. Each
stone in the quadrangle shall teach its
lesson of grace and genuineness, and
this Valley of Santa Clara shall occu
py a warm place in every student's
heart. Pictures of this fair region will
cling to his memory amid the figures
of the draughting-room. He will not
forget the fine waves of our two moun
tain ranges, overarched by a soft blue
Grecian sky, nor the ancient oak trees,
nor the gently sloping fields, changing
from vivid green to richest yellow, as
the seasons change. The noble jnllars
of the gallery of art, its rich treas
ures, the choicest remains of the
ideals of past ages—all these, and a
hundred other things which each one
will find out for himself, shall fill his
mind with bright pictures, never to be
rubbed out in the wea,r of life. Thus
in the character of every student shall
be left some imperishable trace of the
beauty of the Stanford farm, the estate
of Palo Alto.
Influence of Character.
Above and beyond all learning is
the influence of character, the impulse
to virtue and piety which comes from
men whose lives show that virtue and
piety really exist. For the life of the
most exalted as well as the humblest
of men, there can be no nobler motto
than that inscribed by the great
scholar of the last century over his
home in Hammarby: "Innocue vivito;
numen adest." Live blameless; God
is near. "This," said Linnaeus, "is
the wisdom of my life."
Religious Freedom.
Whsn the University was founded,
it was provided that in its religious
life, as in its scientific investigations,
it should be wholly free from outside
control. No religious sect or organi
zation and no group of organizations
should have dominion over it. The
University should exist for its own
sake, to carry out its own purposes,
and to bring out its own results in
its own way.
In this regard the die is cast, once
for all. The choice of the founders
of the University was deliberate and
final. They chose the path of intel
lectual and religious freedom, in the
very interest of religion itself. Re
ligion is devotion in action. In its
higher reaches it must be individual,
because it is a function of the indiv
idual soul which must stand in per
petual protest against the religion
that finds its end in forms and cere
monies and organizations.
The .requirement was a simple re
flection of Mr. Stanford's own relig
ious character, as expressed in the
words of one very near to him: "If
a firm belief in a beneficent Creator,
a profound admiration for Jesus of
Nazareth and His teachings, and the
certainty of a personal life hereafter,
constitute religion, then Leland Stan
ford was a religious man. The nar
row walls of a creed could not confine
him; therefore, he was not a pro
fessed member of any church, for in
each confession of faith he found
something to which he could not sub
scribe. But for the principles of re
ligion he hijd a profound veneration;
in h's heart were the true sentiments
of Christianity, and ho often said that
in his opinion the Golden Rule was
the cornerstone of all religion."
RelMon must form the axis of per
sonal character, and its prime import

ance the university cannot ignore. To
attain its culture it may use indirect
rather than direct means, the influ
ence of effort and character rather
than the imposition of forms. To ac
cept ecclesiastical help is to invite
ecclesiastical control toward ecclesi
astical ends. In the grant of endow
ment it was required that the trustees
should "prohibit sectarian instruction,
but have taught in the university the
immortality of the soul, the existence
of an all-wise and benevolent Crea
tor. and that obedience to His laws
is the highest duty of man."
The founders believed truly that
freedom of thought and action would
promote morality and religion, that a
deeper, fuller religious life would
arise from the growth of the individ
ual, that only where the "winds of
freedom blow" will spring up the
highest type of religious development.
For character is formed from within
by the efforts and strivings and as
pirations of the individual. It can
never be imposed from without. The
will is made strong from choosing
the right, not from having right ac
tion enforced upon it. The life of man
is "made beautiful and sweet through
self-devotion and through self-re
straint." But this must be chosen
voluntarily, else it fails of its purpose.
Growth Through Ages.
It was Mr. Stanford's hope to leave
the University free to grow through
the coming ages. He would extend
no dead hand from the grave to limit
its activities or to control its move
ments. The deed of gift is in favor
of education pure and simple. It has
no hampering clause, and the only end
in view is that of the help of human
ity through the extension of knowl
edge. "We hope," he said, "that this
institution will endure through long
ages. Provisions regarding details of
management, however wise they may
be at present, might prove to be mis
chievous under conditions which may
arise in the future."
The growth of the University must
remain the best evidence of the
founder's wisdom. He had the sagac
ity to recognize the value of higher
education and the patriotism to give
the rewards of a successful life to its
advancement. He had the rare wis
dom to discriminate between the real
and the temporary in university organ
ization and management, and his pro
vision is for the genuine and the per
manent, not for that "which speedily
passes away." Still more rare, he had
the forethought to leave to each suc
ceeding generation, the duty of adapt
ing its details of administration and
methods to the needs of the time.
If the founders had said: "We will
found a university so strong that it
may endure for all the centuries,
whose organization shall be so free
and flexible that in each age it shall
reflect the best spirit of the time,"
they could not have given it greater
freedom of development than it has
today. For the glory of the univer
sity must lie in its freedom, in that
freedom which cannot fall into li
cense, nor lose itself in waywardness
—that freedom which knows but one
bond of control, the eternal truth of
God.
Perpetual Power.
When the University opened its
doors in 1891, Millicent Shinn printed
these words of prophecy: "Greater
than the achievement of lasting hon
or among one's fellow-men of later
generations, is it to become a living
power among them forever. It rarely
happens to one man and woman to
have both the power and the skill to
thus live after death, working and
shaping beneficently in the lives of
many—not of tens nor of hundreds,
but of thousands and tens of thou
sands, as the generations follow on.
Herein is the wisdom of money spent
in education, that each recipient of in
fluence becomes in his time a center
to transmit the same in every direc
tion. so that it multiplies forever in
geometric .ratio. The power to mold
unborn generations for good, to keen
one's hards mightily on human af
fairs after the flesh has been dust for
years, seems not onlv more than mor

tal, but more than man. Thus does
man become co-worker with God in
the shaping of the world to a good
outcome."
And this I said in my opening day
address, "The Golden Age of Califor
nia begins when its gold is used for
purposes like this. From such deeds
must rise the new California of the
coming century, no longer the Califor
nia of the gold-seeker and the adven
turer, but the abode of high-minded
men and women, trained in the wis
dom of the ages, and imbued with the
love of nature, the love of man, and
the love of God. And bright indeed
will be the future of our State if in
the usefulness every hope and prayer
of the founders shall be realized."
University Life
With those words of mine, spoken
twenty-four years ago, the University
began. "We come together today," I
said, "for the first time as teacher and
students. With this relation, the life
of the University begins. It is such
personal contact of young men and
young women with scholars and in
vestigators which constitutes the life
of the University. It is for us as
teachers and students in the Univer
sity's first year to lay the foundations
of a school which may last as long as
human civilization. Ours is the
youngest of the universities, but it is
heir to the wisdom of all the ages,
and with this inheritance it has the
promise of a rapid and sturdy growth
"But the future, with its glories and
responsibilities, will be in other
hands. It is ours at the beginning to
give the University its form, its ten
dencies, its customs. The power of
precedent will cause to be repeated
over again everything that we do —
our errors as well as our wisdom, it
becomes us, then, to begin work mod
estly, as under the eye of the coming
ages. We must lay the foundations
broad and firm, so as to give full sup
port to whatever edifice the future
may build. Ours is the humbler task,
but not the least in importance, and
our work will not be in vain if all we
do is done in sincerity. As sound as
the rocks from which these walls are
hewn should be the work of every
teacher who comes within them. To
the extent that this is true will the
University be successful. Unless its
work be thus 'wrought in sad sincer
ity' nothing can redeem it from fail
ure. In this feeling, and realizing,
too, that only the help we give to the
men and women whose lives we reach
can justify our presence here, we are
ready to begin our work.
"Our University has no history to
fall back upon; no memories of great
teachers to haunt its corridors; in
none of its rooms appear the traces
which show where a great man has
lived and worked. No tender asso
ciations cling, ivv-like, to its fresh,
new halls. It is hallowed by no tra
dition. it is hampered by none.
Traditions and associations it is ours
to make. From our work the future
of the University will grow, as the
splendid lily from the modest bulb."
Dr. Jordan delivered the annual
Founders' Day address in the Assem
bly Hall this morning upon the sub
ject of "The Foundation Ideals of Stan
ford University."
From an historical as well as a per
sonal viewpoint it is eminently fit
ting that Dr. Jordan should discourse
upon this theme, which will farm a
companion piece to the Chancellor's
"The Story of a Good Woman." The
latter also first appeared as a Found
ers' Day address, and was a eulogy
of the life of Mrs. Jane Lathrop Stan
ford, and a narrative of the history
of the University during the so-called
"dark days" between 1893 and 1899,
when the ultimate fate of the institu
tion was in constant doubt.
In treating his subject this morning
Dr. Jordan gave expression to the
ideals which inspired Senator Leland
Stanford in his conception of Stanford
University. Selecting the successful
system then in practice at Cornell
University as the most suitable for the
needs of Stanford, the Senator called
upon Andrew D. White, who was
mainly responsible for the efficiency
of Cornell, where he was then acting
president, to assume the duties of
chief executive at Stanford. In declin
ing White .recommended David Stan-
Jordan, then president of the Universi
ty of Indiana, for the position.
When the present Chancellor name
to Stanford he was the youngest uni
versity president, in po'nt of years, in
the country, and when he resigned he
was the oldest in point of service, a
fact of no little significance.
The important share which Dr.
David Starr Jordan had in forming, di
recting. and developing the "founda
tion 'deals" of Stanford University
need no comment.
The address of Dr. Jordan follows:
I)r. Jordan Introduces Speech.
When Charles Darwin felt himself
growing old, he sat down in his home
in Kent to write the story of his life —
fo.r his children. He wrote, he said, as
might a spirit from another world,
looking down on this one. not swayed
by any emotion, of hope, of fear, or
eagerness or uncertainty as to the
final end. And so, today, T wish in
some such disembodied fashion to tell
the story of the founding of a univer
sity, and of the purposes and ideas
with which it started out.

Twenty-four years is a short time
in the history of a nation or a univer
sity, which is a small and swiftly
changing nation within itself. It is a
long time in the life of a man, as those
who with me have spanned it can tes
tify.
The story of today will not go far
beyond the first day of October, 1891,
when we gathered in the northwest
gate of the quadrangle for the open
ing day.
Founder and President.
Purpose must come before action,
and in the very beginning there were
only two to frame this purpose, the
founder and the president. Leland
Stanford was then scarcely older than
I am now, and I was a mere "youth
of promise," from the simple-minded
east, a "new man," as the San Francis
co journals kindly put it, and Mr.
Stanford had a reputation wider than
the nation, a philosopher and a lover
of li s kind as well as a business man
and a statesman.
A ('auspicious Figure.
Leland Stanford had been for a gen
eration the most conspicious figure in
California. He was a .rich man, weal
thy through his own effort, and he
hoped to leave humanity better for his
riches. Especially he wished to bring
to the California he loved, and who, af
ter California's fash-on, ha.l f'nst, loved
him, the abundance of life, which is
the best gift of the University. Leland
Stanford had held many relations with
California. He was an actual pion
eer. When the Civil War broke out he
had no doubt of his position and he
stood for free speech in Sacramento,
when freedom was dangerous. He was
the war governor of the state, trusted
by Lincoln, and like Lincoln, he knew
how to count the cost in a difficult
crisis. He had been one of the four
men of Sacramento who saw the vision
of a railway over the Sierras. In 1891
he was United States Senator from
California, known to every one and be
loved by all who came near him.
Typically American.
His wide influence did not rise from
his wealth. Wealth and influence
sprang alike from his personality. He
was broad-minded and long-headed,
and his simplicity of life kept him al
ways in touch with the people. "He
was active," it was said, "when other

men were idle; he was generous when
other men were grasping; he was lof
ty when other men were base." He
was thoroughly a man, and a man of
the type we like to call American.
One word of praise of Stanford
clings to my memory. At his funeral
in 1893, Horatio Stebbins in his state
ly fashion told how the Greeks did
honor to a slain hero. Then turning
to the pallbearers, stalwart men from
the Southern Pacific, he said: "Gentle
up your strength a little, for 'tis a man
ye bear."
University Idealized.
The story of the death of the only
son is known to Stanford people. The
boy, young Leland, fell ill in Rome
from the mosquito-borne Roman fever.
After coming back to Florence while
convalescent, he died of failure of the
heart. After the long vigil of a dreary
night, Mr. Stanford awoke one morn
ing with these words on his lips: "The
children of California shall be my chil
dren." And this thought grew crystal
line as the dream of a great universi
ty. And in this plan, nis wife, Jane La
throp Stanford, gave him most loyal
service, which continued unshaken
throughout twelve years of lonely wid
owhood. The story of her love and de
votion I have told as well as I could on
another occasion, the parallel to this.
< aliforiiia tlie .Motif.
So the decision was made that the
beloved Palo Alto farm —famed for the
finest horses in the world —should be
come a university campus. The Uni
versity buildings should have a motif
from California. To this end the old
mission of San Juan Capistrano, near
the seashore above San Diego, founded
by Father Junlpero Serra more than a
century before, was chosen to give the
University its form. Appeal was made
to the greatest living architects, Henry
Hobson Richardson, of Boston, for
the best was none too good for the new
University. Richardson died before
any work was begun, but his partners,
Shepley, Rutan and Coolidge, took up
the plans in all essential respects just
as we see them now in stone. Freder
ick Law Olmsted devised the garden
effects, but his plans are as yet car
ried out only in part. The streets were
laid out, and at Mr. Stanford's request.
I named them for the early padres,
who led in the missions of California.
Among these are Salvatierra Street,
named for the Jesuit father who first
urged the California missions; Serra
Avenue, fo,r Junipero Serra, the Fran
ciscan who first began the work of
building them, performing marvels of
energy and patience in long marches up
and down the coast from La Paz to
Monterey, and in dealing with the be
setting Indians for whose salvation,
temporal and spiritual, the missions
themselves were planned. Lasuen
street is named for Firmin Lasuen, the
wise and self-contained successor to
the impulsive and enthusiastic Padre
Serra. Po.rtola, Arguello, and Alvara
do were the first governors of Califor
nia; Crespi its first historian, Costan
zo its first civil engineer. These with
Ortega, Rivera, and the rest, were
members of Portola's party of explora
tion who first saw the Golden Gate
and the bay belvnd it. They likened it
to a "Mediterranean Sea," and they
named it for their patron saint, San
Francisco of Assisi, who knew the lan
guage of the birds and even that of
the fishes. Meanwhile, and with char
acteristic energy, Mr. Stanford set out
to make his vision into fact. Articles
of endowment were drawn up, and
buildings we.re provided. A president
was found and he was sent forth to
choose fifteen professors. It was not
wise to have too many professors till
we knew whether students would
come. The press notices were not en
thusiastic. The New York Mail and
Express said: "There is as much need
of a university in California as there
is in Switzerland for an asylum for de
cayed sea-captains." And it was
prophesied that even the fifteen would
for years "lecture in marble halls to
empty benches." Rut the benches
were not empty, as we all know; the
never to be forgotten pioneers of '95
were all there, altogether to the num
ber of 465, and on the first of Octob
er, with all bright auspices of earth
and sky. of wealth and generosity, the
University began. Of the fifteen pro
fessors, oldest of the old guard, par
takers in all joy, worry and success,
ten still remain,—Branner, Stillman,
Marx, Jenkins, Sanford, Campbell. An
derson, Gilbert, G.riffin, and Elliott.
Meanwhile, these were the ideas or
the Founder, as he gave them to me in
many evenings together, the
stones of the quadrangle were leaping
to find their places.
How I came in the matter you will
find in the autobiography of President
White, of Cornell, if you are interested
to read.
Possibilities of Knowledge.
The need to train his own son first
turned Mr. Stanford's thoughts to edu
cational matters. His early acquaint
ance with Professor Agassiz, perhaps
the greatest of American teachers, di
rected his thought into channels of
wisdom. From Agassiz he derived a
realizing sense of the possibilities of
human knowledge and the impelling
force of man's intellectual needs, —
that "hunger and thi.rst after truth
which only the destitute student
knows." "Man's physical needs are
slight," he said, "but his intellectual
needs are hounded only by his capacity
to receive.'
Major System Valued.
The major-subject system, especially
characteristic of Stanford, but later
taken in part by several other univer
sities, among them Harvard, may be
traced in some degree back to Agassiz.
It was first devised in Indiana,, in
1887, by a committee of three, D,r. Bry
an. now president of Indiana, Dr. von
Jagemann. now professor in Harvard,
and myself. In framing the plan I
had in mind the oft repeated words of
Atrassiz: "A spec'alty is the backbone
of education." "The mind is made
strong by the thorough possession of
something." And those of us who be
lieved with President White in the de
mocracy of the mental powers, realized
that in the higher education of a stu
dent it is the man himself who can
best choose what the backbone of his
training should be. For in making a
student, there are but two types of im
pulses strong enough to count, to love

the work itself and to know how the
work is related to his future life.
Mr. Stanford believed that an essen
tial part of education was thorough
knowledge in some one line, so firmly
held as to be effective for practical re
sults. He believed in early choice of
profession. The course of study, how
ever broad and however long, should
in all its parts look toward effective
1 fe. The profession chosen early gives
a purpose and stimulus to all the in
termediate training. He saw clearly
the need of individualism in education,
and that the course of study should be
built around the individual man he is.
The supposed needs of the average
man, developed by a consensus of edu
cational philosophers do not suffice for
the actual man in actual life. We must
be fed with the food that is good for
us. It is for 11s that it must be adap
ted, not for some average man in some
overage age. The ready-made curri
culum belongs to the same category
as ready-made clothing. It is some
thing cheap and easy for the man with
out individual needs.
Democracy and Knowledge.
No other university has recognized
so distinctly as ours the absolute de
mocracy of knowledge. The earlier
traditions of Cornell pointed in this di
rection, and for this reason Mr. Stan
ford found in Cornell, rather than in
Harvard Yale, or Michigan, the
nearest existing approach to his
own ideal. It was Ezra Cornell's
hope "to found an institution where
any person could find instruction in
any study." Cornell and Stanford, in
so far as they are loyal to these tra
ditions, know neither favored students
nor favored studies. No class of men
is chosen to the exclusion of others,
and no class of studies is given a fal
lacious importance through force of
academic pressure or through inertia
of academic tradition. While various
kinds of knowledge are of varying
worth td different persons, each has
its own value to the world, and the
value to the individual must he de
termined in each case by itself. The
university should be no respecter of
persons. It is not called on to approve
or condemn the\various orders of ge
nius that come to it for training.
There has been no greater hindrance
to educational progress than the hler
rchy of studies, the fiction that certain
kinds of work had an invisible value
not to be measured by tangible results.
That the work of a university should
be essentially specialized, fitting the
individual for definite forms of higher
usefulness, was an idea constantly pre
sent with Mr. Stanford. He had no
interest in general education as an end
in itself. He had no desire to fit men
for a life of leisure, or for any life
which did not involve a close adaption
of means to ends.
No Educational Millinery.
As a practical man, accustomed to
go to the heart of things, Mr. Stanford
had little respect for educational mil
l'nery and for the conventionalities
which have grown up about the great
institutions of the Old World. He saw
clearly the value of thoroughness, the
need of freedom, the individuality of
development, but cared little for the
machinery by which these ends were
achieved. So it was decreed that tho
new university should be simple in its
organization, with only those details
of structure which the needs of the
times should develop within it. If it
must have precedents and traditions,
it must make its own. "I would have
this institution," he said, "help to fit.
men and women for usefulness in this
life, by 'ncreasing their individual
power of production, and by making
them good company for themselves and
others." Or, in my own words to
young men, spoken in this same time:
"The whole of your life must be spent
in your own company, and only the
educated man is good company for
himself."
And besides, "The world turns asid<>
to let any man pass who knows whi
ther he is going."
In proportion to the extent to which
it widens the range of human know
ledge and of human power, in that de

gree does an institution deserve the
name of university. A man content
with the truth that now is, and without
ambition to venture into the unknown,
is not the proper man to be a university
professor. The truth that now is be
longs to the lower schools. The value
of its original work is the best single
test by wh'ch a university may be
judged; and as it is the best, so is it
also the severest. The incentive for
research should be from within. It
cannot be applied from without.
In its public relations, the university
stands for infinite patience, the calm
tasting of ideas and ideals. It con
ducts no propaganda, it controls no
affairs of business. There is no one
it wishes to elect to office. It is the
judge of the principles of wisdom and
the ways of nature. The details of
action it must leave to men whose
business it is to guide the currents of
the moment.
Freedom and Truth.
It was our hope that we might give
to our students the priceless legacy of
the educated man, the power of know
ing what really is. The higher edu
cation should bring men into direct
contact with truth. It should help to
free them from the dead hands of old
traditions and to enable them to form
opinions worthy of the new evidence
each new day brings before them. An
educated man should not be the slave
of the past, not a copy of men who
have gone before him. He must be in
some degree the founder of a new in
tellectual dynasty; for each new think
er is a new type of man. Whatever
is true is the truest thing in the uni
verse, and mental and moral strength
alike come from our contact with it.
And so wo believed that influence that
gees out from these halls should em
phasize the value of truth. The es
sence of scholarship is to know some
thing which is absolutely true; to
have, in the words of Huxley, "some
knowledge to the certainty of which
no authority could add nor take away
one jot or tittle, and to which the
tradition of a thousand years is but
as the hearsay of yesterday." The
scholar, as was once said of our great
chemist, Benjamin Silliman, must have
"faith in truth as truth, faith that
there is a power in the universe good
enough to make trutli-telling safe and
strong enough to make truth-telling ef
fective." The personal influence of gen
uineness, as embodied in the life of a
teacher, is one of the strongest moral
forces which the school can bring to
its aid; for moral training comes not
mainly by precept, but by practice.
We may teach the value of truth to
our students by showing that we value
it ourselves.
Educational Instrument.
Mr. Stanford insisted as a vital prin
ciple that the university exists for
the benefit of the students, present,
past, and future. It has no exist
ence or function save as an instru
ment of education. To this principle
all others should be subordinate. In
his opening address, he said to the
students of the Pioneer Class: "You
are the most important factor in this
university. It is for your benefit that
it has been established."
No Test in Numbers.
That the new university would in
time attract great numbers of stu
dents, Mr. Stanford believed as a mat
ter of course, although he found In
California few who shared his optim
ism. But he was never deceived with
the cheap test of numbers in estimat
ing the value of institutions. He knew
that a few hundred men well trained
under high influences would count for
more than as many thousand, hurried
in droves over a ready-made curricu
lum by young tutors, themselves
scarcely out of college. So it was de
creed that numbers for numbers' sake
should never be a goal of Stanford
University. And he further made the
practical request that not one dollar
directly or indirectly should be spent
in advertising. The university has no
goods for which it is anxious to find
customers.
The greatest nepd of the student is
the teacher Mr. Stanford said: "In

order that the president may have the
assistance of a competent staff of pro
fessors, we have provided that the
best talent obtainable shall be pro
cured and that liberal compensation
shall always lie offered." Again lie
said: "Ample endowment may have
been provided, intelligent management
may secure large income, students
may present themselves In numbers,
but in the end the faculty makes or
mars the university."
Facility (Greatest Need.
Compared with the character of the
faculty, every other element in the
university is of relatively little im
portance. The chief duty of the col
lege president is the choice of teach
ers. If he lias learned the art of sur
rounding himself with men who are
clean, sane, and scholarly, most other
matters of university administration
will take care of themselves, lie can
not fail if he has good men around
him. And in the choice of teachers
the element of personal sanity seemed
of first importance to Mr. Stanford—
the ability to see things as they are.
The university chai.r should be a cen
ter of clear-seeing from which right
acting should rad ate.
Mr. Stanford said, "I hope the Uni
versity may begin where the State
University leaves off." By this he
meant to lay stress on technical, pro
fessional. and research work, activi
ties which were at that time very lit
tle developed at the State University.
He spoke approvingly of an institu
tion which should combine the special
features of Johns Hopkins and Cor
nell.
A professor to whom original in
vestigation is unknown should have
no place in a university. Men of com
monplace or second-hand scholarship
are of necsssity men of low ideals,
however much the fact may be dis
guised. A man of high ideals must be
an investigator. He must know and
think for himself. Only such as do
this can be really great as teachers.
Universities already begin to recog
nize that their most important profes
sors may be men who teach not in
classes, but only by contact with indiv
iduals, devoting time and strength to
advanced research. The presence and
example of the men who really know
may be worth to the student body a
hundred-fold more than the precepts
and drill of the others. They set
standards of thought. They help to
create the university spirit, without
which any college is but a grammar
school of a little higher pretensions.
University Atmosphere.
In the address on the first day in the
old quadrangle, I said: "If our work
is successful, our ideals will appear in
the daily life of the school. In a
school, as in a fortress, it is not the
form of the building, but the strength
of the materials, which determine its
effectiveness. With a garrison of
hearts of oak, it may not matter even
whether there be a fortress. What
ever its form, or its organization, or
its pretensions, the character of the
university is fixed by the men who
teach. "Have a university in shan
ties, nay in tents," Cardinal Newman
has said, "but have great teachers in
it." The university spirit flows oik
from these teachers, and its organiza
tion serves mainly to bring them to
gether. "Colleges only serve us," says
Emerson, "when their aim is not. to
drill, but to create; when they gath
er from afar every ray of various
genius to their hospitable halls, and
by their concentrated fires set the
heart of their youth in flames."
Strong men make universities strong.
A great man never fails to leave a
ureat mark on every youth with whom
he conies in contact. Too much em
phasis cannot be laid on this: that
the real purpose of the university or
ganization is to produce a university
atmosphere—such an atmosphere as
gathered itself around Arnold at Rug
b.v. around Dollinge.r at Munich,
around Linnaeus at Upsaln. around
Werner at Freiberg, around Agassiz
at Cambridge, around Hopkins at Wil
liamstown, around White at Ithaca,
around all great teachers everywhere.
Agassi/, once said: "The physical
suffering of humanity, the wants of
the poor, the craving of the hungry
and naked, appeal to the sympathies
of every one who has a human heart.
Hut there are necessities which only
the destitute student knows. There is
a hunger and thirst which only the
highest charity can understand and re
lieve; and 011 this solemn occasion
let me say that every dollar given for
higher education, in whatever depart
ment of knowledge, is l'kely to have
a greater influence on the future char
acter of our nation than even the
thousands, the hundred thousands,
and millions which'we have spent, or
are spending, to raise the many to ma
terial ease and comfort."
Presidential Powers.
Mr. Stanford laid much stress on
the work of the President of the Uni
versity. The hoard of trustees were
directed to give to him such powers
as would enable him, with his col
leagues. to control all educational pol
icies, and such that for their success
he might justly lie held responsible.
At some future time the presidency
of the American university may lie an
outworn office, its function to he taKOn
by a committee from the faculty, as
some now urge that it should be.
Hut this cannot be done in the period
of formation of the American univer
s'ty, and no American university has
yet passed its period of youth and
growth. In that lies its strength. Its
hope lies in its imperfection. It is
not born full-grown, as the German
universities have claimed to be. With
perfection, decline sets in, as these
univers'ties have clearly shown. Ev
ery forward movement needs a lead
er. "An institution is but the length
ened shadow of a man."
It is for the president to take the
initiative in all educational affairs, to
give the university its color and its
personality. lie must know how to
take advice and how to value it. The
more checks and balances on his ac
tion the better, but none should de
prive him of his initiative. It is for
him to seek and develop those rare
elements of feeling and character by
which one university is known from
another. And in our University we
tried to weld together such elements
to form what we fondly hoped men
would call the "Stanford Spirit."
Value of Keonomy.
It was the idea of the founders that
each student should be taught the
value of economy—that lavish expen
ditures bring neither happiness nor
success. "A student," it was said by
one of the founders, "will lie better
fitted to battle with the trials and trib
ulations of life, if he lias been taught
the worth of money, the necessity of
saving and of overcoming a desire to
imitate those who are better off in the
world's goods. For, when he has
learned how to save and how to con
trol inordinate desires, be will be rel
atively rich During the past three
and a half years of close observation
on my part, the importance of econ
uniy bas impressed itself forcibly up
on me, and I wish it to be taught to
all students of the university. Na
ture has made the surroundings of
the university beautiful, and the sub
stantial character of the buildings
gives them an appearance of luxury.
I wish this natural beauty and com
parative luxury to impress upon the
students the necessity of their preser
vation for the generations that are to
follow. The lesson thus taught will
remain with them through life and
help them to teach the lesson to
ethers. The un'versitv buildings and
grounds are for their use while stu
dents. in trust for students to come."
\i*l of
The value of the study of political
and social science as a remedy for
defects of government was clearly
seen by Mr. Stanford. "All govern
ments." he said, "at" governments by
public opinion, and in the long run
ever', people is a■ well governed as it
deserves." Hence increase of knowl
edge brin-'s about bett r government.
For help in such matters the people
bavr a ri hi to look to their un ! ', : r

sities and university men. It was his
theory that the art of government is
still in its infancy. "Legislation lias
not, as a rule, been a ainst the peo
ple, but it has not done the good tli it
it might." "No greater biow can be
struck at labor than that which ren
ders ts products insecure." In the
externum of volir't irv co-operation,
he saw a remedy for many present ills,
as lie siw in the lav ef mutual help
the essence of i ur Christian civiliza
tion. He said, in laying the corner
stone: "Out of these suggestions
urows the consider tion of the great
advantages, especially to the laboring
man, of cooperation, by which each
individual has the benefit of the intel
lectual and physical forces of his as
sociates. It is I \ tli • intelligent ap
plication of these |) j c'iiles that there
will le found th? greatest lever *.o
elevate the mass o r humanity, and
laws should h< f:;iincd to protect and
develop co-operat ve associations. . . .
They will accomplish all that is

sought to lie secured by labor leagues,
trades unions and other federations of
workmen, and will be free from the
objection of even impliedly attempt
i 11 to take the unauthorised 01
wrongful control ( 112 the property,
capital, or time of others."
li<>>:ilt > and Co-ojicmtieii,
One result of voluntary co-opera
tion, in .Mr. Stanford's view, would bo
the development of the spirit of loy
> alty. the most precious attribute of
[ the laboring man in any grade, in any
j field, to the interest or cause which
' he serves. One great evil of the pres
ent era of gigantic industrial organ
izations is that it takes no account of
the spirit of loyalty, without which
no man can do li s best work. The
huge trust does away with tlie feeling
of personal association. The equally
huge trades union, in many of its op
erations. strikes directly at the per
sonality of the individual workman.
It makes him merely a pawn to be
moved hither and thither in the game
of industrial war. In the long run,
j no enterprise can flourish, unless
' those who carry it on throw them
selvi s, heart and soul,' into its ser
vice. On the other hand..no one can
do a greater injury to the cause of
labor than to take loyalty out of the
category of working virtues. IJ is one
if the traditional good traits of ihr
healthy college man to be loyal to bis
j t'ollege. This virtue Mr. Stanford
would have cultivated in all effective
ways, and in loyalty on both sides lie
would find a practical < lution of most

112 the la! or troubles of today. That
he carried his ideas into his own prac
tice ir shown by the unflinching devo
tion of all his own employees of what
ever grad j throughout his life. They
were taught to bel eve in him. to be
lieve in th > worth of their own work,
a: d thi s to have respect for tliem
selw-. Much of the dheont ill of the
day has its origin in lack of self-re
spect. The pawn that is moved in the
game of sympathetic strike lias no
control over his own actions, and
then f< re : o respect for his own mo
tives. Th <!< veiop rent of intelligent,
vclur.tary co-i.peration. n the long
r ni, lrakeg the wtvkman more than a
machi '.e. If lie is such, in the long
rti" again, ho will re e've whatever
he deserves. 11 1 will be a factor in
c'vi'i r ior, when the unskilled, un
thinking laborer is not.
\\ iisi < i I abor.
\he - ■ it economic waste in labor
oft m engaged Mr. Stanford's atton
t'on, avd he found its remedy in edu-

•'tin". "Orce," ho faid, "tho great
"n )o c:f labor was to supply the
necessities of life; now, hut a small
portion of our people are so engaged.
' o: d. clothing and shelt.fr are com
non in our country to every provident
'lerscn, excepting, of course, in occa
sional accidental cases. The great
demard for I ilor is to supply what
may he termed Intellectual wants, to
which there is no limit, except that
of intelligence to conceive. If all the
j relations and obligations of man
j were properly understood, it would
I net he nec«vsary for people to make a
| burden of labor. Th > great masses of
I the toilers are now compelled to per
form such an amount of labor as
makes life often wearisome. \n intel
ligent system of education would cor
rect. this inequality. It would make
I
the humblest laborer's work more
I valuable, it would increase both the
| demand and supply for skilled labor,
and reduce the number of the non
producing class. It would dignify la
hor, and ultimately would go far to
wipe out the mere distinctions of
wealth and ancestry. It would achieve
| a. bloodless revolution and establish
j a republic of industry, merit and
; learning.
"Ilow near to that state we may be,
j or how far from it, we cannot tell. It
■ stents very far when we contemplate
the great standing a litres of Europe,
where over five millions of men (or
about one for every twelve adult
male i are marching about with gnus
on their shoulders to preserve the
•tea(' • of nations, while hovering near

them is an innumerable force of po
lice to preserve the peace of individ
uals; but when we remember the pos
sibilities of e vilizution and the power
of education, we can foresee ;i time
when these soldiers and policemen
shall be changed to useful, producing
citizens, engaged in lilting the bur
dens of the people instead of increas
ing them. And yet. extravagant as are
the nations of Europe in standing ar
mies and preparations for war, their
xtravagance in the waste of labor is
still greater. Education, by teaching
the intelligent use of machinery, is
the only remedy for such waste."
Education a Itirtbriglit.
Mr. Stanford believed that no edu
cational system could be complete in
which entrance to the university was
a detached privilege of the chosen
few. lie believed in the unbroken lad
der from the kindergarten to the uni
versity, a ladder that, each one should
be free to climb, as far as his ability
or energy should permit. He believed,
with lan Maclaren. in keeping the
path well trodden from the farmhouse
to the university, lie asked that this
sentence from the president's first, ad
dress be placed on the University Reg
ister: "A generous education is the
birthright of every man and woman in
America." In Emerson's words:
"America means opportunity," and
opportunity comes through training to
receive it. To have such a train'ng
is to be truly free born, and this is
the birthright of each child of the re
public.
A friend at Aix-les-Mains once ar
gued with him that there is already
too much education, and that to in
crease it further ! s simply to swell the
volume of discontent. "I insisted."
Mr. Stanford said, "that there can not
be too much education any more than
too much health or intelligence. Do
you happen to know any man who has
been too well educated. Where does
he live? What is his address? If you
cannot find such a man, you cannot
speak of overeducation." There has
been unwise education or misfit, edu
cation. Some highly educated men
are neither wise nor lit, and there is a
kind of education that comes from
experience and not from books. But
with all this, too thorough or too
good a training no one ever had. Ig
norance is shadow. Education is light.
Nothing is more unpractical than
darkness, nothing is more practical
than sunshine.
Secret of Human Power.
Science is knowledge tested and set
in order, and each advance in knowl
<l ge cirrics with it a corresponding
increment of power. A machine, to
Mr. Stanford, was not a mere saver of
lal or. but an aid to labor, increasing
its efficiency and therefore adding to
the value of men. Hv greater knowl
edge of the forces of nature we ac
quire greater skill in turning these
forces '11 to man's service through the
harness of machinery. In increase of
scientific knowledge he found the se
cret of human power. An education
which does not disclose the secret of
power is unworthy the name. "We
may always advance toward the infi
nite," was a favorite saying of his.
He could find no limit to the develop
in lit of civilization. The possibilities
of human progress expressed to him
the measure of infinite goodness, in
his own words: "The beneficence of
the Creator toward man on earth, and
the possibilities of humanity, are one
and the same."
But in his forecast of the myriad
triumphs of applied science, he did not
forget that knowledge itself must pre
cede any use man can make of it.
Pure science must always go before
applied science. The higher forms of
thought have their place in mental
growth as necessities in the concrete
preparation for action,
In the new university he decreed
that "the work in applied science::
he decreed that "the work in applied
shall be carried along with that
in the pure sciences and the hu
manities. and that, so far as may be.
all lines of work included in the plan
of the university shall be equally fos
tered."
Itcnct'itN el' Vsseeialion.
Mr. Stanford's belief that literature
and engineering should be pursued
side by side was shown by his wish
to provide for each with equal gene.r

osity. And the students of each are
tlii' gainers by this relation. The de
votee of classical culture is strength
ened by his association with men to
whom their college work is part of
the serious duty of life. The student
of engineering stands with both feet
on tlie ground, li s success in life
depends on the exactness of his
knowledge of machinery and of the
basic principles of mechanics and
maihematics. He must be in dead
earnest if lie would succeed at all. On
the other hand, the student of realities
uains by his association with the poet,
the philosopher and the artist. The
finer aspects of life are brought to his
notice, and from this association re
sults tolerance and breadth of sym
( oeditcationa! \(ha»t:iges.
That worn n should receive higher
education as well as men was an ax
iom 'o Mr. Stanford. Coeducation was
taken for granted from the first, pud
the young women of Stanford have
■ ( v ;■ had to question the friendliness
I their welcome. "We have provid
ed." Mr. Stanford says"in the articles
of endowment, that the education of
tlie sexes shall be equal—deeming it.
of special importance that those who
are to be mothers of the future gen
eration shall be fitted to mold and di
rect th,' infantile mind at its most crit
ical period."
The leading argument for coeduca
tion is akin to one just indicated for
the uiron in one institution of the
various lines of literature, art, sci
ence. and applied technology.
In women's education, as planned
for women alone, the tendency is to
ward (he study of beauty and order.
Literature and language take prece
dence over science. Expression is
valued more highly than action. In
carrying this to an extreme, the ne
c ssary relat on of thought to action
becomes obscured. The scholarship
developed tends to be ineffective, be
cause it is not related to life. The
educated women are likely to master
technique, rather than art; method
than substance. She may know a
good deal, but be able to do nothing.
Often her views of life must undergo
nainful changes before she can find
her place in the world.
In schools for men alone, the re
verse condition often obtains. The
::cnse of reality obscures the element
of beauty and fitness. It is of great
advantage to both men and women to
meet on a plane of equality in edu
cation. Women are brought into con
tact, with men who can do things—
men in whom the sense of reality is
strong, and who have definite views in
life. This influence affects them for
good. It turns them away from sen
timentalism. It is opposed to un
wholesome forms of hysterical friend
ship. It. gives tone to their religious
thoughts and impulses. Above all, it
tends to encourage action governed
by ideals, as opposed to that resting
on caprice. It gives them better
standards of what is possible and im
possible, when the responsibility for
action is thrown upon them.
In like manner, the association
with wise, sane and healthy women
has its value for young men. This
value has never been fully realized,
even by the strongest advocates of
coeducation. It raises their ideals of
womanhood, and the highest manhood
must bp associated with such an ideal.
Meanly and Kitnes*.
While the work of the teachers must
make the kernel of the university, we
must rejoice that here at Palo Alto
even the husks are beautiful. Reality
and fitness are great forces in educa
tion. Every object with which the
young mind comes iti contact leaves
on it. its trace. "Nothing is unim
portant in the life of man," and the
least feature of our surroundings has
its influence, greater or less. "There
was a child went forth every day,"
Walt Whitman tells us. "and the first
object that it looked upon, that ob
lect it became." It may be for a mo
ment or an hour, or "for changing
vcb s of years." The essence of civ
'Mv.ation is exposure to vfiilnc: ami
humanizing influence " ' n- in
i university," ♦ "o <>-. "is
ivnrth more than a dol'ar ' ■' '" ,1 "and
" ery dollar spent in tinker n nuiv< r
itv beautiful will be i en,aid with in


( liancellor David Starr .lonian.
terest in the enriching of the students'
lives.
It has been a reproach to America
that for the best of her sons and
daughters she has done the least. She
lias built palaces for lunatics, idiots,
crippled and blind, —nay, even for
criminals and paupers. But the col
lege students —"the young men of
sound mind and earnest purposes, the
noblest treasures of the State," to
quote the words of President White,
"she has housed in vile barracks."
The student has no need for luxury.
Plain living has ever gone with high
thinking. But grace and fitness have
an educative power too often forgot
ten in this utilitarian age. These
long corridors with their stately
arches, these circles of waving palms,
will have their part in the students'
training as surely as the chemical lab
oratory or the seminary-room. Each
stone in the quadrangle shall teach its
lesson of grace and genuineness, and
this Valley of Santa Clara shall occu
py a warm place in every student's
heart. Pictures of this fair region will
cling to his memory amid the figures
of the draughting-room. He will not
forget the fine waves of our two moun
tain ranges, overarched by a soft blue
Grecian sky, nor the ancient oak trees,
nor the gently sloping fields, changing
from vivid green to richest yellow, as
the seasons change. The noble jnllars
of the gallery of art, its rich treas
ures, the choicest remains of the
ideals of past ages—all these, and a
hundred other things which each one
will find out for himself, shall fill his
mind with bright pictures, never to be
rubbed out in the wea,r of life. Thus
in the character of every student shall
be left some imperishable trace of the
beauty of the Stanford farm, the estate
of Palo Alto.
Influence of Character.
Above and beyond all learning is
the influence of character, the impulse
to virtue and piety which comes from
men whose lives show that virtue and
piety really exist. For the life of the
most exalted as well as the humblest
of men, there can be no nobler motto
than that inscribed by the great
scholar of the last century over his
home in Hammarby: "Innocue vivito;
numen adest." Live blameless; God
is near. "This," said Linnaeus, "is
the wisdom of my life."
Religious Freedom.
Whsn the University was founded,
it was provided that in its religious
life, as in its scientific investigations,
it should be wholly free from outside
control. No religious sect or organi
zation and no group of organizations
should have dominion over it. The
University should exist for its own
sake, to carry out its own purposes,
and to bring out its own results in
its own way.
In this regard the die is cast, once
for all. The choice of the founders
of the University was deliberate and
final. They chose the path of intel
lectual and religious freedom, in the
very interest of religion itself. Re
ligion is devotion in action. In its
higher reaches it must be individual,
because it is a function of the indiv
idual soul which must stand in per
petual protest against the religion
that finds its end in forms and cere
monies and organizations.
The .requirement was a simple re
flection of Mr. Stanford's own relig
ious character, as expressed in the
words of one very near to him: "If
a firm belief in a beneficent Creator,
a profound admiration for Jesus of
Nazareth and His teachings, and the
certainty of a personal life hereafter,
constitute religion, then Leland Stan
ford was a religious man. The nar
row walls of a creed could not confine
him; therefore, he was not a pro
fessed member of any church, for in
each confession of faith he found
something to which he could not sub
scribe. But for the principles of re
ligion he hijd a profound veneration;
in h's heart were the true sentiments
of Christianity, and ho often said that
in his opinion the Golden Rule was
the cornerstone of all religion."
RelMon must form the axis of per
sonal character, and its prime import

ance the university cannot ignore. To
attain its culture it may use indirect
rather than direct means, the influ
ence of effort and character rather
than the imposition of forms. To ac
cept ecclesiastical help is to invite
ecclesiastical control toward ecclesi
astical ends. In the grant of endow
ment it was required that the trustees
should "prohibit sectarian instruction,
but have taught in the university the
immortality of the soul, the existence
of an all-wise and benevolent Crea
tor. and that obedience to His laws
is the highest duty of man."
The founders believed truly that
freedom of thought and action would
promote morality and religion, that a
deeper, fuller religious life would
arise from the growth of the individ
ual, that only where the "winds of
freedom blow" will spring up the
highest type of religious development.
For character is formed from within
by the efforts and strivings and as
pirations of the individual. It can
never be imposed from without. The
will is made strong from choosing
the right, not from having right ac
tion enforced upon it. The life of man
is "made beautiful and sweet through
self-devotion and through self-re
straint." But this must be chosen
voluntarily, else it fails of its purpose.
Growth Through Ages.
It was Mr. Stanford's hope to leave
the University free to grow through
the coming ages. He would extend
no dead hand from the grave to limit
its activities or to control its move
ments. The deed of gift is in favor
of education pure and simple. It has
no hampering clause, and the only end
in view is that of the help of human
ity through the extension of knowl
edge. "We hope," he said, "that this
institution will endure through long
ages. Provisions regarding details of
management, however wise they may
be at present, might prove to be mis
chievous under conditions which may
arise in the future."
The growth of the University must
remain the best evidence of the
founder's wisdom. He had the sagac
ity to recognize the value of higher
education and the patriotism to give
the rewards of a successful life to its
advancement. He had the rare wis
dom to discriminate between the real
and the temporary in university organ
ization and management, and his pro
vision is for the genuine and the per
manent, not for that "which speedily
passes away." Still more rare, he had
the forethought to leave to each suc
ceeding generation, the duty of adapt
ing its details of administration and
methods to the needs of the time.
If the founders had said: "We will
found a university so strong that it
may endure for all the centuries,
whose organization shall be so free
and flexible that in each age it shall
reflect the best spirit of the time,"
they could not have given it greater
freedom of development than it has
today. For the glory of the univer
sity must lie in its freedom, in that
freedom which cannot fall into li
cense, nor lose itself in waywardness
—that freedom which knows but one
bond of control, the eternal truth of
God.
Perpetual Power.
When the University opened its
doors in 1891, Millicent Shinn printed
these words of prophecy: "Greater
than the achievement of lasting hon
or among one's fellow-men of later
generations, is it to become a living
power among them forever. It rarely
happens to one man and woman to
have both the power and the skill to
thus live after death, working and
shaping beneficently in the lives of
many—not of tens nor of hundreds,
but of thousands and tens of thou
sands, as the generations follow on.
Herein is the wisdom of money spent
in education, that each recipient of in
fluence becomes in his time a center
to transmit the same in every direc
tion. so that it multiplies forever in
geometric .ratio. The power to mold
unborn generations for good, to keen
one's hards mightily on human af
fairs after the flesh has been dust for
years, seems not onlv more than mor

tal, but more than man. Thus does
man become co-worker with God in
the shaping of the world to a good
outcome."
And this I said in my opening day
address, "The Golden Age of Califor
nia begins when its gold is used for
purposes like this. From such deeds
must rise the new California of the
coming century, no longer the Califor
nia of the gold-seeker and the adven
turer, but the abode of high-minded
men and women, trained in the wis
dom of the ages, and imbued with the
love of nature, the love of man, and
the love of God. And bright indeed
will be the future of our State if in
the usefulness every hope and prayer
of the founders shall be realized."
University Life
With those words of mine, spoken
twenty-four years ago, the University
began. "We come together today," I
said, "for the first time as teacher and
students. With this relation, the life
of the University begins. It is such
personal contact of young men and
young women with scholars and in
vestigators which constitutes the life
of the University. It is for us as
teachers and students in the Univer
sity's first year to lay the foundations
of a school which may last as long as
human civilization. Ours is the
youngest of the universities, but it is
heir to the wisdom of all the ages,
and with this inheritance it has the
promise of a rapid and sturdy growth
"But the future, with its glories and
responsibilities, will be in other
hands. It is ours at the beginning to
give the University its form, its ten
dencies, its customs. The power of
precedent will cause to be repeated
over again everything that we do —
our errors as well as our wisdom, it
becomes us, then, to begin work mod
estly, as under the eye of the coming
ages. We must lay the foundations
broad and firm, so as to give full sup
port to whatever edifice the future
may build. Ours is the humbler task,
but not the least in importance, and
our work will not be in vain if all we
do is done in sincerity. As sound as
the rocks from which these walls are
hewn should be the work of every
teacher who comes within them. To
the extent that this is true will the
University be successful. Unless its
work be thus 'wrought in sad sincer
ity' nothing can redeem it from fail
ure. In this feeling, and realizing,
too, that only the help we give to the
men and women whose lives we reach
can justify our presence here, we are
ready to begin our work.
"Our University has no history to
fall back upon; no memories of great
teachers to haunt its corridors; in
none of its rooms appear the traces
which show where a great man has
lived and worked. No tender asso
ciations cling, ivv-like, to its fresh,
new halls. It is hallowed by no tra
dition. it is hampered by none.
Traditions and associations it is ours
to make. From our work the future
of the University will grow, as the
splendid lily from the modest bulb."
Dr. Jordan delivered the annual
Founders' Day address in the Assem
bly Hall this morning upon the sub
ject of "The Foundation Ideals of Stan
ford University."
From an historical as well as a per
sonal viewpoint it is eminently fit
ting that Dr. Jordan should discourse
upon this theme, which will farm a
companion piece to the Chancellor's
"The Story of a Good Woman." The
latter also first appeared as a Found
ers' Day address, and was a eulogy
of the life of Mrs. Jane Lathrop Stan
ford, and a narrative of the history
of the University during the so-called
"dark days" between 1893 and 1899,
when the ultimate fate of the institu
tion was in constant doubt.
In treating his subject this morning
Dr. Jordan gave expression to the
ideals which inspired Senator Leland
Stanford in his conception of Stanford
University. Selecting the successful
system then in practice at Cornell
University as the most suitable for the
needs of Stanford, the Senator called
upon Andrew D. White, who was
mainly responsible for the efficiency
of Cornell, where he was then acting
president, to assume the duties of
chief executive at Stanford. In declin
ing White .recommended David Stan-
Jordan, then president of the Universi
ty of Indiana, for the position.
When the present Chancellor name
to Stanford he was the youngest uni
versity president, in po'nt of years, in
the country, and when he resigned he
was the oldest in point of service, a
fact of no little significance.
The important share which Dr.
David Starr Jordan had in forming, di
recting. and developing the "founda
tion 'deals" of Stanford University
need no comment.
The address of Dr. Jordan follows:
I)r. Jordan Introduces Speech.
When Charles Darwin felt himself
growing old, he sat down in his home
in Kent to write the story of his life —
fo.r his children. He wrote, he said, as
might a spirit from another world,
looking down on this one. not swayed
by any emotion, of hope, of fear, or
eagerness or uncertainty as to the
final end. And so, today, T wish in
some such disembodied fashion to tell
the story of the founding of a univer
sity, and of the purposes and ideas
with which it started out.

Twenty-four years is a short time
in the history of a nation or a univer
sity, which is a small and swiftly
changing nation within itself. It is a
long time in the life of a man, as those
who with me have spanned it can tes
tify.
The story of today will not go far
beyond the first day of October, 1891,
when we gathered in the northwest
gate of the quadrangle for the open
ing day.
Founder and President.
Purpose must come before action,
and in the very beginning there were
only two to frame this purpose, the
founder and the president. Leland
Stanford was then scarcely older than
I am now, and I was a mere "youth
of promise," from the simple-minded
east, a "new man," as the San Francis
co journals kindly put it, and Mr.
Stanford had a reputation wider than
the nation, a philosopher and a lover
of li s kind as well as a business man
and a statesman.
A ('auspicious Figure.
Leland Stanford had been for a gen
eration the most conspicious figure in
California. He was a .rich man, weal
thy through his own effort, and he
hoped to leave humanity better for his
riches. Especially he wished to bring
to the California he loved, and who, af
ter California's fash-on, ha.l f'nst, loved
him, the abundance of life, which is
the best gift of the University. Leland
Stanford had held many relations with
California. He was an actual pion
eer. When the Civil War broke out he
had no doubt of his position and he
stood for free speech in Sacramento,
when freedom was dangerous. He was
the war governor of the state, trusted
by Lincoln, and like Lincoln, he knew
how to count the cost in a difficult
crisis. He had been one of the four
men of Sacramento who saw the vision
of a railway over the Sierras. In 1891
he was United States Senator from
California, known to every one and be
loved by all who came near him.
Typically American.
His wide influence did not rise from
his wealth. Wealth and influence
sprang alike from his personality. He
was broad-minded and long-headed,
and his simplicity of life kept him al
ways in touch with the people. "He
was active," it was said, "when other

men were idle; he was generous when
other men were grasping; he was lof
ty when other men were base." He
was thoroughly a man, and a man of
the type we like to call American.
One word of praise of Stanford
clings to my memory. At his funeral
in 1893, Horatio Stebbins in his state
ly fashion told how the Greeks did
honor to a slain hero. Then turning
to the pallbearers, stalwart men from
the Southern Pacific, he said: "Gentle
up your strength a little, for 'tis a man
ye bear."
University Idealized.
The story of the death of the only
son is known to Stanford people. The
boy, young Leland, fell ill in Rome
from the mosquito-borne Roman fever.
After coming back to Florence while
convalescent, he died of failure of the
heart. After the long vigil of a dreary
night, Mr. Stanford awoke one morn
ing with these words on his lips: "The
children of California shall be my chil
dren." And this thought grew crystal
line as the dream of a great universi
ty. And in this plan, nis wife, Jane La
throp Stanford, gave him most loyal
service, which continued unshaken
throughout twelve years of lonely wid
owhood. The story of her love and de
votion I have told as well as I could on
another occasion, the parallel to this.
< aliforiiia tlie .Motif.
So the decision was made that the
beloved Palo Alto farm —famed for the
finest horses in the world —should be
come a university campus. The Uni
versity buildings should have a motif
from California. To this end the old
mission of San Juan Capistrano, near
the seashore above San Diego, founded
by Father Junlpero Serra more than a
century before, was chosen to give the
University its form. Appeal was made
to the greatest living architects, Henry
Hobson Richardson, of Boston, for
the best was none too good for the new
University. Richardson died before
any work was begun, but his partners,
Shepley, Rutan and Coolidge, took up
the plans in all essential respects just
as we see them now in stone. Freder
ick Law Olmsted devised the garden
effects, but his plans are as yet car
ried out only in part. The streets were
laid out, and at Mr. Stanford's request.
I named them for the early padres,
who led in the missions of California.
Among these are Salvatierra Street,
named for the Jesuit father who first
urged the California missions; Serra
Avenue, fo,r Junipero Serra, the Fran
ciscan who first began the work of
building them, performing marvels of
energy and patience in long marches up
and down the coast from La Paz to
Monterey, and in dealing with the be
setting Indians for whose salvation,
temporal and spiritual, the missions
themselves were planned. Lasuen
street is named for Firmin Lasuen, the
wise and self-contained successor to
the impulsive and enthusiastic Padre
Serra. Po.rtola, Arguello, and Alvara
do were the first governors of Califor
nia; Crespi its first historian, Costan
zo its first civil engineer. These with
Ortega, Rivera, and the rest, were
members of Portola's party of explora
tion who first saw the Golden Gate
and the bay belvnd it. They likened it
to a "Mediterranean Sea," and they
named it for their patron saint, San
Francisco of Assisi, who knew the lan
guage of the birds and even that of
the fishes. Meanwhile, and with char
acteristic energy, Mr. Stanford set out
to make his vision into fact. Articles
of endowment were drawn up, and
buildings we.re provided. A president
was found and he was sent forth to
choose fifteen professors. It was not
wise to have too many professors till
we knew whether students would
come. The press notices were not en
thusiastic. The New York Mail and
Express said: "There is as much need
of a university in California as there
is in Switzerland for an asylum for de
cayed sea-captains." And it was
prophesied that even the fifteen would
for years "lecture in marble halls to
empty benches." Rut the benches
were not empty, as we all know; the
never to be forgotten pioneers of '95
were all there, altogether to the num
ber of 465, and on the first of Octob
er, with all bright auspices of earth
and sky. of wealth and generosity, the
University began. Of the fifteen pro
fessors, oldest of the old guard, par
takers in all joy, worry and success,
ten still remain,—Branner, Stillman,
Marx, Jenkins, Sanford, Campbell. An
derson, Gilbert, G.riffin, and Elliott.
Meanwhile, these were the ideas or
the Founder, as he gave them to me in
many evenings together, the
stones of the quadrangle were leaping
to find their places.
How I came in the matter you will
find in the autobiography of President
White, of Cornell, if you are interested
to read.
Possibilities of Knowledge.
The need to train his own son first
turned Mr. Stanford's thoughts to edu
cational matters. His early acquaint
ance with Professor Agassiz, perhaps
the greatest of American teachers, di
rected his thought into channels of
wisdom. From Agassiz he derived a
realizing sense of the possibilities of
human knowledge and the impelling
force of man's intellectual needs, —
that "hunger and thi.rst after truth
which only the destitute student
knows." "Man's physical needs are
slight," he said, "but his intellectual
needs are hounded only by his capacity
to receive.'
Major System Valued.
The major-subject system, especially
characteristic of Stanford, but later
taken in part by several other univer
sities, among them Harvard, may be
traced in some degree back to Agassiz.
It was first devised in Indiana,, in
1887, by a committee of three, D,r. Bry
an. now president of Indiana, Dr. von
Jagemann. now professor in Harvard,
and myself. In framing the plan I
had in mind the oft repeated words of
Atrassiz: "A spec'alty is the backbone
of education." "The mind is made
strong by the thorough possession of
something." And those of us who be
lieved with President White in the de
mocracy of the mental powers, realized
that in the higher education of a stu
dent it is the man himself who can
best choose what the backbone of his
training should be. For in making a
student, there are but two types of im
pulses strong enough to count, to love

the work itself and to know how the
work is related to his future life.
Mr. Stanford believed that an essen
tial part of education was thorough
knowledge in some one line, so firmly
held as to be effective for practical re
sults. He believed in early choice of
profession. The course of study, how
ever broad and however long, should
in all its parts look toward effective
1 fe. The profession chosen early gives
a purpose and stimulus to all the in
termediate training. He saw clearly
the need of individualism in education,
and that the course of study should be
built around the individual man he is.
The supposed needs of the average
man, developed by a consensus of edu
cational philosophers do not suffice for
the actual man in actual life. We must
be fed with the food that is good for
us. It is for 11s that it must be adap
ted, not for some average man in some
overage age. The ready-made curri
culum belongs to the same category
as ready-made clothing. It is some
thing cheap and easy for the man with
out individual needs.
Democracy and Knowledge.
No other university has recognized
so distinctly as ours the absolute de
mocracy of knowledge. The earlier
traditions of Cornell pointed in this di
rection, and for this reason Mr. Stan
ford found in Cornell, rather than in
Harvard Yale, or Michigan, the
nearest existing approach to his
own ideal. It was Ezra Cornell's
hope "to found an institution where
any person could find instruction in
any study." Cornell and Stanford, in
so far as they are loyal to these tra
ditions, know neither favored students
nor favored studies. No class of men
is chosen to the exclusion of others,
and no class of studies is given a fal
lacious importance through force of
academic pressure or through inertia
of academic tradition. While various
kinds of knowledge are of varying
worth td different persons, each has
its own value to the world, and the
value to the individual must he de
termined in each case by itself. The
university should be no respecter of
persons. It is not called on to approve
or condemn the\various orders of ge
nius that come to it for training.
There has been no greater hindrance
to educational progress than the hler
rchy of studies, the fiction that certain
kinds of work had an invisible value
not to be measured by tangible results.
That the work of a university should
be essentially specialized, fitting the
individual for definite forms of higher
usefulness, was an idea constantly pre
sent with Mr. Stanford. He had no
interest in general education as an end
in itself. He had no desire to fit men
for a life of leisure, or for any life
which did not involve a close adaption
of means to ends.
No Educational Millinery.
As a practical man, accustomed to
go to the heart of things, Mr. Stanford
had little respect for educational mil
l'nery and for the conventionalities
which have grown up about the great
institutions of the Old World. He saw
clearly the value of thoroughness, the
need of freedom, the individuality of
development, but cared little for the
machinery by which these ends were
achieved. So it was decreed that tho
new university should be simple in its
organization, with only those details
of structure which the needs of the
times should develop within it. If it
must have precedents and traditions,
it must make its own. "I would have
this institution," he said, "help to fit.
men and women for usefulness in this
life, by 'ncreasing their individual
power of production, and by making
them good company for themselves and
others." Or, in my own words to
young men, spoken in this same time:
"The whole of your life must be spent
in your own company, and only the
educated man is good company for
himself."
And besides, "The world turns asid<>
to let any man pass who knows whi
ther he is going."
In proportion to the extent to which
it widens the range of human know
ledge and of human power, in that de

gree does an institution deserve the
name of university. A man content
with the truth that now is, and without
ambition to venture into the unknown,
is not the proper man to be a university
professor. The truth that now is be
longs to the lower schools. The value
of its original work is the best single
test by wh'ch a university may be
judged; and as it is the best, so is it
also the severest. The incentive for
research should be from within. It
cannot be applied from without.
In its public relations, the university
stands for infinite patience, the calm
tasting of ideas and ideals. It con
ducts no propaganda, it controls no
affairs of business. There is no one
it wishes to elect to office. It is the
judge of the principles of wisdom and
the ways of nature. The details of
action it must leave to men whose
business it is to guide the currents of
the moment.
Freedom and Truth.
It was our hope that we might give
to our students the priceless legacy of
the educated man, the power of know
ing what really is. The higher edu
cation should bring men into direct
contact with truth. It should help to
free them from the dead hands of old
traditions and to enable them to form
opinions worthy of the new evidence
each new day brings before them. An
educated man should not be the slave
of the past, not a copy of men who
have gone before him. He must be in
some degree the founder of a new in
tellectual dynasty; for each new think
er is a new type of man. Whatever
is true is the truest thing in the uni
verse, and mental and moral strength
alike come from our contact with it.
And so wo believed that influence that
gees out from these halls should em
phasize the value of truth. The es
sence of scholarship is to know some
thing which is absolutely true; to
have, in the words of Huxley, "some
knowledge to the certainty of which
no authority could add nor take away
one jot or tittle, and to which the
tradition of a thousand years is but
as the hearsay of yesterday." The
scholar, as was once said of our great
chemist, Benjamin Silliman, must have
"faith in truth as truth, faith that
there is a power in the universe good
enough to make trutli-telling safe and
strong enough to make truth-telling ef
fective." The personal influence of gen
uineness, as embodied in the life of a
teacher, is one of the strongest moral
forces which the school can bring to
its aid; for moral training comes not
mainly by precept, but by practice.
We may teach the value of truth to
our students by showing that we value
it ourselves.
Educational Instrument.
Mr. Stanford insisted as a vital prin
ciple that the university exists for
the benefit of the students, present,
past, and future. It has no exist
ence or function save as an instru
ment of education. To this principle
all others should be subordinate. In
his opening address, he said to the
students of the Pioneer Class: "You
are the most important factor in this
university. It is for your benefit that
it has been established."
No Test in Numbers.
That the new university would in
time attract great numbers of stu
dents, Mr. Stanford believed as a mat
ter of course, although he found In
California few who shared his optim
ism. But he was never deceived with
the cheap test of numbers in estimat
ing the value of institutions. He knew
that a few hundred men well trained
under high influences would count for
more than as many thousand, hurried
in droves over a ready-made curricu
lum by young tutors, themselves
scarcely out of college. So it was de
creed that numbers for numbers' sake
should never be a goal of Stanford
University. And he further made the
practical request that not one dollar
directly or indirectly should be spent
in advertising. The university has no
goods for which it is anxious to find
customers.
The greatest nepd of the student is
the teacher Mr. Stanford said: "In

order that the president may have the
assistance of a competent staff of pro
fessors, we have provided that the
best talent obtainable shall be pro
cured and that liberal compensation
shall always lie offered." Again lie
said: "Ample endowment may have
been provided, intelligent management
may secure large income, students
may present themselves In numbers,
but in the end the faculty makes or
mars the university."
Facility (Greatest Need.
Compared with the character of the
faculty, every other element in the
university is of relatively little im
portance. The chief duty of the col
lege president is the choice of teach
ers. If he lias learned the art of sur
rounding himself with men who are
clean, sane, and scholarly, most other
matters of university administration
will take care of themselves, lie can
not fail if he has good men around
him. And in the choice of teachers
the element of personal sanity seemed
of first importance to Mr. Stanford—
the ability to see things as they are.
The university chai.r should be a cen
ter of clear-seeing from which right
acting should rad ate.
Mr. Stanford said, "I hope the Uni
versity may begin where the State
University leaves off." By this he
meant to lay stress on technical, pro
fessional. and research work, activi
ties which were at that time very lit
tle developed at the State University.
He spoke approvingly of an institu
tion which should combine the special
features of Johns Hopkins and Cor
nell.
A professor to whom original in
vestigation is unknown should have
no place in a university. Men of com
monplace or second-hand scholarship
are of necsssity men of low ideals,
however much the fact may be dis
guised. A man of high ideals must be
an investigator. He must know and
think for himself. Only such as do
this can be really great as teachers.
Universities already begin to recog
nize that their most important profes
sors may be men who teach not in
classes, but only by contact with indiv
iduals, devoting time and strength to
advanced research. The presence and
example of the men who really know
may be worth to the student body a
hundred-fold more than the precepts
and drill of the others. They set
standards of thought. They help to
create the university spirit, without
which any college is but a grammar
school of a little higher pretensions.
University Atmosphere.
In the address on the first day in the
old quadrangle, I said: "If our work
is successful, our ideals will appear in
the daily life of the school. In a
school, as in a fortress, it is not the
form of the building, but the strength
of the materials, which determine its
effectiveness. With a garrison of
hearts of oak, it may not matter even
whether there be a fortress. What
ever its form, or its organization, or
its pretensions, the character of the
university is fixed by the men who
teach. "Have a university in shan
ties, nay in tents," Cardinal Newman
has said, "but have great teachers in
it." The university spirit flows oik
from these teachers, and its organiza
tion serves mainly to bring them to
gether. "Colleges only serve us," says
Emerson, "when their aim is not. to
drill, but to create; when they gath
er from afar every ray of various
genius to their hospitable halls, and
by their concentrated fires set the
heart of their youth in flames."
Strong men make universities strong.
A great man never fails to leave a
ureat mark on every youth with whom
he conies in contact. Too much em
phasis cannot be laid on this: that
the real purpose of the university or
ganization is to produce a university
atmosphere—such an atmosphere as
gathered itself around Arnold at Rug
b.v. around Dollinge.r at Munich,
around Linnaeus at Upsaln. around
Werner at Freiberg, around Agassiz
at Cambridge, around Hopkins at Wil
liamstown, around White at Ithaca,
around all great teachers everywhere.
Agassi/, once said: "The physical
suffering of humanity, the wants of
the poor, the craving of the hungry
and naked, appeal to the sympathies
of every one who has a human heart.
Hut there are necessities which only
the destitute student knows. There is
a hunger and thirst which only the
highest charity can understand and re
lieve; and 011 this solemn occasion
let me say that every dollar given for
higher education, in whatever depart
ment of knowledge, is l'kely to have
a greater influence on the future char
acter of our nation than even the
thousands, the hundred thousands,
and millions which'we have spent, or
are spending, to raise the many to ma
terial ease and comfort."
Presidential Powers.
Mr. Stanford laid much stress on
the work of the President of the Uni
versity. The hoard of trustees were
directed to give to him such powers
as would enable him, with his col
leagues. to control all educational pol
icies, and such that for their success
he might justly lie held responsible.
At some future time the presidency
of the American university may lie an
outworn office, its function to he taKOn
by a committee from the faculty, as
some now urge that it should be.
Hut this cannot be done in the period
of formation of the American univer
s'ty, and no American university has
yet passed its period of youth and
growth. In that lies its strength. Its
hope lies in its imperfection. It is
not born full-grown, as the German
universities have claimed to be. With
perfection, decline sets in, as these
univers'ties have clearly shown. Ev
ery forward movement needs a lead
er. "An institution is but the length
ened shadow of a man."
It is for the president to take the
initiative in all educational affairs, to
give the university its color and its
personality. lie must know how to
take advice and how to value it. The
more checks and balances on his ac
tion the better, but none should de
prive him of his initiative. It is for
him to seek and develop those rare
elements of feeling and character by
which one university is known from
another. And in our University we
tried to weld together such elements
to form what we fondly hoped men
would call the "Stanford Spirit."
Value of Keonomy.
It was the idea of the founders that
each student should be taught the
value of economy—that lavish expen
ditures bring neither happiness nor
success. "A student," it was said by
one of the founders, "will lie better
fitted to battle with the trials and trib
ulations of life, if he lias been taught
the worth of money, the necessity of
saving and of overcoming a desire to
imitate those who are better off in the
world's goods. For, when he has
learned how to save and how to con
trol inordinate desires, be will be rel
atively rich During the past three
and a half years of close observation
on my part, the importance of econ
uniy bas impressed itself forcibly up
on me, and I wish it to be taught to
all students of the university. Na
ture has made the surroundings of
the university beautiful, and the sub
stantial character of the buildings
gives them an appearance of luxury.
I wish this natural beauty and com
parative luxury to impress upon the
students the necessity of their preser
vation for the generations that are to
follow. The lesson thus taught will
remain with them through life and
help them to teach the lesson to
ethers. The un'versitv buildings and
grounds are for their use while stu
dents. in trust for students to come."
\i*l of
The value of the study of political
and social science as a remedy for
defects of government was clearly
seen by Mr. Stanford. "All govern
ments." he said, "at" governments by
public opinion, and in the long run
ever', people is a■ well governed as it
deserves." Hence increase of knowl
edge brin-'s about bett r government.
For help in such matters the people
bavr a ri hi to look to their un ! ', : r

sities and university men. It was his
theory that the art of government is
still in its infancy. "Legislation lias
not, as a rule, been a ainst the peo
ple, but it has not done the good tli it
it might." "No greater biow can be
struck at labor than that which ren
ders ts products insecure." In the
externum of volir't irv co-operation,
he saw a remedy for many present ills,
as lie siw in the lav ef mutual help
the essence of i ur Christian civiliza
tion. He said, in laying the corner
stone: "Out of these suggestions
urows the consider tion of the great
advantages, especially to the laboring
man, of cooperation, by which each
individual has the benefit of the intel
lectual and physical forces of his as
sociates. It is I \ tli • intelligent ap
plication of these |) j c'iiles that there
will le found th? greatest lever *.o
elevate the mass o r humanity, and
laws should h< f:;iincd to protect and
develop co-operat ve associations. . . .
They will accomplish all that is

sought to lie secured by labor leagues,
trades unions and other federations of
workmen, and will be free from the
objection of even impliedly attempt
i 11 to take the unauthorised 01
wrongful control ( 112 the property,
capital, or time of others."
li<>>:ilt > and Co-ojicmtieii,
One result of voluntary co-opera
tion, in .Mr. Stanford's view, would bo
the development of the spirit of loy
> alty. the most precious attribute of
[ the laboring man in any grade, in any
j field, to the interest or cause which
' he serves. One great evil of the pres
ent era of gigantic industrial organ
izations is that it takes no account of
the spirit of loyalty, without which
no man can do li s best work. The
huge trust does away with tlie feeling
of personal association. The equally
huge trades union, in many of its op
erations. strikes directly at the per
sonality of the individual workman.
It makes him merely a pawn to be
moved hither and thither in the game
of industrial war. In the long run,
j no enterprise can flourish, unless
' those who carry it on throw them
selvi s, heart and soul,' into its ser
vice. On the other hand..no one can
do a greater injury to the cause of
labor than to take loyalty out of the
category of working virtues. IJ is one
if the traditional good traits of ihr
healthy college man to be loyal to bis
j t'ollege. This virtue Mr. Stanford
would have cultivated in all effective
ways, and in loyalty on both sides lie
would find a practical < lution of most

112 the la! or troubles of today. That
he carried his ideas into his own prac
tice ir shown by the unflinching devo
tion of all his own employees of what
ever grad j throughout his life. They
were taught to bel eve in him. to be
lieve in th > worth of their own work,
a: d thi s to have respect for tliem
selw-. Much of the dheont ill of the
day has its origin in lack of self-re
spect. The pawn that is moved in the
game of sympathetic strike lias no
control over his own actions, and
then f< re : o respect for his own mo
tives. Th <!< veiop rent of intelligent,
vclur.tary co-i.peration. n the long
r ni, lrakeg the wtvkman more than a
machi '.e. If lie is such, in the long
rti" again, ho will re e've whatever
he deserves. 11 1 will be a factor in
c'vi'i r ior, when the unskilled, un
thinking laborer is not.
\\ iisi < i I abor.
\he - ■ it economic waste in labor
oft m engaged Mr. Stanford's atton
t'on, avd he found its remedy in edu-

•'tin". "Orce," ho faid, "tho great
"n )o c:f labor was to supply the
necessities of life; now, hut a small
portion of our people are so engaged.
' o: d. clothing and shelt.fr are com
non in our country to every provident
'lerscn, excepting, of course, in occa
sional accidental cases. The great
demard for I ilor is to supply what
may he termed Intellectual wants, to
which there is no limit, except that
of intelligence to conceive. If all the
j relations and obligations of man
j were properly understood, it would
I net he nec«vsary for people to make a
| burden of labor. Th > great masses of
I the toilers are now compelled to per
form such an amount of labor as
makes life often wearisome. \n intel
ligent system of education would cor
rect. this inequality. It would make
I
the humblest laborer's work more
I valuable, it would increase both the
| demand and supply for skilled labor,
and reduce the number of the non
producing class. It would dignify la
hor, and ultimately would go far to
wipe out the mere distinctions of
wealth and ancestry. It would achieve
| a. bloodless revolution and establish
j a republic of industry, merit and
; learning.
"Ilow near to that state we may be,
j or how far from it, we cannot tell. It
■ stents very far when we contemplate
the great standing a litres of Europe,
where over five millions of men (or
about one for every twelve adult
male i are marching about with gnus
on their shoulders to preserve the
•tea(' • of nations, while hovering near

them is an innumerable force of po
lice to preserve the peace of individ
uals; but when we remember the pos
sibilities of e vilizution and the power
of education, we can foresee ;i time
when these soldiers and policemen
shall be changed to useful, producing
citizens, engaged in lilting the bur
dens of the people instead of increas
ing them. And yet. extravagant as are
the nations of Europe in standing ar
mies and preparations for war, their
xtravagance in the waste of labor is
still greater. Education, by teaching
the intelligent use of machinery, is
the only remedy for such waste."
Education a Itirtbriglit.
Mr. Stanford believed that no edu
cational system could be complete in
which entrance to the university was
a detached privilege of the chosen
few. lie believed in the unbroken lad
der from the kindergarten to the uni
versity, a ladder that, each one should
be free to climb, as far as his ability
or energy should permit. He believed,
with lan Maclaren. in keeping the
path well trodden from the farmhouse
to the university, lie asked that this
sentence from the president's first, ad
dress be placed on the University Reg
ister: "A generous education is the
birthright of every man and woman in
America." In Emerson's words:
"America means opportunity," and
opportunity comes through training to
receive it. To have such a train'ng
is to be truly free born, and this is
the birthright of each child of the re
public.
A friend at Aix-les-Mains once ar
gued with him that there is already
too much education, and that to in
crease it further ! s simply to swell the
volume of discontent. "I insisted."
Mr. Stanford said, "that there can not
be too much education any more than
too much health or intelligence. Do
you happen to know any man who has
been too well educated. Where does
he live? What is his address? If you
cannot find such a man, you cannot
speak of overeducation." There has
been unwise education or misfit, edu
cation. Some highly educated men
are neither wise nor lit, and there is a
kind of education that comes from
experience and not from books. But
with all this, too thorough or too
good a training no one ever had. Ig
norance is shadow. Education is light.
Nothing is more unpractical than
darkness, nothing is more practical
than sunshine.
Secret of Human Power.
Science is knowledge tested and set
in order, and each advance in knowl
<l ge cirrics with it a corresponding
increment of power. A machine, to
Mr. Stanford, was not a mere saver of
lal or. but an aid to labor, increasing
its efficiency and therefore adding to
the value of men. Hv greater knowl
edge of the forces of nature we ac
quire greater skill in turning these
forces '11 to man's service through the
harness of machinery. In increase of
scientific knowledge he found the se
cret of human power. An education
which does not disclose the secret of
power is unworthy the name. "We
may always advance toward the infi
nite," was a favorite saying of his.
He could find no limit to the develop
in lit of civilization. The possibilities
of human progress expressed to him
the measure of infinite goodness, in
his own words: "The beneficence of
the Creator toward man on earth, and
the possibilities of humanity, are one
and the same."
But in his forecast of the myriad
triumphs of applied science, he did not
forget that knowledge itself must pre
cede any use man can make of it.
Pure science must always go before
applied science. The higher forms of
thought have their place in mental
growth as necessities in the concrete
preparation for action,
In the new university he decreed
that "the work in applied science::
he decreed that "the work in applied
shall be carried along with that
in the pure sciences and the hu
manities. and that, so far as may be.
all lines of work included in the plan
of the university shall be equally fos
tered."
Itcnct'itN el' Vsseeialion.
Mr. Stanford's belief that literature
and engineering should be pursued
side by side was shown by his wish
to provide for each with equal gene.r

osity. And the students of each are
tlii' gainers by this relation. The de
votee of classical culture is strength
ened by his association with men to
whom their college work is part of
the serious duty of life. The student
of engineering stands with both feet
on tlie ground, li s success in life
depends on the exactness of his
knowledge of machinery and of the
basic principles of mechanics and
maihematics. He must be in dead
earnest if lie would succeed at all. On
the other hand, the student of realities
uains by his association with the poet,
the philosopher and the artist. The
finer aspects of life are brought to his
notice, and from this association re
sults tolerance and breadth of sym
( oeditcationa! \(ha»t:iges.
That worn n should receive higher
education as well as men was an ax
iom 'o Mr. Stanford. Coeducation was
taken for granted from the first, pud
the young women of Stanford have
■ ( v ;■ had to question the friendliness
I their welcome. "We have provid
ed." Mr. Stanford says"in the articles
of endowment, that the education of
tlie sexes shall be equal—deeming it.
of special importance that those who
are to be mothers of the future gen
eration shall be fitted to mold and di
rect th,' infantile mind at its most crit
ical period."
The leading argument for coeduca
tion is akin to one just indicated for
the uiron in one institution of the
various lines of literature, art, sci
ence. and applied technology.
In women's education, as planned
for women alone, the tendency is to
ward (he study of beauty and order.
Literature and language take prece
dence over science. Expression is
valued more highly than action. In
carrying this to an extreme, the ne
c ssary relat on of thought to action
becomes obscured. The scholarship
developed tends to be ineffective, be
cause it is not related to life. The
educated women are likely to master
technique, rather than art; method
than substance. She may know a
good deal, but be able to do nothing.
Often her views of life must undergo
nainful changes before she can find
her place in the world.
In schools for men alone, the re
verse condition often obtains. The
::cnse of reality obscures the element
of beauty and fitness. It is of great
advantage to both men and women to
meet on a plane of equality in edu
cation. Women are brought into con
tact, with men who can do things—
men in whom the sense of reality is
strong, and who have definite views in
life. This influence affects them for
good. It turns them away from sen
timentalism. It is opposed to un
wholesome forms of hysterical friend
ship. It. gives tone to their religious
thoughts and impulses. Above all, it
tends to encourage action governed
by ideals, as opposed to that resting
on caprice. It gives them better
standards of what is possible and im
possible, when the responsibility for
action is thrown upon them.
In like manner, the association
with wise, sane and healthy women
has its value for young men. This
value has never been fully realized,
even by the strongest advocates of
coeducation. It raises their ideals of
womanhood, and the highest manhood
must bp associated with such an ideal.
Meanly and Kitnes*.
While the work of the teachers must
make the kernel of the university, we
must rejoice that here at Palo Alto
even the husks are beautiful. Reality
and fitness are great forces in educa
tion. Every object with which the
young mind comes iti contact leaves
on it. its trace. "Nothing is unim
portant in the life of man," and the
least feature of our surroundings has
its influence, greater or less. "There
was a child went forth every day,"
Walt Whitman tells us. "and the first
object that it looked upon, that ob
lect it became." It may be for a mo
ment or an hour, or "for changing
vcb s of years." The essence of civ
'Mv.ation is exposure to vfiilnc: ami
humanizing influence " ' n- in
i university," ♦ "o <>-. "is
ivnrth more than a dol'ar ' ■' '" ,1 "and
" ery dollar spent in tinker n nuiv< r
itv beautiful will be i en,aid with in


( liancellor David Starr .lonian.
terest in the enriching of the students'
lives.
It has been a reproach to America
that for the best of her sons and
daughters she has done the least. She
lias built palaces for lunatics, idiots,
crippled and blind, —nay, even for
criminals and paupers. But the col
lege students —"the young men of
sound mind and earnest purposes, the
noblest treasures of the State," to
quote the words of President White,
"she has housed in vile barracks."
The student has no need for luxury.
Plain living has ever gone with high
thinking. But grace and fitness have
an educative power too often forgot
ten in this utilitarian age. These
long corridors with their stately
arches, these circles of waving palms,
will have their part in the students'
training as surely as the chemical lab
oratory or the seminary-room. Each
stone in the quadrangle shall teach its
lesson of grace and genuineness, and
this Valley of Santa Clara shall occu
py a warm place in every student's
heart. Pictures of this fair region will
cling to his memory amid the figures
of the draughting-room. He will not
forget the fine waves of our two moun
tain ranges, overarched by a soft blue
Grecian sky, nor the ancient oak trees,
nor the gently sloping fields, changing
from vivid green to richest yellow, as
the seasons change. The noble jnllars
of the gallery of art, its rich treas
ures, the choicest remains of the
ideals of past ages—all these, and a
hundred other things which each one
will find out for himself, shall fill his
mind with bright pictures, never to be
rubbed out in the wea,r of life. Thus
in the character of every student shall
be left some imperishable trace of the
beauty of the Stanford farm, the estate
of Palo Alto.
Influence of Character.
Above and beyond all learning is
the influence of character, the impulse
to virtue and piety which comes from
men whose lives show that virtue and
piety really exist. For the life of the
most exalted as well as the humblest
of men, there can be no nobler motto
than that inscribed by the great
scholar of the last century over his
home in Hammarby: "Innocue vivito;
numen adest." Live blameless; God
is near. "This," said Linnaeus, "is
the wisdom of my life."
Religious Freedom.
Whsn the University was founded,
it was provided that in its religious
life, as in its scientific investigations,
it should be wholly free from outside
control. No religious sect or organi
zation and no group of organizations
should have dominion over it. The
University should exist for its own
sake, to carry out its own purposes,
and to bring out its own results in
its own way.
In this regard the die is cast, once
for all. The choice of the founders
of the University was deliberate and
final. They chose the path of intel
lectual and religious freedom, in the
very interest of religion itself. Re
ligion is devotion in action. In its
higher reaches it must be individual,
because it is a function of the indiv
idual soul which must stand in per
petual protest against the religion
that finds its end in forms and cere
monies and organizations.
The .requirement was a simple re
flection of Mr. Stanford's own relig
ious character, as expressed in the
words of one very near to him: "If
a firm belief in a beneficent Creator,
a profound admiration for Jesus of
Nazareth and His teachings, and the
certainty of a personal life hereafter,
constitute religion, then Leland Stan
ford was a religious man. The nar
row walls of a creed could not confine
him; therefore, he was not a pro
fessed member of any church, for in
each confession of faith he found
something to which he could not sub
scribe. But for the principles of re
ligion he hijd a profound veneration;
in h's heart were the true sentiments
of Christianity, and ho often said that
in his opinion the Golden Rule was
the cornerstone of all religion."
RelMon must form the axis of per
sonal character, and its prime import

ance the university cannot ignore. To
attain its culture it may use indirect
rather than direct means, the influ
ence of effort and character rather
than the imposition of forms. To ac
cept ecclesiastical help is to invite
ecclesiastical control toward ecclesi
astical ends. In the grant of endow
ment it was required that the trustees
should "prohibit sectarian instruction,
but have taught in the university the
immortality of the soul, the existence
of an all-wise and benevolent Crea
tor. and that obedience to His laws
is the highest duty of man."
The founders believed truly that
freedom of thought and action would
promote morality and religion, that a
deeper, fuller religious life would
arise from the growth of the individ
ual, that only where the "winds of
freedom blow" will spring up the
highest type of religious development.
For character is formed from within
by the efforts and strivings and as
pirations of the individual. It can
never be imposed from without. The
will is made strong from choosing
the right, not from having right ac
tion enforced upon it. The life of man
is "made beautiful and sweet through
self-devotion and through self-re
straint." But this must be chosen
voluntarily, else it fails of its purpose.
Growth Through Ages.
It was Mr. Stanford's hope to leave
the University free to grow through
the coming ages. He would extend
no dead hand from the grave to limit
its activities or to control its move
ments. The deed of gift is in favor
of education pure and simple. It has
no hampering clause, and the only end
in view is that of the help of human
ity through the extension of knowl
edge. "We hope," he said, "that this
institution will endure through long
ages. Provisions regarding details of
management, however wise they may
be at present, might prove to be mis
chievous under conditions which may
arise in the future."
The growth of the University must
remain the best evidence of the
founder's wisdom. He had the sagac
ity to recognize the value of higher
education and the patriotism to give
the rewards of a successful life to its
advancement. He had the rare wis
dom to discriminate between the real
and the temporary in university organ
ization and management, and his pro
vision is for the genuine and the per
manent, not for that "which speedily
passes away." Still more rare, he had
the forethought to leave to each suc
ceeding generation, the duty of adapt
ing its details of administration and
methods to the needs of the time.
If the founders had said: "We will
found a university so strong that it
may endure for all the centuries,
whose organization shall be so free
and flexible that in each age it shall
reflect the best spirit of the time,"
they could not have given it greater
freedom of development than it has
today. For the glory of the univer
sity must lie in its freedom, in that
freedom which cannot fall into li
cense, nor lose itself in waywardness
—that freedom which knows but one
bond of control, the eternal truth of
God.
Perpetual Power.
When the University opened its
doors in 1891, Millicent Shinn printed
these words of prophecy: "Greater
than the achievement of lasting hon
or among one's fellow-men of later
generations, is it to become a living
power among them forever. It rarely
happens to one man and woman to
have both the power and the skill to
thus live after death, working and
shaping beneficently in the lives of
many—not of tens nor of hundreds,
but of thousands and tens of thou
sands, as the generations follow on.
Herein is the wisdom of money spent
in education, that each recipient of in
fluence becomes in his time a center
to transmit the same in every direc
tion. so that it multiplies forever in
geometric .ratio. The power to mold
unborn generations for good, to keen
one's hards mightily on human af
fairs after the flesh has been dust for
years, seems not onlv more than mor

tal, but more than man. Thus does
man become co-worker with God in
the shaping of the world to a good
outcome."
And this I said in my opening day
address, "The Golden Age of Califor
nia begins when its gold is used for
purposes like this. From such deeds
must rise the new California of the
coming century, no longer the Califor
nia of the gold-seeker and the adven
turer, but the abode of high-minded
men and women, trained in the wis
dom of the ages, and imbued with the
love of nature, the love of man, and
the love of God. And bright indeed
will be the future of our State if in
the usefulness every hope and prayer
of the founders shall be realized."
University Life
With those words of mine, spoken
twenty-four years ago, the University
began. "We come together today," I
said, "for the first time as teacher and
students. With this relation, the life
of the University begins. It is such
personal contact of young men and
young women with scholars and in
vestigators which constitutes the life
of the University. It is for us as
teachers and students in the Univer
sity's first year to lay the foundations
of a school which may last as long as
human civilization. Ours is the
youngest of the universities, but it is
heir to the wisdom of all the ages,
and with this inheritance it has the
promise of a rapid and sturdy growth
"But the future, with its glories and
responsibilities, will be in other
hands. It is ours at the beginning to
give the University its form, its ten
dencies, its customs. The power of
precedent will cause to be repeated
over again everything that we do —
our errors as well as our wisdom, it
becomes us, then, to begin work mod
estly, as under the eye of the coming
ages. We must lay the foundations
broad and firm, so as to give full sup
port to whatever edifice the future
may build. Ours is the humbler task,
but not the least in importance, and
our work will not be in vain if all we
do is done in sincerity. As sound as
the rocks from which these walls are
hewn should be the work of every
teacher who comes within them. To
the extent that this is true will the
University be successful. Unless its
work be thus 'wrought in sad sincer
ity' nothing can redeem it from fail
ure. In this feeling, and realizing,
too, that only the help we give to the
men and women whose lives we reach
can justify our presence here, we are
ready to begin our work.
"Our University has no history to
fall back upon; no memories of great
teachers to haunt its corridors; in
none of its rooms appear the traces
which show where a great man has
lived and worked. No tender asso
ciations cling, ivv-like, to its fresh,
new halls. It is hallowed by no tra
dition. it is hampered by none.
Traditions and associations it is ours
to make. From our work the future
of the University will grow, as the
splendid lily from the modest bulb."
Dr. Jordan delivered the annual
Founders' Day address in the Assem
bly Hall this morning upon the sub
ject of "The Foundation Ideals of Stan
ford University."
From an historical as well as a per
sonal viewpoint it is eminently fit
ting that Dr. Jordan should discourse
upon this theme, which will farm a
companion piece to the Chancellor's
"The Story of a Good Woman." The
latter also first appeared as a Found
ers' Day address, and was a eulogy
of the life of Mrs. Jane Lathrop Stan
ford, and a narrative of the history
of the University during the so-called
"dark days" between 1893 and 1899,
when the ultimate fate of the institu
tion was in constant doubt.
In treating his subject this morning
Dr. Jordan gave expression to the
ideals which inspired Senator Leland
Stanford in his conception of Stanford
University. Selecting the successful
system then in practice at Cornell
University as the most suitable for the
needs of Stanford, the Senator called
upon Andrew D. White, who was
mainly responsible for the efficiency
of Cornell, where he was then acting
president, to assume the duties of
chief executive at Stanford. In declin
ing White .recommended David Stan-
Jordan, then president of the Universi
ty of Indiana, for the position.
When the present Chancellor name
to Stanford he was the youngest uni
versity president, in po'nt of years, in
the country, and when he resigned he
was the oldest in point of service, a
fact of no little significance.
The important share which Dr.
David Starr Jordan had in forming, di
recting. and developing the "founda
tion 'deals" of Stanford University
need no comment.
The address of Dr. Jordan follows:
I)r. Jordan Introduces Speech.
When Charles Darwin felt himself
growing old, he sat down in his home
in Kent to write the story of his life —
fo.r his children. He wrote, he said, as
might a spirit from another world,
looking down on this one. not swayed
by any emotion, of hope, of fear, or
eagerness or uncertainty as to the
final end. And so, today, T wish in
some such disembodied fashion to tell
the story of the founding of a univer
sity, and of the purposes and ideas
with which it started out.

Twenty-four years is a short time
in the history of a nation or a univer
sity, which is a small and swiftly
changing nation within itself. It is a
long time in the life of a man, as those
who with me have spanned it can tes
tify.
The story of today will not go far
beyond the first day of October, 1891,
when we gathered in the northwest
gate of the quadrangle for the open
ing day.
Founder and President.
Purpose must come before action,
and in the very beginning there were
only two to frame this purpose, the
founder and the president. Leland
Stanford was then scarcely older than
I am now, and I was a mere "youth
of promise," from the simple-minded
east, a "new man," as the San Francis
co journals kindly put it, and Mr.
Stanford had a reputation wider than
the nation, a philosopher and a lover
of li s kind as well as a business man
and a statesman.
A ('auspicious Figure.
Leland Stanford had been for a gen
eration the most conspicious figure in
California. He was a .rich man, weal
thy through his own effort, and he
hoped to leave humanity better for his
riches. Especially he wished to bring
to the California he loved, and who, af
ter California's fash-on, ha.l f'nst, loved
him, the abundance of life, which is
the best gift of the University. Leland
Stanford had held many relations with
California. He was an actual pion
eer. When the Civil War broke out he
had no doubt of his position and he
stood for free speech in Sacramento,
when freedom was dangerous. He was
the war governor of the state, trusted
by Lincoln, and like Lincoln, he knew
how to count the cost in a difficult
crisis. He had been one of the four
men of Sacramento who saw the vision
of a railway over the Sierras. In 1891
he was United States Senator from
California, known to every one and be
loved by all who came near him.
Typically American.
His wide influence did not rise from
his wealth. Wealth and influence
sprang alike from his personality. He
was broad-minded and long-headed,
and his simplicity of life kept him al
ways in touch with the people. "He
was active," it was said, "when other

men were idle; he was generous when
other men were grasping; he was lof
ty when other men were base." He
was thoroughly a man, and a man of
the type we like to call American.
One word of praise of Stanford
clings to my memory. At his funeral
in 1893, Horatio Stebbins in his state
ly fashion told how the Greeks did
honor to a slain hero. Then turning
to the pallbearers, stalwart men from
the Southern Pacific, he said: "Gentle
up your strength a little, for 'tis a man
ye bear."
University Idealized.
The story of the death of the only
son is known to Stanford people. The
boy, young Leland, fell ill in Rome
from the mosquito-borne Roman fever.
After coming back to Florence while
convalescent, he died of failure of the
heart. After the long vigil of a dreary
night, Mr. Stanford awoke one morn
ing with these words on his lips: "The
children of California shall be my chil
dren." And this thought grew crystal
line as the dream of a great universi
ty. And in this plan, nis wife, Jane La
throp Stanford, gave him most loyal
service, which continued unshaken
throughout twelve years of lonely wid
owhood. The story of her love and de
votion I have told as well as I could on
another occasion, the parallel to this.
< aliforiiia tlie .Motif.
So the decision was made that the
beloved Palo Alto farm —famed for the
finest horses in the world —should be
come a university campus. The Uni
versity buildings should have a motif
from California. To this end the old
mission of San Juan Capistrano, near
the seashore above San Diego, founded
by Father Junlpero Serra more than a
century before, was chosen to give the
University its form. Appeal was made
to the greatest living architects, Henry
Hobson Richardson, of Boston, for
the best was none too good for the new
University. Richardson died before
any work was begun, but his partners,
Shepley, Rutan and Coolidge, took up
the plans in all essential respects just
as we see them now in stone. Freder
ick Law Olmsted devised the garden
effects, but his plans are as yet car
ried out only in part. The streets were
laid out, and at Mr. Stanford's request.
I named them for the early padres,
who led in the missions of California.
Among these are Salvatierra Street,
named for the Jesuit father who first
urged the California missions; Serra
Avenue, fo,r Junipero Serra, the Fran
ciscan who first began the work of
building them, performing marvels of
energy and patience in long marches up
and down the coast from La Paz to
Monterey, and in dealing with the be
setting Indians for whose salvation,
temporal and spiritual, the missions
themselves were planned. Lasuen
street is named for Firmin Lasuen, the
wise and self-contained successor to
the impulsive and enthusiastic Padre
Serra. Po.rtola, Arguello, and Alvara
do were the first governors of Califor
nia; Crespi its first historian, Costan
zo its first civil engineer. These with
Ortega, Rivera, and the rest, were
members of Portola's party of explora
tion who first saw the Golden Gate
and the bay belvnd it. They likened it
to a "Mediterranean Sea," and they
named it for their patron saint, San
Francisco of Assisi, who knew the lan
guage of the birds and even that of
the fishes. Meanwhile, and with char
acteristic energy, Mr. Stanford set out
to make his vision into fact. Articles
of endowment were drawn up, and
buildings we.re provided. A president
was found and he was sent forth to
choose fifteen professors. It was not
wise to have too many professors till
we knew whether students would
come. The press notices were not en
thusiastic. The New York Mail and
Express said: "There is as much need
of a university in California as there
is in Switzerland for an asylum for de
cayed sea-captains." And it was
prophesied that even the fifteen would
for years "lecture in marble halls to
empty benches." Rut the benches
were not empty, as we all know; the
never to be forgotten pioneers of '95
were all there, altogether to the num
ber of 465, and on the first of Octob
er, with all bright auspices of earth
and sky. of wealth and generosity, the
University began. Of the fifteen pro
fessors, oldest of the old guard, par
takers in all joy, worry and success,
ten still remain,—Branner, Stillman,
Marx, Jenkins, Sanford, Campbell. An
derson, Gilbert, G.riffin, and Elliott.
Meanwhile, these were the ideas or
the Founder, as he gave them to me in
many evenings together, the
stones of the quadrangle were leaping
to find their places.
How I came in the matter you will
find in the autobiography of President
White, of Cornell, if you are interested
to read.
Possibilities of Knowledge.
The need to train his own son first
turned Mr. Stanford's thoughts to edu
cational matters. His early acquaint
ance with Professor Agassiz, perhaps
the greatest of American teachers, di
rected his thought into channels of
wisdom. From Agassiz he derived a
realizing sense of the possibilities of
human knowledge and the impelling
force of man's intellectual needs, —
that "hunger and thi.rst after truth
which only the destitute student
knows." "Man's physical needs are
slight," he said, "but his intellectual
needs are hounded only by his capacity
to receive.'
Major System Valued.
The major-subject system, especially
characteristic of Stanford, but later
taken in part by several other univer
sities, among them Harvard, may be
traced in some degree back to Agassiz.
It was first devised in Indiana,, in
1887, by a committee of three, D,r. Bry
an. now president of Indiana, Dr. von
Jagemann. now professor in Harvard,
and myself. In framing the plan I
had in mind the oft repeated words of
Atrassiz: "A spec'alty is the backbone
of education." "The mind is made
strong by the thorough possession of
something." And those of us who be
lieved with President White in the de
mocracy of the mental powers, realized
that in the higher education of a stu
dent it is the man himself who can
best choose what the backbone of his
training should be. For in making a
student, there are but two types of im
pulses strong enough to count, to love

the work itself and to know how the
work is related to his future life.
Mr. Stanford believed that an essen
tial part of education was thorough
knowledge in some one line, so firmly
held as to be effective for practical re
sults. He believed in early choice of
profession. The course of study, how
ever broad and however long, should
in all its parts look toward effective
1 fe. The profession chosen early gives
a purpose and stimulus to all the in
termediate training. He saw clearly
the need of individualism in education,
and that the course of study should be
built around the individual man he is.
The supposed needs of the average
man, developed by a consensus of edu
cational philosophers do not suffice for
the actual man in actual life. We must
be fed with the food that is good for
us. It is for 11s that it must be adap
ted, not for some average man in some
overage age. The ready-made curri
culum belongs to the same category
as ready-made clothing. It is some
thing cheap and easy for the man with
out individual needs.
Democracy and Knowledge.
No other university has recognized
so distinctly as ours the absolute de
mocracy of knowledge. The earlier
traditions of Cornell pointed in this di
rection, and for this reason Mr. Stan
ford found in Cornell, rather than in
Harvard Yale, or Michigan, the
nearest existing approach to his
own ideal. It was Ezra Cornell's
hope "to found an institution where
any person could find instruction in
any study." Cornell and Stanford, in
so far as they are loyal to these tra
ditions, know neither favored students
nor favored studies. No class of men
is chosen to the exclusion of others,
and no class of studies is given a fal
lacious importance through force of
academic pressure or through inertia
of academic tradition. While various
kinds of knowledge are of varying
worth td different persons, each has
its own value to the world, and the
value to the individual must he de
termined in each case by itself. The
university should be no respecter of
persons. It is not called on to approve
or condemn the\various orders of ge
nius that come to it for training.
There has been no greater hindrance
to educational progress than the hler
rchy of studies, the fiction that certain
kinds of work had an invisible value
not to be measured by tangible results.
That the work of a university should
be essentially specialized, fitting the
individual for definite forms of higher
usefulness, was an idea constantly pre
sent with Mr. Stanford. He had no
interest in general education as an end
in itself. He had no desire to fit men
for a life of leisure, or for any life
which did not involve a close adaption
of means to ends.
No Educational Millinery.
As a practical man, accustomed to
go to the heart of things, Mr. Stanford
had little respect for educational mil
l'nery and for the conventionalities
which have grown up about the great
institutions of the Old World. He saw
clearly the value of thoroughness, the
need of freedom, the individuality of
development, but cared little for the
machinery by which these ends were
achieved. So it was decreed that tho
new university should be simple in its
organization, with only those details
of structure which the needs of the
times should develop within it. If it
must have precedents and traditions,
it must make its own. "I would have
this institution," he said, "help to fit.
men and women for usefulness in this
life, by 'ncreasing their individual
power of production, and by making
them good company for themselves and
others." Or, in my own words to
young men, spoken in this same time:
"The whole of your life must be spent
in your own company, and only the
educated man is good company for
himself."
And besides, "The world turns asid<>
to let any man pass who knows whi
ther he is going."
In proportion to the extent to which
it widens the range of human know
ledge and of human power, in that de

gree does an institution deserve the
name of university. A man content
with the truth that now is, and without
ambition to venture into the unknown,
is not the proper man to be a university
professor. The truth that now is be
longs to the lower schools. The value
of its original work is the best single
test by wh'ch a university may be
judged; and as it is the best, so is it
also the severest. The incentive for
research should be from within. It
cannot be applied from without.
In its public relations, the university
stands for infinite patience, the calm
tasting of ideas and ideals. It con
ducts no propaganda, it controls no
affairs of business. There is no one
it wishes to elect to office. It is the
judge of the principles of wisdom and
the ways of nature. The details of
action it must leave to men whose
business it is to guide the currents of
the moment.
Freedom and Truth.
It was our hope that we might give
to our students the priceless legacy of
the educated man, the power of know
ing what really is. The higher edu
cation should bring men into direct
contact with truth. It should help to
free them from the dead hands of old
traditions and to enable them to form
opinions worthy of the new evidence
each new day brings before them. An
educated man should not be the slave
of the past, not a copy of men who
have gone before him. He must be in
some degree the founder of a new in
tellectual dynasty; for each new think
er is a new type of man. Whatever
is true is the truest thing in the uni
verse, and mental and moral strength
alike come from our contact with it.
And so wo believed that influence that
gees out from these halls should em
phasize the value of truth. The es
sence of scholarship is to know some
thing which is absolutely true; to
have, in the words of Huxley, "some
knowledge to the certainty of which
no authority could add nor take away
one jot or tittle, and to which the
tradition of a thousand years is but
as the hearsay of yesterday." The
scholar, as was once said of our great
chemist, Benjamin Silliman, must have
"faith in truth as truth, faith that
there is a power in the universe good
enough to make trutli-telling safe and
strong enough to make truth-telling ef
fective." The personal influence of gen
uineness, as embodied in the life of a
teacher, is one of the strongest moral
forces which the school can bring to
its aid; for moral training comes not
mainly by precept, but by practice.
We may teach the value of truth to
our students by showing that we value
it ourselves.
Educational Instrument.
Mr. Stanford insisted as a vital prin
ciple that the university exists for
the benefit of the students, present,
past, and future. It has no exist
ence or function save as an instru
ment of education. To this principle
all others should be subordinate. In
his opening address, he said to the
students of the Pioneer Class: "You
are the most important factor in this
university. It is for your benefit that
it has been established."
No Test in Numbers.
That the new university would in
time attract great numbers of stu
dents, Mr. Stanford believed as a mat
ter of course, although he found In
California few who shared his optim
ism. But he was never deceived with
the cheap test of numbers in estimat
ing the value of institutions. He knew
that a few hundred men well trained
under high influences would count for
more than as many thousand, hurried
in droves over a ready-made curricu
lum by young tutors, themselves
scarcely out of college. So it was de
creed that numbers for numbers' sake
should never be a goal of Stanford
University. And he further made the
practical request that not one dollar
directly or indirectly should be spent
in advertising. The university has no
goods for which it is anxious to find
customers.
The greatest nepd of the student is
the teacher Mr. Stanford said: "In

order that the president may have the
assistance of a competent staff of pro
fessors, we have provided that the
best talent obtainable shall be pro
cured and that liberal compensation
shall always lie offered." Again lie
said: "Ample endowment may have
been provided, intelligent management
may secure large income, students
may present themselves In numbers,
but in the end the faculty makes or
mars the university."
Facility (Greatest Need.
Compared with the character of the
faculty, every other element in the
university is of relatively little im
portance. The chief duty of the col
lege president is the choice of teach
ers. If he lias learned the art of sur
rounding himself with men who are
clean, sane, and scholarly, most other
matters of university administration
will take care of themselves, lie can
not fail if he has good men around
him. And in the choice of teachers
the element of personal sanity seemed
of first importance to Mr. Stanford—
the ability to see things as they are.
The university chai.r should be a cen
ter of clear-seeing from which right
acting should rad ate.
Mr. Stanford said, "I hope the Uni
versity may begin where the State
University leaves off." By this he
meant to lay stress on technical, pro
fessional. and research work, activi
ties which were at that time very lit
tle developed at the State University.
He spoke approvingly of an institu
tion which should combine the special
features of Johns Hopkins and Cor
nell.
A professor to whom original in
vestigation is unknown should have
no place in a university. Men of com
monplace or second-hand scholarship
are of necsssity men of low ideals,
however much the fact may be dis
guised. A man of high ideals must be
an investigator. He must know and
think for himself. Only such as do
this can be really great as teachers.
Universities already begin to recog
nize that their most important profes
sors may be men who teach not in
classes, but only by contact with indiv
iduals, devoting time and strength to
advanced research. The presence and
example of the men who really know
may be worth to the student body a
hundred-fold more than the precepts
and drill of the others. They set
standards of thought. They help to
create the university spirit, without
which any college is but a grammar
school of a little higher pretensions.
University Atmosphere.
In the address on the first day in the
old quadrangle, I said: "If our work
is successful, our ideals will appear in
the daily life of the school. In a
school, as in a fortress, it is not the
form of the building, but the strength
of the materials, which determine its
effectiveness. With a garrison of
hearts of oak, it may not matter even
whether there be a fortress. What
ever its form, or its organization, or
its pretensions, the character of the
university is fixed by the men who
teach. "Have a university in shan
ties, nay in tents," Cardinal Newman
has said, "but have great teachers in
it." The university spirit flows oik
from these teachers, and its organiza
tion serves mainly to bring them to
gether. "Colleges only serve us," says
Emerson, "when their aim is not. to
drill, but to create; when they gath
er from afar every ray of various
genius to their hospitable halls, and
by their concentrated fires set the
heart of their youth in flames."
Strong men make universities strong.
A great man never fails to leave a
ureat mark on every youth with whom
he conies in contact. Too much em
phasis cannot be laid on this: that
the real purpose of the university or
ganization is to produce a university
atmosphere—such an atmosphere as
gathered itself around Arnold at Rug
b.v. around Dollinge.r at Munich,
around Linnaeus at Upsaln. around
Werner at Freiberg, around Agassiz
at Cambridge, around Hopkins at Wil
liamstown, around White at Ithaca,
around all great teachers everywhere.
Agassi/, once said: "The physical
suffering of humanity, the wants of
the poor, the craving of the hungry
and naked, appeal to the sympathies
of every one who has a human heart.
Hut there are necessities which only
the destitute student knows. There is
a hunger and thirst which only the
highest charity can understand and re
lieve; and 011 this solemn occasion
let me say that every dollar given for
higher education, in whatever depart
ment of knowledge, is l'kely to have
a greater influence on the future char
acter of our nation than even the
thousands, the hundred thousands,
and millions which'we have spent, or
are spending, to raise the many to ma
terial ease and comfort."
Presidential Powers.
Mr. Stanford laid much stress on
the work of the President of the Uni
versity. The hoard of trustees were
directed to give to him such powers
as would enable him, with his col
leagues. to control all educational pol
icies, and such that for their success
he might justly lie held responsible.
At some future time the presidency
of the American university may lie an
outworn office, its function to he taKOn
by a committee from the faculty, as
some now urge that it should be.
Hut this cannot be done in the period
of formation of the American univer
s'ty, and no American university has
yet passed its period of youth and
growth. In that lies its strength. Its
hope lies in its imperfection. It is
not born full-grown, as the German
universities have claimed to be. With
perfection, decline sets in, as these
univers'ties have clearly shown. Ev
ery forward movement needs a lead
er. "An institution is but the length
ened shadow of a man."
It is for the president to take the
initiative in all educational affairs, to
give the university its color and its
personality. lie must know how to
take advice and how to value it. The
more checks and balances on his ac
tion the better, but none should de
prive him of his initiative. It is for
him to seek and develop those rare
elements of feeling and character by
which one university is known from
another. And in our University we
tried to weld together such elements
to form what we fondly hoped men
would call the "Stanford Spirit."
Value of Keonomy.
It was the idea of the founders that
each student should be taught the
value of economy—that lavish expen
ditures bring neither happiness nor
success. "A student," it was said by
one of the founders, "will lie better
fitted to battle with the trials and trib
ulations of life, if he lias been taught
the worth of money, the necessity of
saving and of overcoming a desire to
imitate those who are better off in the
world's goods. For, when he has
learned how to save and how to con
trol inordinate desires, be will be rel
atively rich During the past three
and a half years of close observation
on my part, the importance of econ
uniy bas impressed itself forcibly up
on me, and I wish it to be taught to
all students of the university. Na
ture has made the surroundings of
the university beautiful, and the sub
stantial character of the buildings
gives them an appearance of luxury.
I wish this natural beauty and com
parative luxury to impress upon the
students the necessity of their preser
vation for the generations that are to
follow. The lesson thus taught will
remain with them through life and
help them to teach the lesson to
ethers. The un'versitv buildings and
grounds are for their use while stu
dents. in trust for students to come."
\i*l of
The value of the study of political
and social science as a remedy for
defects of government was clearly
seen by Mr. Stanford. "All govern
ments." he said, "at" governments by
public opinion, and in the long run
ever', people is a■ well governed as it
deserves." Hence increase of knowl
edge brin-'s about bett r government.
For help in such matters the people
bavr a ri hi to look to their un ! ', : r

sities and university men. It was his
theory that the art of government is
still in its infancy. "Legislation lias
not, as a rule, been a ainst the peo
ple, but it has not done the good tli it
it might." "No greater biow can be
struck at labor than that which ren
ders ts products insecure." In the
externum of volir't irv co-operation,
he saw a remedy for many present ills,
as lie siw in the lav ef mutual help
the essence of i ur Christian civiliza
tion. He said, in laying the corner
stone: "Out of these suggestions
urows the consider tion of the great
advantages, especially to the laboring
man, of cooperation, by which each
individual has the benefit of the intel
lectual and physical forces of his as
sociates. It is I \ tli • intelligent ap
plication of these |) j c'iiles that there
will le found th? greatest lever *.o
elevate the mass o r humanity, and
laws should h< f:;iincd to protect and
develop co-operat ve associations. . . .
They will accomplish all that is

sought to lie secured by labor leagues,
trades unions and other federations of
workmen, and will be free from the
objection of even impliedly attempt
i 11 to take the unauthorised 01
wrongful control ( 112 the property,
capital, or time of others."
li<>>:ilt > and Co-ojicmtieii,
One result of voluntary co-opera
tion, in .Mr. Stanford's view, would bo
the development of the spirit of loy
> alty. the most precious attribute of
[ the laboring man in any grade, in any
j field, to the interest or cause which
' he serves. One great evil of the pres
ent era of gigantic industrial organ
izations is that it takes no account of
the spirit of loyalty, without which
no man can do li s best work. The
huge trust does away with tlie feeling
of personal association. The equally
huge trades union, in many of its op
erations. strikes directly at the per
sonality of the individual workman.
It makes him merely a pawn to be
moved hither and thither in the game
of industrial war. In the long run,
j no enterprise can flourish, unless
' those who carry it on throw them
selvi s, heart and soul,' into its ser
vice. On the other hand..no one can
do a greater injury to the cause of
labor than to take loyalty out of the
category of working virtues. IJ is one
if the traditional good traits of ihr
healthy college man to be loyal to bis
j t'ollege. This virtue Mr. Stanford
would have cultivated in all effective
ways, and in loyalty on both sides lie
would find a practical < lution of most

112 the la! or troubles of today. That
he carried his ideas into his own prac
tice ir shown by the unflinching devo
tion of all his own employees of what
ever grad j throughout his life. They
were taught to bel eve in him. to be
lieve in th > worth of their own work,
a: d thi s to have respect for tliem
selw-. Much of the dheont ill of the
day has its origin in lack of self-re
spect. The pawn that is moved in the
game of sympathetic strike lias no
control over his own actions, and
then f< re : o respect for his own mo
tives. Th <!< veiop rent of intelligent,
vclur.tary co-i.peration. n the long
r ni, lrakeg the wtvkman more than a
machi '.e. If lie is such, in the long
rti" again, ho will re e've whatever
he deserves. 11 1 will be a factor in
c'vi'i r ior, when the unskilled, un
thinking laborer is not.
\\ iisi < i I abor.
\he - ■ it economic waste in labor
oft m engaged Mr. Stanford's atton
t'on, avd he found its remedy in edu-

•'tin". "Orce," ho faid, "tho great
"n )o c:f labor was to supply the
necessities of life; now, hut a small
portion of our people are so engaged.
' o: d. clothing and shelt.fr are com
non in our country to every provident
'lerscn, excepting, of course, in occa
sional accidental cases. The great
demard for I ilor is to supply what
may he termed Intellectual wants, to
which there is no limit, except that
of intelligence to conceive. If all the
j relations and obligations of man
j were properly understood, it would
I net he nec«vsary for people to make a
| burden of labor. Th > great masses of
I the toilers are now compelled to per
form such an amount of labor as
makes life often wearisome. \n intel
ligent system of education would cor
rect. this inequality. It would make
I
the humblest laborer's work more
I valuable, it would increase both the
| demand and supply for skilled labor,
and reduce the number of the non
producing class. It would dignify la
hor, and ultimately would go far to
wipe out the mere distinctions of
wealth and ancestry. It would achieve
| a. bloodless revolution and establish
j a republic of industry, merit and
; learning.
"Ilow near to that state we may be,
j or how far from it, we cannot tell. It
■ stents very far when we contemplate
the great standing a litres of Europe,
where over five millions of men (or
about one for every twelve adult
male i are marching about with gnus
on their shoulders to preserve the
•tea(' • of nations, while hovering near

them is an innumerable force of po
lice to preserve the peace of individ
uals; but when we remember the pos
sibilities of e vilizution and the power
of education, we can foresee ;i time
when these soldiers and policemen
shall be changed to useful, producing
citizens, engaged in lilting the bur
dens of the people instead of increas
ing them. And yet. extravagant as are
the nations of Europe in standing ar
mies and preparations for war, their
xtravagance in the waste of labor is
still greater. Education, by teaching
the intelligent use of machinery, is
the only remedy for such waste."
Education a Itirtbriglit.
Mr. Stanford believed that no edu
cational system could be complete in
which entrance to the university was
a detached privilege of the chosen
few. lie believed in the unbroken lad
der from the kindergarten to the uni
versity, a ladder that, each one should
be free to climb, as far as his ability
or energy should permit. He believed,
with lan Maclaren. in keeping the
path well trodden from the farmhouse
to the university, lie asked that this
sentence from the president's first, ad
dress be placed on the University Reg
ister: "A generous education is the
birthright of every man and woman in
America." In Emerson's words:
"America means opportunity," and
opportunity comes through training to
receive it. To have such a train'ng
is to be truly free born, and this is
the birthright of each child of the re
public.
A friend at Aix-les-Mains once ar
gued with him that there is already
too much education, and that to in
crease it further ! s simply to swell the
volume of discontent. "I insisted."
Mr. Stanford said, "that there can not
be too much education any more than
too much health or intelligence. Do
you happen to know any man who has
been too well educated. Where does
he live? What is his address? If you
cannot find such a man, you cannot
speak of overeducation." There has
been unwise education or misfit, edu
cation. Some highly educated men
are neither wise nor lit, and there is a
kind of education that comes from
experience and not from books. But
with all this, too thorough or too
good a training no one ever had. Ig
norance is shadow. Education is light.
Nothing is more unpractical than
darkness, nothing is more practical
than sunshine.
Secret of Human Power.
Science is knowledge tested and set
in order, and each advance in knowl
<l ge cirrics with it a corresponding
increment of power. A machine, to
Mr. Stanford, was not a mere saver of
lal or. but an aid to labor, increasing
its efficiency and therefore adding to
the value of men. Hv greater knowl
edge of the forces of nature we ac
quire greater skill in turning these
forces '11 to man's service through the
harness of machinery. In increase of
scientific knowledge he found the se
cret of human power. An education
which does not disclose the secret of
power is unworthy the name. "We
may always advance toward the infi
nite," was a favorite saying of his.
He could find no limit to the develop
in lit of civilization. The possibilities
of human progress expressed to him
the measure of infinite goodness, in
his own words: "The beneficence of
the Creator toward man on earth, and
the possibilities of humanity, are one
and the same."
But in his forecast of the myriad
triumphs of applied science, he did not
forget that knowledge itself must pre
cede any use man can make of it.
Pure science must always go before
applied science. The higher forms of
thought have their place in mental
growth as necessities in the concrete
preparation for action,
In the new university he decreed
that "the work in applied science::
he decreed that "the work in applied
shall be carried along with that
in the pure sciences and the hu
manities. and that, so far as may be.
all lines of work included in the plan
of the university shall be equally fos
tered."
Itcnct'itN el' Vsseeialion.
Mr. Stanford's belief that literature
and engineering should be pursued
side by side was shown by his wish
to provide for each with equal gene.r

osity. And the students of each are
tlii' gainers by this relation. The de
votee of classical culture is strength
ened by his association with men to
whom their college work is part of
the serious duty of life. The student
of engineering stands with both feet
on tlie ground, li s success in life
depends on the exactness of his
knowledge of machinery and of the
basic principles of mechanics and
maihematics. He must be in dead
earnest if lie would succeed at all. On
the other hand, the student of realities
uains by his association with the poet,
the philosopher and the artist. The
finer aspects of life are brought to his
notice, and from this association re
sults tolerance and breadth of sym
( oeditcationa! \(ha»t:iges.
That worn n should receive higher
education as well as men was an ax
iom 'o Mr. Stanford. Coeducation was
taken for granted from the first, pud
the young women of Stanford have
■ ( v ;■ had to question the friendliness
I their welcome. "We have provid
ed." Mr. Stanford says"in the articles
of endowment, that the education of
tlie sexes shall be equal—deeming it.
of special importance that those who
are to be mothers of the future gen
eration shall be fitted to mold and di
rect th,' infantile mind at its most crit
ical period."
The leading argument for coeduca
tion is akin to one just indicated for
the uiron in one institution of the
various lines of literature, art, sci
ence. and applied technology.
In women's education, as planned
for women alone, the tendency is to
ward (he study of beauty and order.
Literature and language take prece
dence over science. Expression is
valued more highly than action. In
carrying this to an extreme, the ne
c ssary relat on of thought to action
becomes obscured. The scholarship
developed tends to be ineffective, be
cause it is not related to life. The
educated women are likely to master
technique, rather than art; method
than substance. She may know a
good deal, but be able to do nothing.
Often her views of life must undergo
nainful changes before she can find
her place in the world.
In schools for men alone, the re
verse condition often obtains. The
::cnse of reality obscures the element
of beauty and fitness. It is of great
advantage to both men and women to
meet on a plane of equality in edu
cation. Women are brought into con
tact, with men who can do things—
men in whom the sense of reality is
strong, and who have definite views in
life. This influence affects them for
good. It turns them away from sen
timentalism. It is opposed to un
wholesome forms of hysterical friend
ship. It. gives tone to their religious
thoughts and impulses. Above all, it
tends to encourage action governed
by ideals, as opposed to that resting
on caprice. It gives them better
standards of what is possible and im
possible, when the responsibility for
action is thrown upon them.
In like manner, the association
with wise, sane and healthy women
has its value for young men. This
value has never been fully realized,
even by the strongest advocates of
coeducation. It raises their ideals of
womanhood, and the highest manhood
must bp associated with such an ideal.
Meanly and Kitnes*.
While the work of the teachers must
make the kernel of the university, we
must rejoice that here at Palo Alto
even the husks are beautiful. Reality
and fitness are great forces in educa
tion. Every object with which the
young mind comes iti contact leaves
on it. its trace. "Nothing is unim
portant in the life of man," and the
least feature of our surroundings has
its influence, greater or less. "There
was a child went forth every day,"
Walt Whitman tells us. "and the first
object that it looked upon, that ob
lect it became." It may be for a mo
ment or an hour, or "for changing
vcb s of years." The essence of civ
'Mv.ation is exposure to vfiilnc: ami
humanizing influence " ' n- in
i university," ♦ "o <>-. "is
ivnrth more than a dol'ar ' ■' '" ,1 "and
" ery dollar spent in tinker n nuiv< r
itv beautiful will be i en,aid with in


( liancellor David Starr .lonian.
terest in the enriching of the students'
lives.
It has been a reproach to America
that for the best of her sons and
daughters she has done the least. She
lias built palaces for lunatics, idiots,
crippled and blind, —nay, even for
criminals and paupers. But the col
lege students —"the young men of
sound mind and earnest purposes, the
noblest treasures of the State," to
quote the words of President White,
"she has housed in vile barracks."
The student has no need for luxury.
Plain living has ever gone with high
thinking. But grace and fitness have
an educative power too often forgot
ten in this utilitarian age. These
long corridors with their stately
arches, these circles of waving palms,
will have their part in the students'
training as surely as the chemical lab
oratory or the seminary-room. Each
stone in the quadrangle shall teach its
lesson of grace and genuineness, and
this Valley of Santa Clara shall occu
py a warm place in every student's
heart. Pictures of this fair region will
cling to his memory amid the figures
of the draughting-room. He will not
forget the fine waves of our two moun
tain ranges, overarched by a soft blue
Grecian sky, nor the ancient oak trees,
nor the gently sloping fields, changing
from vivid green to richest yellow, as
the seasons change. The noble jnllars
of the gallery of art, its rich treas
ures, the choicest remains of the
ideals of past ages—all these, and a
hundred other things which each one
will find out for himself, shall fill his
mind with bright pictures, never to be
rubbed out in the wea,r of life. Thus
in the character of every student shall
be left some imperishable trace of the
beauty of the Stanford farm, the estate
of Palo Alto.
Influence of Character.
Above and beyond all learning is
the influence of character, the impulse
to virtue and piety which comes from
men whose lives show that virtue and
piety really exist. For the life of the
most exalted as well as the humblest
of men, there can be no nobler motto
than that inscribed by the great
scholar of the last century over his
home in Hammarby: "Innocue vivito;
numen adest." Live blameless; God
is near. "This," said Linnaeus, "is
the wisdom of my life."
Religious Freedom.
Whsn the University was founded,
it was provided that in its religious
life, as in its scientific investigations,
it should be wholly free from outside
control. No religious sect or organi
zation and no group of organizations
should have dominion over it. The
University should exist for its own
sake, to carry out its own purposes,
and to bring out its own results in
its own way.
In this regard the die is cast, once
for all. The choice of the founders
of the University was deliberate and
final. They chose the path of intel
lectual and religious freedom, in the
very interest of religion itself. Re
ligion is devotion in action. In its
higher reaches it must be individual,
because it is a function of the indiv
idual soul which must stand in per
petual protest against the religion
that finds its end in forms and cere
monies and organizations.
The .requirement was a simple re
flection of Mr. Stanford's own relig
ious character, as expressed in the
words of one very near to him: "If
a firm belief in a beneficent Creator,
a profound admiration for Jesus of
Nazareth and His teachings, and the
certainty of a personal life hereafter,
constitute religion, then Leland Stan
ford was a religious man. The nar
row walls of a creed could not confine
him; therefore, he was not a pro
fessed member of any church, for in
each confession of faith he found
something to which he could not sub
scribe. But for the principles of re
ligion he hijd a profound veneration;
in h's heart were the true sentiments
of Christianity, and ho often said that
in his opinion the Golden Rule was
the cornerstone of all religion."
RelMon must form the axis of per
sonal character, and its prime import

ance the university cannot ignore. To
attain its culture it may use indirect
rather than direct means, the influ
ence of effort and character rather
than the imposition of forms. To ac
cept ecclesiastical help is to invite
ecclesiastical control toward ecclesi
astical ends. In the grant of endow
ment it was required that the trustees
should "prohibit sectarian instruction,
but have taught in the university the
immortality of the soul, the existence
of an all-wise and benevolent Crea
tor. and that obedience to His laws
is the highest duty of man."
The founders believed truly that
freedom of thought and action would
promote morality and religion, that a
deeper, fuller religious life would
arise from the growth of the individ
ual, that only where the "winds of
freedom blow" will spring up the
highest type of religious development.
For character is formed from within
by the efforts and strivings and as
pirations of the individual. It can
never be imposed from without. The
will is made strong from choosing
the right, not from having right ac
tion enforced upon it. The life of man
is "made beautiful and sweet through
self-devotion and through self-re
straint." But this must be chosen
voluntarily, else it fails of its purpose.
Growth Through Ages.
It was Mr. Stanford's hope to leave
the University free to grow through
the coming ages. He would extend
no dead hand from the grave to limit
its activities or to control its move
ments. The deed of gift is in favor
of education pure and simple. It has
no hampering clause, and the only end
in view is that of the help of human
ity through the extension of knowl
edge. "We hope," he said, "that this
institution will endure through long
ages. Provisions regarding details of
management, however wise they may
be at present, might prove to be mis
chievous under conditions which may
arise in the future."
The growth of the University must
remain the best evidence of the
founder's wisdom. He had the sagac
ity to recognize the value of higher
education and the patriotism to give
the rewards of a successful life to its
advancement. He had the rare wis
dom to discriminate between the real
and the temporary in university organ
ization and management, and his pro
vision is for the genuine and the per
manent, not for that "which speedily
passes away." Still more rare, he had
the forethought to leave to each suc
ceeding generation, the duty of adapt
ing its details of administration and
methods to the needs of the time.
If the founders had said: "We will
found a university so strong that it
may endure for all the centuries,
whose organization shall be so free
and flexible that in each age it shall
reflect the best spirit of the time,"
they could not have given it greater
freedom of development than it has
today. For the glory of the univer
sity must lie in its freedom, in that
freedom which cannot fall into li
cense, nor lose itself in waywardness
—that freedom which knows but one
bond of control, the eternal truth of
God.
Perpetual Power.
When the University opened its
doors in 1891, Millicent Shinn printed
these words of prophecy: "Greater
than the achievement of lasting hon
or among one's fellow-men of later
generations, is it to become a living
power among them forever. It rarely
happens to one man and woman to
have both the power and the skill to
thus live after death, working and
shaping beneficently in the lives of
many—not of tens nor of hundreds,
but of thousands and tens of thou
sands, as the generations follow on.
Herein is the wisdom of money spent
in education, that each recipient of in
fluence becomes in his time a center
to transmit the same in every direc
tion. so that it multiplies forever in
geometric .ratio. The power to mold
unborn generations for good, to keen
one's hards mightily on human af
fairs after the flesh has been dust for
years, seems not onlv more than mor

tal, but more than man. Thus does
man become co-worker with God in
the shaping of the world to a good
outcome."
And this I said in my opening day
address, "The Golden Age of Califor
nia begins when its gold is used for
purposes like this. From such deeds
must rise the new California of the
coming century, no longer the Califor
nia of the gold-seeker and the adven
turer, but the abode of high-minded
men and women, trained in the wis
dom of the ages, and imbued with the
love of nature, the love of man, and
the love of God. And bright indeed
will be the future of our State if in
the usefulness every hope and prayer
of the founders shall be realized."
University Life
With those words of mine, spoken
twenty-four years ago, the University
began. "We come together today," I
said, "for the first time as teacher and
students. With this relation, the life
of the University begins. It is such
personal contact of young men and
young women with scholars and in
vestigators which constitutes the life
of the University. It is for us as
teachers and students in the Univer
sity's first year to lay the foundations
of a school which may last as long as
human civilization. Ours is the
youngest of the universities, but it is
heir to the wisdom of all the ages,
and with this inheritance it has the
promise of a rapid and sturdy growth
"But the future, with its glories and
responsibilities, will be in other
hands. It is ours at the beginning to
give the University its form, its ten
dencies, its customs. The power of
precedent will cause to be repeated
over again everything that we do —
our errors as well as our wisdom, it
becomes us, then, to begin work mod
estly, as under the eye of the coming
ages. We must lay the foundations
broad and firm, so as to give full sup
port to whatever edifice the future
may build. Ours is the humbler task,
but not the least in importance, and
our work will not be in vain if all we
do is done in sincerity. As sound as
the rocks from which these walls are
hewn should be the work of every
teacher who comes within them. To
the extent that this is true will the
University be successful. Unless its
work be thus 'wrought in sad sincer
ity' nothing can redeem it from fail
ure. In this feeling, and realizing,
too, that only the help we give to the
men and women whose lives we reach
can justify our presence here, we are
ready to begin our work.
"Our University has no history to
fall back upon; no memories of great
teachers to haunt its corridors; in
none of its rooms appear the traces
which show where a great man has
lived and worked. No tender asso
ciations cling, ivv-like, to its fresh,
new halls. It is hallowed by no tra
dition. it is hampered by none.
Traditions and associations it is ours
to make. From our work the future
of the University will grow, as the
splendid lily from the modest bulb."
Dr. Jordan delivered the annual
Founders' Day address in the Assem
bly Hall this morning upon the sub
ject of "The Foundation Ideals of Stan
ford University."
From an historical as well as a per
sonal viewpoint it is eminently fit
ting that Dr. Jordan should discourse
upon this theme, which will farm a
companion piece to the Chancellor's
"The Story of a Good Woman." The
latter also first appeared as a Found
ers' Day address, and was a eulogy
of the life of Mrs. Jane Lathrop Stan
ford, and a narrative of the history
of the University during the so-called
"dark days" between 1893 and 1899,
when the ultimate fate of the institu
tion was in constant doubt.
In treating his subject this morning
Dr. Jordan gave expression to the
ideals which inspired Senator Leland
Stanford in his conception of Stanford
University. Selecting the successful
system then in practice at Cornell
University as the most suitable for the
needs of Stanford, the Senator called
upon Andrew D. White, who was
mainly responsible for the efficiency
of Cornell, where he was then acting
president, to assume the duties of
chief executive at Stanford. In declin
ing White .recommended David Stan-
Jordan, then president of the Universi
ty of Indiana, for the position.
When the present Chancellor name
to Stanford he was the youngest uni
versity president, in po'nt of years, in
the country, and when he resigned he
was the oldest in point of service, a
fact of no little significance.
The important share which Dr.
David Starr Jordan had in forming, di
recting. and developing the "founda
tion 'deals" of Stanford University
need no comment.
The address of Dr. Jordan follows:
I)r. Jordan Introduces Speech.
When Charles Darwin felt himself
growing old, he sat down in his home
in Kent to write the story of his life —
fo.r his children. He wrote, he said, as
might a spirit from another world,
looking down on this one. not swayed
by any emotion, of hope, of fear, or
eagerness or uncertainty as to the
final end. And so, today, T wish in
some such disembodied fashion to tell
the story of the founding of a univer
sity, and of the purposes and ideas
with which it started out.

Twenty-four years is a short time
in the history of a nation or a univer
sity, which is a small and swiftly
changing nation within itself. It is a
long time in the life of a man, as those
who with me have spanned it can tes
tify.
The story of today will not go far
beyond the first day of October, 1891,
when we gathered in the northwest
gate of the quadrangle for the open
ing day.
Founder and President.
Purpose must come before action,
and in the very beginning there were
only two to frame this purpose, the
founder and the president. Leland
Stanford was then scarcely older than
I am now, and I was a mere "youth
of promise," from the simple-minded
east, a "new man," as the San Francis
co journals kindly put it, and Mr.
Stanford had a reputation wider than
the nation, a philosopher and a lover
of li s kind as well as a business man
and a statesman.
A ('auspicious Figure.
Leland Stanford had been for a gen
eration the most conspicious figure in
California. He was a .rich man, weal
thy through his own effort, and he
hoped to leave humanity better for his
riches. Especially he wished to bring
to the California he loved, and who, af
ter California's fash-on, ha.l f'nst, loved
him, the abundance of life, which is
the best gift of the University. Leland
Stanford had held many relations with
California. He was an actual pion
eer. When the Civil War broke out he
had no doubt of his position and he
stood for free speech in Sacramento,
when freedom was dangerous. He was
the war governor of the state, trusted
by Lincoln, and like Lincoln, he knew
how to count the cost in a difficult
crisis. He had been one of the four
men of Sacramento who saw the vision
of a railway over the Sierras. In 1891
he was United States Senator from
California, known to every one and be
loved by all who came near him.
Typically American.
His wide influence did not rise from
his wealth. Wealth and influence
sprang alike from his personality. He
was broad-minded and long-headed,
and his simplicity of life kept him al
ways in touch with the people. "He
was active," it was said, "when other

men were idle; he was generous when
other men were grasping; he was lof
ty when other men were base." He
was thoroughly a man, and a man of
the type we like to call American.
One word of praise of Stanford
clings to my memory. At his funeral
in 1893, Horatio Stebbins in his state
ly fashion told how the Greeks did
honor to a slain hero. Then turning
to the pallbearers, stalwart men from
the Southern Pacific, he said: "Gentle
up your strength a little, for 'tis a man
ye bear."
University Idealized.
The story of the death of the only
son is known to Stanford people. The
boy, young Leland, fell ill in Rome
from the mosquito-borne Roman fever.
After coming back to Florence while
convalescent, he died of failure of the
heart. After the long vigil of a dreary
night, Mr. Stanford awoke one morn
ing with these words on his lips: "The
children of California shall be my chil
dren." And this thought grew crystal
line as the dream of a great universi
ty. And in this plan, nis wife, Jane La
throp Stanford, gave him most loyal
service, which continued unshaken
throughout twelve years of lonely wid
owhood. The story of her love and de
votion I have told as well as I could on
another occasion, the parallel to this.
< aliforiiia tlie .Motif.
So the decision was made that the
beloved Palo Alto farm —famed for the
finest horses in the world —should be
come a university campus. The Uni
versity buildings should have a motif
from California. To this end the old
mission of San Juan Capistrano, near
the seashore above San Diego, founded
by Father Junlpero Serra more than a
century before, was chosen to give the
University its form. Appeal was made
to the greatest living architects, Henry
Hobson Richardson, of Boston, for
the best was none too good for the new
University. Richardson died before
any work was begun, but his partners,
Shepley, Rutan and Coolidge, took up
the plans in all essential respects just
as we see them now in stone. Freder
ick Law Olmsted devised the garden
effects, but his plans are as yet car
ried out only in part. The streets were
laid out, and at Mr. Stanford's request.
I named them for the early padres,
who led in the missions of California.
Among these are Salvatierra Street,
named for the Jesuit father who first
urged the California missions; Serra
Avenue, fo,r Junipero Serra, the Fran
ciscan who first began the work of
building them, performing marvels of
energy and patience in long marches up
and down the coast from La Paz to
Monterey, and in dealing with the be
setting Indians for whose salvation,
temporal and spiritual, the missions
themselves were planned. Lasuen
street is named for Firmin Lasuen, the
wise and self-contained successor to
the impulsive and enthusiastic Padre
Serra. Po.rtola, Arguello, and Alvara
do were the first governors of Califor
nia; Crespi its first historian, Costan
zo its first civil engineer. These with
Ortega, Rivera, and the rest, were
members of Portola's party of explora
tion who first saw the Golden Gate
and the bay belvnd it. They likened it
to a "Mediterranean Sea," and they
named it for their patron saint, San
Francisco of Assisi, who knew the lan
guage of the birds and even that of
the fishes. Meanwhile, and with char
acteristic energy, Mr. Stanford set out
to make his vision into fact. Articles
of endowment were drawn up, and
buildings we.re provided. A president
was found and he was sent forth to
choose fifteen professors. It was not
wise to have too many professors till
we knew whether students would
come. The press notices were not en
thusiastic. The New York Mail and
Express said: "There is as much need
of a university in California as there
is in Switzerland for an asylum for de
cayed sea-captains." And it was
prophesied that even the fifteen would
for years "lecture in marble halls to
empty benches." Rut the benches
were not empty, as we all know; the
never to be forgotten pioneers of '95
were all there, altogether to the num
ber of 465, and on the first of Octob
er, with all bright auspices of earth
and sky. of wealth and generosity, the
University began. Of the fifteen pro
fessors, oldest of the old guard, par
takers in all joy, worry and success,
ten still remain,—Branner, Stillman,
Marx, Jenkins, Sanford, Campbell. An
derson, Gilbert, G.riffin, and Elliott.
Meanwhile, these were the ideas or
the Founder, as he gave them to me in
many evenings together, the
stones of the quadrangle were leaping
to find their places.
How I came in the matter you will
find in the autobiography of President
White, of Cornell, if you are interested
to read.
Possibilities of Knowledge.
The need to train his own son first
turned Mr. Stanford's thoughts to edu
cational matters. His early acquaint
ance with Professor Agassiz, perhaps
the greatest of American teachers, di
rected his thought into channels of
wisdom. From Agassiz he derived a
realizing sense of the possibilities of
human knowledge and the impelling
force of man's intellectual needs, —
that "hunger and thi.rst after truth
which only the destitute student
knows." "Man's physical needs are
slight," he said, "but his intellectual
needs are hounded only by his capacity
to receive.'
Major System Valued.
The major-subject system, especially
characteristic of Stanford, but later
taken in part by several other univer
sities, among them Harvard, may be
traced in some degree back to Agassiz.
It was first devised in Indiana,, in
1887, by a committee of three, D,r. Bry
an. now president of Indiana, Dr. von
Jagemann. now professor in Harvard,
and myself. In framing the plan I
had in mind the oft repeated words of
Atrassiz: "A spec'alty is the backbone
of education." "The mind is made
strong by the thorough possession of
something." And those of us who be
lieved with President White in the de
mocracy of the mental powers, realized
that in the higher education of a stu
dent it is the man himself who can
best choose what the backbone of his
training should be. For in making a
student, there are but two types of im
pulses strong enough to count, to love

the work itself and to know how the
work is related to his future life.
Mr. Stanford believed that an essen
tial part of education was thorough
knowledge in some one line, so firmly
held as to be effective for practical re
sults. He believed in early choice of
profession. The course of study, how
ever broad and however long, should
in all its parts look toward effective
1 fe. The profession chosen early gives
a purpose and stimulus to all the in
termediate training. He saw clearly
the need of individualism in education,
and that the course of study should be
built around the individual man he is.
The supposed needs of the average
man, developed by a consensus of edu
cational philosophers do not suffice for
the actual man in actual life. We must
be fed with the food that is good for
us. It is for 11s that it must be adap
ted, not for some average man in some
overage age. The ready-made curri
culum belongs to the same category
as ready-made clothing. It is some
thing cheap and easy for the man with
out individual needs.
Democracy and Knowledge.
No other university has recognized
so distinctly as ours the absolute de
mocracy of knowledge. The earlier
traditions of Cornell pointed in this di
rection, and for this reason Mr. Stan
ford found in Cornell, rather than in
Harvard Yale, or Michigan, the
nearest existing approach to his
own ideal. It was Ezra Cornell's
hope "to found an institution where
any person could find instruction in
any study." Cornell and Stanford, in
so far as they are loyal to these tra
ditions, know neither favored students
nor favored studies. No class of men
is chosen to the exclusion of others,
and no class of studies is given a fal
lacious importance through force of
academic pressure or through inertia
of academic tradition. While various
kinds of knowledge are of varying
worth td different persons, each has
its own value to the world, and the
value to the individual must he de
termined in each case by itself. The
university should be no respecter of
persons. It is not called on to approve
or condemn the\various orders of ge
nius that come to it for training.
There has been no greater hindrance
to educational progress than the hler
rchy of studies, the fiction that certain
kinds of work had an invisible value
not to be measured by tangible results.
That the work of a university should
be essentially specialized, fitting the
individual for definite forms of higher
usefulness, was an idea constantly pre
sent with Mr. Stanford. He had no
interest in general education as an end
in itself. He had no desire to fit men
for a life of leisure, or for any life
which did not involve a close adaption
of means to ends.
No Educational Millinery.
As a practical man, accustomed to
go to the heart of things, Mr. Stanford
had little respect for educational mil
l'nery and for the conventionalities
which have grown up about the great
institutions of the Old World. He saw
clearly the value of thoroughness, the
need of freedom, the individuality of
development, but cared little for the
machinery by which these ends were
achieved. So it was decreed that tho
new university should be simple in its
organization, with only those details
of structure which the needs of the
times should develop within it. If it
must have precedents and traditions,
it must make its own. "I would have
this institution," he said, "help to fit.
men and women for usefulness in this
life, by 'ncreasing their individual
power of production, and by making
them good company for themselves and
others." Or, in my own words to
young men, spoken in this same time:
"The whole of your life must be spent
in your own company, and only the
educated man is good company for
himself."
And besides, "The world turns asid<>
to let any man pass who knows whi
ther he is going."
In proportion to the extent to which
it widens the range of human know
ledge and of human power, in that de

gree does an institution deserve the
name of university. A man content
with the truth that now is, and without
ambition to venture into the unknown,
is not the proper man to be a university
professor. The truth that now is be
longs to the lower schools. The value
of its original work is the best single
test by wh'ch a university may be
judged; and as it is the best, so is it
also the severest. The incentive for
research should be from within. It
cannot be applied from without.
In its public relations, the university
stands for infinite patience, the calm
tasting of ideas and ideals. It con
ducts no propaganda, it controls no
affairs of business. There is no one
it wishes to elect to office. It is the
judge of the principles of wisdom and
the ways of nature. The details of
action it must leave to men whose
business it is to guide the currents of
the moment.
Freedom and Truth.
It was our hope that we might give
to our students the priceless legacy of
the educated man, the power of know
ing what really is. The higher edu
cation should bring men into direct
contact with truth. It should help to
free them from the dead hands of old
traditions and to enable them to form
opinions worthy of the new evidence
each new day brings before them. An
educated man should not be the slave
of the past, not a copy of men who
have gone before him. He must be in
some degree the founder of a new in
tellectual dynasty; for each new think
er is a new type of man. Whatever
is true is the truest thing in the uni
verse, and mental and moral strength
alike come from our contact with it.
And so wo believed that influence that
gees out from these halls should em
phasize the value of truth. The es
sence of scholarship is to know some
thing which is absolutely true; to
have, in the words of Huxley, "some
knowledge to the certainty of which
no authority could add nor take away
one jot or tittle, and to which the
tradition of a thousand years is but
as the hearsay of yesterday." The
scholar, as was once said of our great
chemist, Benjamin Silliman, must have
"faith in truth as truth, faith that
there is a power in the universe good
enough to make trutli-telling safe and
strong enough to make truth-telling ef
fective." The personal influence of gen
uineness, as embodied in the life of a
teacher, is one of the strongest moral
forces which the school can bring to
its aid; for moral training comes not
mainly by precept, but by practice.
We may teach the value of truth to
our students by showing that we value
it ourselves.
Educational Instrument.
Mr. Stanford insisted as a vital prin
ciple that the university exists for
the benefit of the students, present,
past, and future. It has no exist
ence or function save as an instru
ment of education. To this principle
all others should be subordinate. In
his opening address, he said to the
students of the Pioneer Class: "You
are the most important factor in this
university. It is for your benefit that
it has been established."
No Test in Numbers.
That the new university would in
time attract great numbers of stu
dents, Mr. Stanford believed as a mat
ter of course, although he found In
California few who shared his optim
ism. But he was never deceived with
the cheap test of numbers in estimat
ing the value of institutions. He knew
that a few hundred men well trained
under high influences would count for
more than as many thousand, hurried
in droves over a ready-made curricu
lum by young tutors, themselves
scarcely out of college. So it was de
creed that numbers for numbers' sake
should never be a goal of Stanford
University. And he further made the
practical request that not one dollar
directly or indirectly should be spent
in advertising. The university has no
goods for which it is anxious to find
customers.
The greatest nepd of the student is
the teacher Mr. Stanford said: "In

order that the president may have the
assistance of a competent staff of pro
fessors, we have provided that the
best talent obtainable shall be pro
cured and that liberal compensation
shall always lie offered." Again lie
said: "Ample endowment may have
been provided, intelligent management
may secure large income, students
may present themselves In numbers,
but in the end the faculty makes or
mars the university."
Facility (Greatest Need.
Compared with the character of the
faculty, every other element in the
university is of relatively little im
portance. The chief duty of the col
lege president is the choice of teach
ers. If he lias learned the art of sur
rounding himself with men who are
clean, sane, and scholarly, most other
matters of university administration
will take care of themselves, lie can
not fail if he has good men around
him. And in the choice of teachers
the element of personal sanity seemed
of first importance to Mr. Stanford—
the ability to see things as they are.
The university chai.r should be a cen
ter of clear-seeing from which right
acting should rad ate.
Mr. Stanford said, "I hope the Uni
versity may begin where the State
University leaves off." By this he
meant to lay stress on technical, pro
fessional. and research work, activi
ties which were at that time very lit
tle developed at the State University.
He spoke approvingly of an institu
tion which should combine the special
features of Johns Hopkins and Cor
nell.
A professor to whom original in
vestigation is unknown should have
no place in a university. Men of com
monplace or second-hand scholarship
are of necsssity men of low ideals,
however much the fact may be dis
guised. A man of high ideals must be
an investigator. He must know and
think for himself. Only such as do
this can be really great as teachers.
Universities already begin to recog
nize that their most important profes
sors may be men who teach not in
classes, but only by contact with indiv
iduals, devoting time and strength to
advanced research. The presence and
example of the men who really know
may be worth to the student body a
hundred-fold more than the precepts
and drill of the others. They set
standards of thought. They help to
create the university spirit, without
which any college is but a grammar
school of a little higher pretensions.
University Atmosphere.
In the address on the first day in the
old quadrangle, I said: "If our work
is successful, our ideals will appear in
the daily life of the school. In a
school, as in a fortress, it is not the
form of the building, but the strength
of the materials, which determine its
effectiveness. With a garrison of
hearts of oak, it may not matter even
whether there be a fortress. What
ever its form, or its organization, or
its pretensions, the character of the
university is fixed by the men who
teach. "Have a university in shan
ties, nay in tents," Cardinal Newman
has said, "but have great teachers in
it." The university spirit flows oik
from these teachers, and its organiza
tion serves mainly to bring them to
gether. "Colleges only serve us," says
Emerson, "when their aim is not. to
drill, but to create; when they gath
er from afar every ray of various
genius to their hospitable halls, and
by their concentrated fires set the
heart of their youth in flames."
Strong men make universities strong.
A great man never fails to leave a
ureat mark on every youth with whom
he conies in contact. Too much em
phasis cannot be laid on this: that
the real purpose of the university or
ganization is to produce a university
atmosphere—such an atmosphere as
gathered itself around Arnold at Rug
b.v. around Dollinge.r at Munich,
around Linnaeus at Upsaln. around
Werner at Freiberg, around Agassiz
at Cambridge, around Hopkins at Wil
liamstown, around White at Ithaca,
around all great teachers everywhere.
Agassi/, once said: "The physical
suffering of humanity, the wants of
the poor, the craving of the hungry
and naked, appeal to the sympathies
of every one who has a human heart.
Hut there are necessities which only
the destitute student knows. There is
a hunger and thirst which only the
highest charity can understand and re
lieve; and 011 this solemn occasion
let me say that every dollar given for
higher education, in whatever depart
ment of knowledge, is l'kely to have
a greater influence on the future char
acter of our nation than even the
thousands, the hundred thousands,
and millions which'we have spent, or
are spending, to raise the many to ma
terial ease and comfort."
Presidential Powers.
Mr. Stanford laid much stress on
the work of the President of the Uni
versity. The hoard of trustees were
directed to give to him such powers
as would enable him, with his col
leagues. to control all educational pol
icies, and such that for their success
he might justly lie held responsible.
At some future time the presidency
of the American university may lie an
outworn office, its function to he taKOn
by a committee from the faculty, as
some now urge that it should be.
Hut this cannot be done in the period
of formation of the American univer
s'ty, and no American university has
yet passed its period of youth and
growth. In that lies its strength. Its
hope lies in its imperfection. It is
not born full-grown, as the German
universities have claimed to be. With
perfection, decline sets in, as these
univers'ties have clearly shown. Ev
ery forward movement needs a lead
er. "An institution is but the length
ened shadow of a man."
It is for the president to take the
initiative in all educational affairs, to
give the university its color and its
personality. lie must know how to
take advice and how to value it. The
more checks and balances on his ac
tion the better, but none should de
prive him of his initiative. It is for
him to seek and develop those rare
elements of feeling and character by
which one university is known from
another. And in our University we
tried to weld together such elements
to form what we fondly hoped men
would call the "Stanford Spirit."
Value of Keonomy.
It was the idea of the founders that
each student should be taught the
value of economy—that lavish expen
ditures bring neither happiness nor
success. "A student," it was said by
one of the founders, "will lie better
fitted to battle with the trials and trib
ulations of life, if he lias been taught
the worth of money, the necessity of
saving and of overcoming a desire to
imitate those who are better off in the
world's goods. For, when he has
learned how to save and how to con
trol inordinate desires, be will be rel
atively rich During the past three
and a half years of close observation
on my part, the importance of econ
uniy bas impressed itself forcibly up
on me, and I wish it to be taught to
all students of the university. Na
ture has made the surroundings of
the university beautiful, and the sub
stantial character of the buildings
gives them an appearance of luxury.
I wish this natural beauty and com
parative luxury to impress upon the
students the necessity of their preser
vation for the generations that are to
follow. The lesson thus taught will
remain with them through life and
help them to teach the lesson to
ethers. The un'versitv buildings and
grounds are for their use while stu
dents. in trust for students to come."
\i*l of
The value of the study of political
and social science as a remedy for
defects of government was clearly
seen by Mr. Stanford. "All govern
ments." he said, "at" governments by
public opinion, and in the long run
ever', people is a■ well governed as it
deserves." Hence increase of knowl
edge brin-'s about bett r government.
For help in such matters the people
bavr a ri hi to look to their un ! ', : r

sities and university men. It was his
theory that the art of government is
still in its infancy. "Legislation lias
not, as a rule, been a ainst the peo
ple, but it has not done the good tli it
it might." "No greater biow can be
struck at labor than that which ren
ders ts products insecure." In the
externum of volir't irv co-operation,
he saw a remedy for many present ills,
as lie siw in the lav ef mutual help
the essence of i ur Christian civiliza
tion. He said, in laying the corner
stone: "Out of these suggestions
urows the consider tion of the great
advantages, especially to the laboring
man, of cooperation, by which each
individual has the benefit of the intel
lectual and physical forces of his as
sociates. It is I \ tli • intelligent ap
plication of these |) j c'iiles that there
will le found th? greatest lever *.o
elevate the mass o r humanity, and
laws should h< f:;iincd to protect and
develop co-operat ve associations. . . .
They will accomplish all that is

sought to lie secured by labor leagues,
trades unions and other federations of
workmen, and will be free from the
objection of even impliedly attempt
i 11 to take the unauthorised 01
wrongful control ( 112 the property,
capital, or time of others."
li<>>:ilt > and Co-ojicmtieii,
One result of voluntary co-opera
tion, in .Mr. Stanford's view, would bo
the development of the spirit of loy
> alty. the most precious attribute of
[ the laboring man in any grade, in any
j field, to the interest or cause which
' he serves. One great evil of the pres
ent era of gigantic industrial organ
izations is that it takes no account of
the spirit of loyalty, without which
no man can do li s best work. The
huge trust does away with tlie feeling
of personal association. The equally
huge trades union, in many of its op
erations. strikes directly at the per
sonality of the individual workman.
It makes him merely a pawn to be
moved hither and thither in the game
of industrial war. In the long run,
j no enterprise can flourish, unless
' those who carry it on throw them
selvi s, heart and soul,' into its ser
vice. On the other hand..no one can
do a greater injury to the cause of
labor than to take loyalty out of the
category of working virtues. IJ is one
if the traditional good traits of ihr
healthy college man to be loyal to bis
j t'ollege. This virtue Mr. Stanford
would have cultivated in all effective
ways, and in loyalty on both sides lie
would find a practical < lution of most

112 the la! or troubles of today. That
he carried his ideas into his own prac
tice ir shown by the unflinching devo
tion of all his own employees of what
ever grad j throughout his life. They
were taught to bel eve in him. to be
lieve in th > worth of their own work,
a: d thi s to have respect for tliem
selw-. Much of the dheont ill of the
day has its origin in lack of self-re
spect. The pawn that is moved in the
game of sympathetic strike lias no
control over his own actions, and
then f< re : o respect for his own mo
tives. Th <!< veiop rent of intelligent,
vclur.tary co-i.peration. n the long
r ni, lrakeg the wtvkman more than a
machi '.e. If lie is such, in the long
rti" again, ho will re e've whatever
he deserves. 11 1 will be a factor in
c'vi'i r ior, when the unskilled, un
thinking laborer is not.
\\ iisi < i I abor.
\he - ■ it economic waste in labor
oft m engaged Mr. Stanford's atton
t'on, avd he found its remedy in edu-

•'tin". "Orce," ho faid, "tho great
"n )o c:f labor was to supply the
necessities of life; now, hut a small
portion of our people are so engaged.
' o: d. clothing and shelt.fr are com
non in our country to every provident
'lerscn, excepting, of course, in occa
sional accidental cases. The great
demard for I ilor is to supply what
may he termed Intellectual wants, to
which there is no limit, except that
of intelligence to conceive. If all the
j relations and obligations of man
j were properly understood, it would
I net he nec«vsary for people to make a
| burden of labor. Th > great masses of
I the toilers are now compelled to per
form such an amount of labor as
makes life often wearisome. \n intel
ligent system of education would cor
rect. this inequality. It would make
I
the humblest laborer's work more
I valuable, it would increase both the
| demand and supply for skilled labor,
and reduce the number of the non
producing class. It would dignify la
hor, and ultimately would go far to
wipe out the mere distinctions of
wealth and ancestry. It would achieve
| a. bloodless revolution and establish
j a republic of industry, merit and
; learning.
"Ilow near to that state we may be,
j or how far from it, we cannot tell. It
■ stents very far when we contemplate
the great standing a litres of Europe,
where over five millions of men (or
about one for every twelve adult
male i are marching about with gnus
on their shoulders to preserve the
•tea(' • of nations, while hovering near

them is an innumerable force of po
lice to preserve the peace of individ
uals; but when we remember the pos
sibilities of e vilizution and the power
of education, we can foresee ;i time
when these soldiers and policemen
shall be changed to useful, producing
citizens, engaged in lilting the bur
dens of the people instead of increas
ing them. And yet. extravagant as are
the nations of Europe in standing ar
mies and preparations for war, their
xtravagance in the waste of labor is
still greater. Education, by teaching
the intelligent use of machinery, is
the only remedy for such waste."
Education a Itirtbriglit.
Mr. Stanford believed that no edu
cational system could be complete in
which entrance to the university was
a detached privilege of the chosen
few. lie believed in the unbroken lad
der from the kindergarten to the uni
versity, a ladder that, each one should
be free to climb, as far as his ability
or energy should permit. He believed,
with lan Maclaren. in keeping the
path well trodden from the farmhouse
to the university, lie asked that this
sentence from the president's first, ad
dress be placed on the University Reg
ister: "A generous education is the
birthright of every man and woman in
America." In Emerson's words:
"America means opportunity," and
opportunity comes through training to
receive it. To have such a train'ng
is to be truly free born, and this is
the birthright of each child of the re
public.
A friend at Aix-les-Mains once ar
gued with him that there is already
too much education, and that to in
crease it further ! s simply to swell the
volume of discontent. "I insisted."
Mr. Stanford said, "that there can not
be too much education any more than
too much health or intelligence. Do
you happen to know any man who has
been too well educated. Where does
he live? What is his address? If you
cannot find such a man, you cannot
speak of overeducation." There has
been unwise education or misfit, edu
cation. Some highly educated men
are neither wise nor lit, and there is a
kind of education that comes from
experience and not from books. But
with all this, too thorough or too
good a training no one ever had. Ig
norance is shadow. Education is light.
Nothing is more unpractical than
darkness, nothing is more practical
than sunshine.
Secret of Human Power.
Science is knowledge tested and set
in order, and each advance in knowl
<l ge cirrics with it a corresponding
increment of power. A machine, to
Mr. Stanford, was not a mere saver of
lal or. but an aid to labor, increasing
its efficiency and therefore adding to
the value of men. Hv greater knowl
edge of the forces of nature we ac
quire greater skill in turning these
forces '11 to man's service through the
harness of machinery. In increase of
scientific knowledge he found the se
cret of human power. An education
which does not disclose the secret of
power is unworthy the name. "We
may always advance toward the infi
nite," was a favorite saying of his.
He could find no limit to the develop
in lit of civilization. The possibilities
of human progress expressed to him
the measure of infinite goodness, in
his own words: "The beneficence of
the Creator toward man on earth, and
the possibilities of humanity, are one
and the same."
But in his forecast of the myriad
triumphs of applied science, he did not
forget that knowledge itself must pre
cede any use man can make of it.
Pure science must always go before
applied science. The higher forms of
thought have their place in mental
growth as necessities in the concrete
preparation for action,
In the new university he decreed
that "the work in applied science::
he decreed that "the work in applied
shall be carried along with that
in the pure sciences and the hu
manities. and that, so far as may be.
all lines of work included in the plan
of the university shall be equally fos
tered."
Itcnct'itN el' Vsseeialion.
Mr. Stanford's belief that literature
and engineering should be pursued
side by side was shown by his wish
to provide for each with equal gene.r

osity. And the students of each are
tlii' gainers by this relation. The de
votee of classical culture is strength
ened by his association with men to
whom their college work is part of
the serious duty of life. The student
of engineering stands with both feet
on tlie ground, li s success in life
depends on the exactness of his
knowledge of machinery and of the
basic principles of mechanics and
maihematics. He must be in dead
earnest if lie would succeed at all. On
the other hand, the student of realities
uains by his association with the poet,
the philosopher and the artist. The
finer aspects of life are brought to his
notice, and from this association re
sults tolerance and breadth of sym
( oeditcationa! \(ha»t:iges.
That worn n should receive higher
education as well as men was an ax
iom 'o Mr. Stanford. Coeducation was
taken for granted from the first, pud
the young women of Stanford have
■ ( v ;■ had to question the friendliness
I their welcome. "We have provid
ed." Mr. Stanford says"in the articles
of endowment, that the education of
tlie sexes shall be equal—deeming it.
of special importance that those who
are to be mothers of the future gen
eration shall be fitted to mold and di
rect th,' infantile mind at its most crit
ical period."
The leading argument for coeduca
tion is akin to one just indicated for
the uiron in one institution of the
various lines of literature, art, sci
ence. and applied technology.
In women's education, as planned
for women alone, the tendency is to
ward (he study of beauty and order.
Literature and language take prece
dence over science. Expression is
valued more highly than action. In
carrying this to an extreme, the ne
c ssary relat on of thought to action
becomes obscured. The scholarship
developed tends to be ineffective, be
cause it is not related to life. The
educated women are likely to master
technique, rather than art; method
than substance. She may know a
good deal, but be able to do nothing.
Often her views of life must undergo
nainful changes before she can find
her place in the world.
In schools for men alone, the re
verse condition often obtains. The
::cnse of reality obscures the element
of beauty and fitness. It is of great
advantage to both men and women to
meet on a plane of equality in edu
cation. Women are brought into con
tact, with men who can do things—
men in whom the sense of reality is
strong, and who have definite views in
life. This influence affects them for
good. It turns them away from sen
timentalism. It is opposed to un
wholesome forms of hysterical friend
ship. It. gives tone to their religious
thoughts and impulses. Above all, it
tends to encourage action governed
by ideals, as opposed to that resting
on caprice. It gives them better
standards of what is possible and im
possible, when the responsibility for
action is thrown upon them.
In like manner, the association
with wise, sane and healthy women
has its value for young men. This
value has never been fully realized,
even by the strongest advocates of
coeducation. It raises their ideals of
womanhood, and the highest manhood
must bp associated with such an ideal.
Meanly and Kitnes*.
While the work of the teachers must
make the kernel of the university, we
must rejoice that here at Palo Alto
even the husks are beautiful. Reality
and fitness are great forces in educa
tion. Every object with which the
young mind comes iti contact leaves
on it. its trace. "Nothing is unim
portant in the life of man," and the
least feature of our surroundings has
its influence, greater or less. "There
was a child went forth every day,"
Walt Whitman tells us. "and the first
object that it looked upon, that ob
lect it became." It may be for a mo
ment or an hour, or "for changing
vcb s of years." The essence of civ
'Mv.ation is exposure to vfiilnc: ami
humanizing influence " ' n- in
i university," ♦ "o <>-. "is
ivnrth more than a dol'ar ' ■' '" ,1 "and
" ery dollar spent in tinker n nuiv< r
itv beautiful will be i en,aid with in


( liancellor David Starr .lonian.
terest in the enriching of the students'
lives.
It has been a reproach to America
that for the best of her sons and
daughters she has done the least. She
lias built palaces for lunatics, idiots,
crippled and blind, —nay, even for
criminals and paupers. But the col
lege students —"the young men of
sound mind and earnest purposes, the
noblest treasures of the State," to
quote the words of President White,
"she has housed in vile barracks."
The student has no need for luxury.
Plain living has ever gone with high
thinking. But grace and fitness have
an educative power too often forgot
ten in this utilitarian age. These
long corridors with their stately
arches, these circles of waving palms,
will have their part in the students'
training as surely as the chemical lab
oratory or the seminary-room. Each
stone in the quadrangle shall teach its
lesson of grace and genuineness, and
this Valley of Santa Clara shall occu
py a warm place in every student's
heart. Pictures of this fair region will
cling to his memory amid the figures
of the draughting-room. He will not
forget the fine waves of our two moun
tain ranges, overarched by a soft blue
Grecian sky, nor the ancient oak trees,
nor the gently sloping fields, changing
from vivid green to richest yellow, as
the seasons change. The noble jnllars
of the gallery of art, its rich treas
ures, the choicest remains of the
ideals of past ages—all these, and a
hundred other things which each one
will find out for himself, shall fill his
mind with bright pictures, never to be
rubbed out in the wea,r of life. Thus
in the character of every student shall
be left some imperishable trace of the
beauty of the Stanford farm, the estate
of Palo Alto.
Influence of Character.
Above and beyond all learning is
the influence of character, the impulse
to virtue and piety which comes from
men whose lives show that virtue and
piety really exist. For the life of the
most exalted as well as the humblest
of men, there can be no nobler motto
than that inscribed by the great
scholar of the last century over his
home in Hammarby: "Innocue vivito;
numen adest." Live blameless; God
is near. "This," said Linnaeus, "is
the wisdom of my life."
Religious Freedom.
Whsn the University was founded,
it was provided that in its religious
life, as in its scientific investigations,
it should be wholly free from outside
control. No religious sect or organi
zation and no group of organizations
should have dominion over it. The
University should exist for its own
sake, to carry out its own purposes,
and to bring out its own results in
its own way.
In this regard the die is cast, once
for all. The choice of the founders
of the University was deliberate and
final. They chose the path of intel
lectual and religious freedom, in the
very interest of religion itself. Re
ligion is devotion in action. In its
higher reaches it must be individual,
because it is a function of the indiv
idual soul which must stand in per
petual protest against the religion
that finds its end in forms and cere
monies and organizations.
The .requirement was a simple re
flection of Mr. Stanford's own relig
ious character, as expressed in the
words of one very near to him: "If
a firm belief in a beneficent Creator,
a profound admiration for Jesus of
Nazareth and His teachings, and the
certainty of a personal life hereafter,
constitute religion, then Leland Stan
ford was a religious man. The nar
row walls of a creed could not confine
him; therefore, he was not a pro
fessed member of any church, for in
each confession of faith he found
something to which he could not sub
scribe. But for the principles of re
ligion he hijd a profound veneration;
in h's heart were the true sentiments
of Christianity, and ho often said that
in his opinion the Golden Rule was
the cornerstone of all religion."
RelMon must form the axis of per
sonal character, and its prime import

ance the university cannot ignore. To
attain its culture it may use indirect
rather than direct means, the influ
ence of effort and character rather
than the imposition of forms. To ac
cept ecclesiastical help is to invite
ecclesiastical control toward ecclesi
astical ends. In the grant of endow
ment it was required that the trustees
should "prohibit sectarian instruction,
but have taught in the university the
immortality of the soul, the existence
of an all-wise and benevolent Crea
tor. and that obedience to His laws
is the highest duty of man."
The founders believed truly that
freedom of thought and action would
promote morality and religion, that a
deeper, fuller religious life would
arise from the growth of the individ
ual, that only where the "winds of
freedom blow" will spring up the
highest type of religious development.
For character is formed from within
by the efforts and strivings and as
pirations of the individual. It can
never be imposed from without. The
will is made strong from choosing
the right, not from having right ac
tion enforced upon it. The life of man
is "made beautiful and sweet through
self-devotion and through self-re
straint." But this must be chosen
voluntarily, else it fails of its purpose.
Growth Through Ages.
It was Mr. Stanford's hope to leave
the University free to grow through
the coming ages. He would extend
no dead hand from the grave to limit
its activities or to control its move
ments. The deed of gift is in favor
of education pure and simple. It has
no hampering clause, and the only end
in view is that of the help of human
ity through the extension of knowl
edge. "We hope," he said, "that this
institution will endure through long
ages. Provisions regarding details of
management, however wise they may
be at present, might prove to be mis
chievous under conditions which may
arise in the future."
The growth of the University must
remain the best evidence of the
founder's wisdom. He had the sagac
ity to recognize the value of higher
education and the patriotism to give
the rewards of a successful life to its
advancement. He had the rare wis
dom to discriminate between the real
and the temporary in university organ
ization and management, and his pro
vision is for the genuine and the per
manent, not for that "which speedily
passes away." Still more rare, he had
the forethought to leave to each suc
ceeding generation, the duty of adapt
ing its details of administration and
methods to the needs of the time.
If the founders had said: "We will
found a university so strong that it
may endure for all the centuries,
whose organization shall be so free
and flexible that in each age it shall
reflect the best spirit of the time,"
they could not have given it greater
freedom of development than it has
today. For the glory of the univer
sity must lie in its freedom, in that
freedom which cannot fall into li
cense, nor lose itself in waywardness
—that freedom which knows but one
bond of control, the eternal truth of
God.
Perpetual Power.
When the University opened its
doors in 1891, Millicent Shinn printed
these words of prophecy: "Greater
than the achievement of lasting hon
or among one's fellow-men of later
generations, is it to become a living
power among them forever. It rarely
happens to one man and woman to
have both the power and the skill to
thus live after death, working and
shaping beneficently in the lives of
many—not of tens nor of hundreds,
but of thousands and tens of thou
sands, as the generations follow on.
Herein is the wisdom of money spent
in education, that each recipient of in
fluence becomes in his time a center
to transmit the same in every direc
tion. so that it multiplies forever in
geometric .ratio. The power to mold
unborn generations for good, to keen
one's hards mightily on human af
fairs after the flesh has been dust for
years, seems not onlv more than mor

tal, but more than man. Thus does
man become co-worker with God in
the shaping of the world to a good
outcome."
And this I said in my opening day
address, "The Golden Age of Califor
nia begins when its gold is used for
purposes like this. From such deeds
must rise the new California of the
coming century, no longer the Califor
nia of the gold-seeker and the adven
turer, but the abode of high-minded
men and women, trained in the wis
dom of the ages, and imbued with the
love of nature, the love of man, and
the love of God. And bright indeed
will be the future of our State if in
the usefulness every hope and prayer
of the founders shall be realized."
University Life
With those words of mine, spoken
twenty-four years ago, the University
began. "We come together today," I
said, "for the first time as teacher and
students. With this relation, the life
of the University begins. It is such
personal contact of young men and
young women with scholars and in
vestigators which constitutes the life
of the University. It is for us as
teachers and students in the Univer
sity's first year to lay the foundations
of a school which may last as long as
human civilization. Ours is the
youngest of the universities, but it is
heir to the wisdom of all the ages,
and with this inheritance it has the
promise of a rapid and sturdy growth
"But the future, with its glories and
responsibilities, will be in other
hands. It is ours at the beginning to
give the University its form, its ten
dencies, its customs. The power of
precedent will cause to be repeated
over again everything that we do —
our errors as well as our wisdom, it
becomes us, then, to begin work mod
estly, as under the eye of the coming
ages. We must lay the foundations
broad and firm, so as to give full sup
port to whatever edifice the future
may build. Ours is the humbler task,
but not the least in importance, and
our work will not be in vain if all we
do is done in sincerity. As sound as
the rocks from which these walls are
hewn should be the work of every
teacher who comes within them. To
the extent that this is true will the
University be successful. Unless its
work be thus 'wrought in sad sincer
ity' nothing can redeem it from fail
ure. In this feeling, and realizing,
too, that only the help we give to the
men and women whose lives we reach
can justify our presence here, we are
ready to begin our work.
"Our University has no history to
fall back upon; no memories of great
teachers to haunt its corridors; in
none of its rooms appear the traces
which show where a great man has
lived and worked. No tender asso
ciations cling, ivv-like, to its fresh,
new halls. It is hallowed by no tra
dition. it is hampered by none.
Traditions and associations it is ours
to make. From our work the future
of the University will grow, as the
splendid lily from the modest bulb."
Dr. Jordan delivered the annual
Founders' Day address in the Assem
bly Hall this morning upon the sub
ject of "The Foundation Ideals of Stan
ford University."
From an historical as well as a per
sonal viewpoint it is eminently fit
ting that Dr. Jordan should discourse
upon this theme, which will farm a
companion piece to the Chancellor's
"The Story of a Good Woman." The
latter also first appeared as a Found
ers' Day address, and was a eulogy
of the life of Mrs. Jane Lathrop Stan
ford, and a narrative of the history
of the University during the so-called
"dark days" between 1893 and 1899,
when the ultimate fate of the institu
tion was in constant doubt.
In treating his subject this morning
Dr. Jordan gave expression to the
ideals which inspired Senator Leland
Stanford in his conception of Stanford
University. Selecting the successful
system then in practice at Cornell
University as the most suitable for the
needs of Stanford, the Senator called
upon Andrew D. White, who was
mainly responsible for the efficiency
of Cornell, where he was then acting
president, to assume the duties of
chief executive at Stanford. In declin
ing White .recommended David Stan-
Jordan, then president of the Universi
ty of Indiana, for the position.
When the present Chancellor name
to Stanford he was the youngest uni
versity president, in po'nt of years, in
the country, and when he resigned he
was the oldest in point of service, a
fact of no little significance.
The important share which Dr.
David Starr Jordan had in forming, di
recting. and developing the "founda
tion 'deals" of Stanford University
need no comment.
The address of Dr. Jordan follows:
I)r. Jordan Introduces Speech.
When Charles Darwin felt himself
growing old, he sat down in his home
in Kent to write the story of his life —
fo.r his children. He wrote, he said, as
might a spirit from another world,
looking down on this one. not swayed
by any emotion, of hope, of fear, or
eagerness or uncertainty as to the
final end. And so, today, T wish in
some such disembodied fashion to tell
the story of the founding of a univer
sity, and of the purposes and ideas
with which it started out.

Twenty-four years is a short time
in the history of a nation or a univer
sity, which is a small and swiftly
changing nation within itself. It is a
long time in the life of a man, as those
who with me have spanned it can tes
tify.
The story of today will not go far
beyond the first day of October, 1891,
when we gathered in the northwest
gate of the quadrangle for the open
ing day.
Founder and President.
Purpose must come before action,
and in the very beginning there were
only two to frame this purpose, the
founder and the president. Leland
Stanford was then scarcely older than
I am now, and I was a mere "youth
of promise," from the simple-minded
east, a "new man," as the San Francis
co journals kindly put it, and Mr.
Stanford had a reputation wider than
the nation, a philosopher and a lover
of li s kind as well as a business man
and a statesman.
A ('auspicious Figure.
Leland Stanford had been for a gen
eration the most conspicious figure in
California. He was a .rich man, weal
thy through his own effort, and he
hoped to leave humanity better for his
riches. Especially he wished to bring
to the California he loved, and who, af
ter California's fash-on, ha.l f'nst, loved
him, the abundance of life, which is
the best gift of the University. Leland
Stanford had held many relations with
California. He was an actual pion
eer. When the Civil War broke out he
had no doubt of his position and he
stood for free speech in Sacramento,
when freedom was dangerous. He was
the war governor of the state, trusted
by Lincoln, and like Lincoln, he knew
how to count the cost in a difficult
crisis. He had been one of the four
men of Sacramento who saw the vision
of a railway over the Sierras. In 1891
he was United States Senator from
California, known to every one and be
loved by all who came near him.
Typically American.
His wide influence did not rise from
his wealth. Wealth and influence
sprang alike from his personality. He
was broad-minded and long-headed,
and his simplicity of life kept him al
ways in touch with the people. "He
was active," it was said, "when other

men were idle; he was generous when
other men were grasping; he was lof
ty when other men were base." He
was thoroughly a man, and a man of
the type we like to call American.
One word of praise of Stanford
clings to my memory. At his funeral
in 1893, Horatio Stebbins in his state
ly fashion told how the Greeks did
honor to a slain hero. Then turning
to the pallbearers, stalwart men from
the Southern Pacific, he said: "Gentle
up your strength a little, for 'tis a man
ye bear."
University Idealized.
The story of the death of the only
son is known to Stanford people. The
boy, young Leland, fell ill in Rome
from the mosquito-borne Roman fever.
After coming back to Florence while
convalescent, he died of failure of the
heart. After the long vigil of a dreary
night, Mr. Stanford awoke one morn
ing with these words on his lips: "The
children of California shall be my chil
dren." And this thought grew crystal
line as the dream of a great universi
ty. And in this plan, nis wife, Jane La
throp Stanford, gave him most loyal
service, which continued unshaken
throughout twelve years of lonely wid
owhood. The story of her love and de
votion I have told as well as I could on
another occasion, the parallel to this.
< aliforiiia tlie .Motif.
So the decision was made that the
beloved Palo Alto farm —famed for the
finest horses in the world —should be
come a university campus. The Uni
versity buildings should have a motif
from California. To this end the old
mission of San Juan Capistrano, near
the seashore above San Diego, founded
by Father Junlpero Serra more than a
century before, was chosen to give the
University its form. Appeal was made
to the greatest living architects, Henry
Hobson Richardson, of Boston, for
the best was none too good for the new
University. Richardson died before
any work was begun, but his partners,
Shepley, Rutan and Coolidge, took up
the plans in all essential respects just
as we see them now in stone. Freder
ick Law Olmsted devised the garden
effects, but his plans are as yet car
ried out only in part. The streets were
laid out, and at Mr. Stanford's request.
I named them for the early padres,
who led in the missions of California.
Among these are Salvatierra Street,
named for the Jesuit father who first
urged the California missions; Serra
Avenue, fo,r Junipero Serra, the Fran
ciscan who first began the work of
building them, performing marvels of
energy and patience in long marches up
and down the coast from La Paz to
Monterey, and in dealing with the be
setting Indians for whose salvation,
temporal and spiritual, the missions
themselves were planned. Lasuen
street is named for Firmin Lasuen, the
wise and self-contained successor to
the impulsive and enthusiastic Padre
Serra. Po.rtola, Arguello, and Alvara
do were the first governors of Califor
nia; Crespi its first historian, Costan
zo its first civil engineer. These with
Ortega, Rivera, and the rest, were
members of Portola's party of explora
tion who first saw the Golden Gate
and the bay belvnd it. They likened it
to a "Mediterranean Sea," and they
named it for their patron saint, San
Francisco of Assisi, who knew the lan
guage of the birds and even that of
the fishes. Meanwhile, and with char
acteristic energy, Mr. Stanford set out
to make his vision into fact. Articles
of endowment were drawn up, and
buildings we.re provided. A president
was found and he was sent forth to
choose fifteen professors. It was not
wise to have too many professors till
we knew whether students would
come. The press notices were not en
thusiastic. The New York Mail and
Express said: "There is as much need
of a university in California as there
is in Switzerland for an asylum for de
cayed sea-captains." And it was
prophesied that even the fifteen would
for years "lecture in marble halls to
empty benches." Rut the benches
were not empty, as we all know; the
never to be forgotten pioneers of '95
were all there, altogether to the num
ber of 465, and on the first of Octob
er, with all bright auspices of earth
and sky. of wealth and generosity, the
University began. Of the fifteen pro
fessors, oldest of the old guard, par
takers in all joy, worry and success,
ten still remain,—Branner, Stillman,
Marx, Jenkins, Sanford, Campbell. An
derson, Gilbert, G.riffin, and Elliott.
Meanwhile, these were the ideas or
the Founder, as he gave them to me in
many evenings together, the
stones of the quadrangle were leaping
to find their places.
How I came in the matter you will
find in the autobiography of President
White, of Cornell, if you are interested
to read.
Possibilities of Knowledge.
The need to train his own son first
turned Mr. Stanford's thoughts to edu
cational matters. His early acquaint
ance with Professor Agassiz, perhaps
the greatest of American teachers, di
rected his thought into channels of
wisdom. From Agassiz he derived a
realizing sense of the possibilities of
human knowledge and the impelling
force of man's intellectual needs, —
that "hunger and thi.rst after truth
which only the destitute student
knows." "Man's physical needs are
slight," he said, "but his intellectual
needs are hounded only by his capacity
to receive.'
Major System Valued.
The major-subject system, especially
characteristic of Stanford, but later
taken in part by several other univer
sities, among them Harvard, may be
traced in some degree back to Agassiz.
It was first devised in Indiana,, in
1887, by a committee of three, D,r. Bry
an. now president of Indiana, Dr. von
Jagemann. now professor in Harvard,
and myself. In framing the plan I
had in mind the oft repeated words of
Atrassiz: "A spec'alty is the backbone
of education." "The mind is made
strong by the thorough possession of
something." And those of us who be
lieved with President White in the de
mocracy of the mental powers, realized
that in the higher education of a stu
dent it is the man himself who can
best choose what the backbone of his
training should be. For in making a
student, there are but two types of im
pulses strong enough to count, to love

the work itself and to know how the
work is related to his future life.
Mr. Stanford believed that an essen
tial part of education was thorough
knowledge in some one line, so firmly
held as to be effective for practical re
sults. He believed in early choice of
profession. The course of study, how
ever broad and however long, should
in all its parts look toward effective
1 fe. The profession chosen early gives
a purpose and stimulus to all the in
termediate training. He saw clearly
the need of individualism in education,
and that the course of study should be
built around the individual man he is.
The supposed needs of the average
man, developed by a consensus of edu
cational philosophers do not suffice for
the actual man in actual life. We must
be fed with the food that is good for
us. It is for 11s that it must be adap
ted, not for some average man in some
overage age. The ready-made curri
culum belongs to the same category
as ready-made clothing. It is some
thing cheap and easy for the man with
out individual needs.
Democracy and Knowledge.
No other university has recognized
so distinctly as ours the absolute de
mocracy of knowledge. The earlier
traditions of Cornell pointed in this di
rection, and for this reason Mr. Stan
ford found in Cornell, rather than in
Harvard Yale, or Michigan, the
nearest existing approach to his
own ideal. It was Ezra Cornell's
hope "to found an institution where
any person could find instruction in
any study." Cornell and Stanford, in
so far as they are loyal to these tra
ditions, know neither favored students
nor favored studies. No class of men
is chosen to the exclusion of others,
and no class of studies is given a fal
lacious importance through force of
academic pressure or through inertia
of academic tradition. While various
kinds of knowledge are of varying
worth td different persons, each has
its own value to the world, and the
value to the individual must he de
termined in each case by itself. The
university should be no respecter of
persons. It is not called on to approve
or condemn the\various orders of ge
nius that come to it for training.
There has been no greater hindrance
to educational progress than the hler
rchy of studies, the fiction that certain
kinds of work had an invisible value
not to be measured by tangible results.
That the work of a university should
be essentially specialized, fitting the
individual for definite forms of higher
usefulness, was an idea constantly pre
sent with Mr. Stanford. He had no
interest in general education as an end
in itself. He had no desire to fit men
for a life of leisure, or for any life
which did not involve a close adaption
of means to ends.
No Educational Millinery.
As a practical man, accustomed to
go to the heart of things, Mr. Stanford
had little respect for educational mil
l'nery and for the conventionalities
which have grown up about the great
institutions of the Old World. He saw
clearly the value of thoroughness, the
need of freedom, the individuality of
development, but cared little for the
machinery by which these ends were
achieved. So it was decreed that tho
new university should be simple in its
organization, with only those details
of structure which the needs of the
times should develop within it. If it
must have precedents and traditions,
it must make its own. "I would have
this institution," he said, "help to fit.
men and women for usefulness in this
life, by 'ncreasing their individual
power of production, and by making
them good company for themselves and
others." Or, in my own words to
young men, spoken in this same time:
"The whole of your life must be spent
in your own company, and only the
educated man is good company for
himself."
And besides, "The world turns asid<>
to let any man pass who knows whi
ther he is going."
In proportion to the extent to which
it widens the range of human know
ledge and of human power, in that de

gree does an institution deserve the
name of university. A man content
with the truth that now is, and without
ambition to venture into the unknown,
is not the proper man to be a university
professor. The truth that now is be
longs to the lower schools. The value
of its original work is the best single
test by wh'ch a university may be
judged; and as it is the best, so is it
also the severest. The incentive for
research should be from within. It
cannot be applied from without.
In its public relations, the university
stands for infinite patience, the calm
tasting of ideas and ideals. It con
ducts no propaganda, it controls no
affairs of business. There is no one
it wishes to elect to office. It is the
judge of the principles of wisdom and
the ways of nature. The details of
action it must leave to men whose
business it is to guide the currents of
the moment.
Freedom and Truth.
It was our hope that we might give
to our students the priceless legacy of
the educated man, the power of know
ing what really is. The higher edu
cation should bring men into direct
contact with truth. It should help to
free them from the dead hands of old
traditions and to enable them to form
opinions worthy of the new evidence
each new day brings before them. An
educated man should not be the slave
of the past, not a copy of men who
have gone before him. He must be in
some degree the founder of a new in
tellectual dynasty; for each new think
er is a new type of man. Whatever
is true is the truest thing in the uni
verse, and mental and moral strength
alike come from our contact with it.
And so wo believed that influence that
gees out from these halls should em
phasize the value of truth. The es
sence of scholarship is to know some
thing which is absolutely true; to
have, in the words of Huxley, "some
knowledge to the certainty of which
no authority could add nor take away
one jot or tittle, and to which the
tradition of a thousand years is but
as the hearsay of yesterday." The
scholar, as was once said of our great
chemist, Benjamin Silliman, must have
"faith in truth as truth, faith that
there is a power in the universe good
enough to make trutli-telling safe and
strong enough to make truth-telling ef
fective." The personal influence of gen
uineness, as embodied in the life of a
teacher, is one of the strongest moral
forces which the school can bring to
its aid; for moral training comes not
mainly by precept, but by practice.
We may teach the value of truth to
our students by showing that we value
it ourselves.
Educational Instrument.
Mr. Stanford insisted as a vital prin
ciple that the university exists for
the benefit of the students, present,
past, and future. It has no exist
ence or function save as an instru
ment of education. To this principle
all others should be subordinate. In
his opening address, he said to the
students of the Pioneer Class: "You
are the most important factor in this
university. It is for your benefit that
it has been established."
No Test in Numbers.
That the new university would in
time attract great numbers of stu
dents, Mr. Stanford believed as a mat
ter of course, although he found In
California few who shared his optim
ism. But he was never deceived with
the cheap test of numbers in estimat
ing the value of institutions. He knew
that a few hundred men well trained
under high influences would count for
more than as many thousand, hurried
in droves over a ready-made curricu
lum by young tutors, themselves
scarcely out of college. So it was de
creed that numbers for numbers' sake
should never be a goal of Stanford
University. And he further made the
practical request that not one dollar
directly or indirectly should be spent
in advertising. The university has no
goods for which it is anxious to find
customers.
The greatest nepd of the student is
the teacher Mr. Stanford said: "In

order that the president may have the
assistance of a competent staff of pro
fessors, we have provided that the
best talent obtainable shall be pro
cured and that liberal compensation
shall always lie offered." Again lie
said: "Ample endowment may have
been provided, intelligent management
may secure large income, students
may present themselves In numbers,
but in the end the faculty makes or
mars the university."
Facility (Greatest Need.
Compared with the character of the
faculty, every other element in the
university is of relatively little im
portance. The chief duty of the col
lege president is the choice of teach
ers. If he lias learned the art of sur
rounding himself with men who are
clean, sane, and scholarly, most other
matters of university administration
will take care of themselves, lie can
not fail if he has good men around
him. And in the choice of teachers
the element of personal sanity seemed
of first importance to Mr. Stanford—
the ability to see things as they are.
The university chai.r should be a cen
ter of clear-seeing from which right
acting should rad ate.
Mr. Stanford said, "I hope the Uni
versity may begin where the State
University leaves off." By this he
meant to lay stress on technical, pro
fessional. and research work, activi
ties which were at that time very lit
tle developed at the State University.
He spoke approvingly of an institu
tion which should combine the special
features of Johns Hopkins and Cor
nell.
A professor to whom original in
vestigation is unknown should have
no place in a university. Men of com
monplace or second-hand scholarship
are of necsssity men of low ideals,
however much the fact may be dis
guised. A man of high ideals must be
an investigator. He must know and
think for himself. Only such as do
this can be really great as teachers.
Universities already begin to recog
nize that their most important profes
sors may be men who teach not in
classes, but only by contact with indiv
iduals, devoting time and strength to
advanced research. The presence and
example of the men who really know
may be worth to the student body a
hundred-fold more than the precepts
and drill of the others. They set
standards of thought. They help to
create the university spirit, without
which any college is but a grammar
school of a little higher pretensions.
University Atmosphere.
In the address on the first day in the
old quadrangle, I said: "If our work
is successful, our ideals will appear in
the daily life of the school. In a
school, as in a fortress, it is not the
form of the building, but the strength
of the materials, which determine its
effectiveness. With a garrison of
hearts of oak, it may not matter even
whether there be a fortress. What
ever its form, or its organization, or
its pretensions, the character of the
university is fixed by the men who
teach. "Have a university in shan
ties, nay in tents," Cardinal Newman
has said, "but have great teachers in
it." The university spirit flows oik
from these teachers, and its organiza
tion serves mainly to bring them to
gether. "Colleges only serve us," says
Emerson, "when their aim is not. to
drill, but to create; when they gath
er from afar every ray of various
genius to their hospitable halls, and
by their concentrated fires set the
heart of their youth in flames."
Strong men make universities strong.
A great man never fails to leave a
ureat mark on every youth with whom
he conies in contact. Too much em
phasis cannot be laid on this: that
the real purpose of the university or
ganization is to produce a university
atmosphere—such an atmosphere as
gathered itself around Arnold at Rug
b.v. around Dollinge.r at Munich,
around Linnaeus at Upsaln. around
Werner at Freiberg, around Agassiz
at Cambridge, around Hopkins at Wil
liamstown, around White at Ithaca,
around all great teachers everywhere.
Agassi/, once said: "The physical
suffering of humanity, the wants of
the poor, the craving of the hungry
and naked, appeal to the sympathies
of every one who has a human heart.
Hut there are necessities which only
the destitute student knows. There is
a hunger and thirst which only the
highest charity can understand and re
lieve; and 011 this solemn occasion
let me say that every dollar given for
higher education, in whatever depart
ment of knowledge, is l'kely to have
a greater influence on the future char
acter of our nation than even the
thousands, the hundred thousands,
and millions which'we have spent, or
are spending, to raise the many to ma
terial ease and comfort."
Presidential Powers.
Mr. Stanford laid much stress on
the work of the President of the Uni
versity. The hoard of trustees were
directed to give to him such powers
as would enable him, with his col
leagues. to control all educational pol
icies, and such that for their success
he might justly lie held responsible.
At some future time the presidency
of the American university may lie an
outworn office, its function to he taKOn
by a committee from the faculty, as
some now urge that it should be.
Hut this cannot be done in the period
of formation of the American univer
s'ty, and no American university has
yet passed its period of youth and
growth. In that lies its strength. Its
hope lies in its imperfection. It is
not born full-grown, as the German
universities have claimed to be. With
perfection, decline sets in, as these
univers'ties have clearly shown. Ev
ery forward movement needs a lead
er. "An institution is but the length
ened shadow of a man."
It is for the president to take the
initiative in all educational affairs, to
give the university its color and its
personality. lie must know how to
take advice and how to value it. The
more checks and balances on his ac
tion the better, but none should de
prive him of his initiative. It is for
him to seek and develop those rare
elements of feeling and character by
which one university is known from
another. And in our University we
tried to weld together such elements
to form what we fondly hoped men
would call the "Stanford Spirit."
Value of Keonomy.
It was the idea of the founders that
each student should be taught the
value of economy—that lavish expen
ditures bring neither happiness nor
success. "A student," it was said by
one of the founders, "will lie better
fitted to battle with the trials and trib
ulations of life, if he lias been taught
the worth of money, the necessity of
saving and of overcoming a desire to
imitate those who are better off in the
world's goods. For, when he has
learned how to save and how to con
trol inordinate desires, be will be rel
atively rich During the past three
and a half years of close observation
on my part, the importance of econ
uniy bas impressed itself forcibly up
on me, and I wish it to be taught to
all students of the university. Na
ture has made the surroundings of
the university beautiful, and the sub
stantial character of the buildings
gives them an appearance of luxury.
I wish this natural beauty and com
parative luxury to impress upon the
students the necessity of their preser
vation for the generations that are to
follow. The lesson thus taught will
remain with them through life and
help them to teach the lesson to
ethers. The un'versitv buildings and
grounds are for their use while stu
dents. in trust for students to come."
\i*l of
The value of the study of political
and social science as a remedy for
defects of government was clearly
seen by Mr. Stanford. "All govern
ments." he said, "at" governments by
public opinion, and in the long run
ever', people is a■ well governed as it
deserves." Hence increase of knowl
edge brin-'s about bett r government.
For help in such matters the people
bavr a ri hi to look to their un ! ', : r

sities and university men. It was his
theory that the art of government is
still in its infancy. "Legislation lias
not, as a rule, been a ainst the peo
ple, but it has not done the good tli it
it might." "No greater biow can be
struck at labor than that which ren
ders ts products insecure." In the
externum of volir't irv co-operation,
he saw a remedy for many present ills,
as lie siw in the lav ef mutual help
the essence of i ur Christian civiliza
tion. He said, in laying the corner
stone: "Out of these suggestions
urows the consider tion of the great
advantages, especially to the laboring
man, of cooperation, by which each
individual has the benefit of the intel
lectual and physical forces of his as
sociates. It is I \ tli • intelligent ap
plication of these |) j c'iiles that there
will le found th? greatest lever *.o
elevate the mass o r humanity, and
laws should h< f:;iincd to protect and
develop co-operat ve associations. . . .
They will accomplish all that is

sought to lie secured by labor leagues,
trades unions and other federations of
workmen, and will be free from the
objection of even impliedly attempt
i 11 to take the unauthorised 01
wrongful control ( 112 the property,
capital, or time of others."
li<>>:ilt > and Co-ojicmtieii,
One result of voluntary co-opera
tion, in .Mr. Stanford's view, would bo
the development of the spirit of loy
> alty. the most precious attribute of
[ the laboring man in any grade, in any
j field, to the interest or cause which
' he serves. One great evil of the pres
ent era of gigantic industrial organ
izations is that it takes no account of
the spirit of loyalty, without which
no man can do li s best work. The
huge trust does away with tlie feeling
of personal association. The equally
huge trades union, in many of its op
erations. strikes directly at the per
sonality of the individual workman.
It makes him merely a pawn to be
moved hither and thither in the game
of industrial war. In the long run,
j no enterprise can flourish, unless
' those who carry it on throw them
selvi s, heart and soul,' into its ser
vice. On the other hand..no one can
do a greater injury to the cause of
labor than to take loyalty out of the
category of working virtues. IJ is one
if the traditional good traits of ihr
healthy college man to be loyal to bis
j t'ollege. This virtue Mr. Stanford
would have cultivated in all effective
ways, and in loyalty on both sides lie
would find a practical < lution of most

112 the la! or troubles of today. That
he carried his ideas into his own prac
tice ir shown by the unflinching devo
tion of all his own employees of what
ever grad j throughout his life. They
were taught to bel eve in him. to be
lieve in th > worth of their own work,
a: d thi s to have respect for tliem
selw-. Much of the dheont ill of the
day has its origin in lack of self-re
spect. The pawn that is moved in the
game of sympathetic strike lias no
control over his own actions, and
then f< re : o respect for his own mo
tives. Th <!< veiop rent of intelligent,
vclur.tary co-i.peration. n the long
r ni, lrakeg the wtvkman more than a
machi '.e. If lie is such, in the long
rti" again, ho will re e've whatever
he deserves. 11 1 will be a factor in
c'vi'i r ior, when the unskilled, un
thinking laborer is not.
\\ iisi < i I abor.
\he - ■ it economic waste in labor
oft m engaged Mr. Stanford's atton
t'on, avd he found its remedy in edu-

•'tin". "Orce," ho faid, "tho great
"n )o c:f labor was to supply the
necessities of life; now, hut a small
portion of our people are so engaged.
' o: d. clothing and shelt.fr are com
non in our country to every provident
'lerscn, excepting, of course, in occa
sional accidental cases. The great
demard for I ilor is to supply what
may he termed Intellectual wants, to
which there is no limit, except that
of intelligence to conceive. If all the
j relations and obligations of man
j were properly understood, it would
I net he nec«vsary for people to make a
| burden of labor. Th > great masses of
I the toilers are now compelled to per
form such an amount of labor as
makes life often wearisome. \n intel
ligent system of education would cor
rect. this inequality. It would make
I
the humblest laborer's work more
I valuable, it would increase both the
| demand and supply for skilled labor,
and reduce the number of the non
producing class. It would dignify la
hor, and ultimately would go far to
wipe out the mere distinctions of
wealth and ancestry. It would achieve
| a. bloodless revolution and establish
j a republic of industry, merit and
; learning.
"Ilow near to that state we may be,
j or how far from it, we cannot tell. It
■ stents very far when we contemplate
the great standing a litres of Europe,
where over five millions of men (or
about one for every twelve adult
male i are marching about with gnus
on their shoulders to preserve the
•tea(' • of nations, while hovering near

them is an innumerable force of po
lice to preserve the peace of individ
uals; but when we remember the pos
sibilities of e vilizution and the power
of education, we can foresee ;i time
when these soldiers and policemen
shall be changed to useful, producing
citizens, engaged in lilting the bur
dens of the people instead of increas
ing them. And yet. extravagant as are
the nations of Europe in standing ar
mies and preparations for war, their
xtravagance in the waste of labor is
still greater. Education, by teaching
the intelligent use of machinery, is
the only remedy for such waste."
Education a Itirtbriglit.
Mr. Stanford believed that no edu
cational system could be complete in
which entrance to the university was
a detached privilege of the chosen
few. lie believed in the unbroken lad
der from the kindergarten to the uni
versity, a ladder that, each one should
be free to climb, as far as his ability
or energy should permit. He believed,
with lan Maclaren. in keeping the
path well trodden from the farmhouse
to the university, lie asked that this
sentence from the president's first, ad
dress be placed on the University Reg
ister: "A generous education is the
birthright of every man and woman in
America." In Emerson's words:
"America means opportunity," and
opportunity comes through training to
receive it. To have such a train'ng
is to be truly free born, and this is
the birthright of each child of the re
public.
A friend at Aix-les-Mains once ar
gued with him that there is already
too much education, and that to in
crease it further ! s simply to swell the
volume of discontent. "I insisted."
Mr. Stanford said, "that there can not
be too much education any more than
too much health or intelligence. Do
you happen to know any man who has
been too well educated. Where does
he live? What is his address? If you
cannot find such a man, you cannot
speak of overeducation." There has
been unwise education or misfit, edu
cation. Some highly educated men
are neither wise nor lit, and there is a
kind of education that comes from
experience and not from books. But
with all this, too thorough or too
good a training no one ever had. Ig
norance is shadow. Education is light.
Nothing is more unpractical than
darkness, nothing is more practical
than sunshine.
Secret of Human Power.
Science is knowledge tested and set
in order, and each advance in knowl
<l ge cirrics with it a corresponding
increment of power. A machine, to
Mr. Stanford, was not a mere saver of
lal or. but an aid to labor, increasing
its efficiency and therefore adding to
the value of men. Hv greater knowl
edge of the forces of nature we ac
quire greater skill in turning these
forces '11 to man's service through the
harness of machinery. In increase of
scientific knowledge he found the se
cret of human power. An education
which does not disclose the secret of
power is unworthy the name. "We
may always advance toward the infi
nite," was a favorite saying of his.
He could find no limit to the develop
in lit of civilization. The possibilities
of human progress expressed to him
the measure of infinite goodness, in
his own words: "The beneficence of
the Creator toward man on earth, and
the possibilities of humanity, are one
and the same."
But in his forecast of the myriad
triumphs of applied science, he did not
forget that knowledge itself must pre
cede any use man can make of it.
Pure science must always go before
applied science. The higher forms of
thought have their place in mental
growth as necessities in the concrete
preparation for action,
In the new university he decreed
that "the work in applied science::
he decreed that "the work in applied
shall be carried along with that
in the pure sciences and the hu
manities. and that, so far as may be.
all lines of work included in the plan
of the university shall be equally fos
tered."
Itcnct'itN el' Vsseeialion.
Mr. Stanford's belief that literature
and engineering should be pursued
side by side was shown by his wish
to provide for each with equal gene.r

osity. And the students of each are
tlii' gainers by this relation. The de
votee of classical culture is strength
ened by his association with men to
whom their college work is part of
the serious duty of life. The student
of engineering stands with both feet
on tlie ground, li s success in life
depends on the exactness of his
knowledge of machinery and of the
basic principles of mechanics and
maihematics. He must be in dead
earnest if lie would succeed at all. On
the other hand, the student of realities
uains by his association with the poet,
the philosopher and the artist. The
finer aspects of life are brought to his
notice, and from this association re
sults tolerance and breadth of sym
( oeditcationa! \(ha»t:iges.
That worn n should receive higher
education as well as men was an ax
iom 'o Mr. Stanford. Coeducation was
taken for granted from the first, pud
the young women of Stanford have
■ ( v ;■ had to question the friendliness
I their welcome. "We have provid
ed." Mr. Stanford says"in the articles
of endowment, that the education of
tlie sexes shall be equal—deeming it.
of special importance that those who
are to be mothers of the future gen
eration shall be fitted to mold and di
rect th,' infantile mind at its most crit
ical period."
The leading argument for coeduca
tion is akin to one just indicated for
the uiron in one institution of the
various lines of literature, art, sci
ence. and applied technology.
In women's education, as planned
for women alone, the tendency is to
ward (he study of beauty and order.
Literature and language take prece
dence over science. Expression is
valued more highly than action. In
carrying this to an extreme, the ne
c ssary relat on of thought to action
becomes obscured. The scholarship
developed tends to be ineffective, be
cause it is not related to life. The
educated women are likely to master
technique, rather than art; method
than substance. She may know a
good deal, but be able to do nothing.
Often her views of life must undergo
nainful changes before she can find
her place in the world.
In schools for men alone, the re
verse condition often obtains. The
::cnse of reality obscures the element
of beauty and fitness. It is of great
advantage to both men and women to
meet on a plane of equality in edu
cation. Women are brought into con
tact, with men who can do things—
men in whom the sense of reality is
strong, and who have definite views in
life. This influence affects them for
good. It turns them away from sen
timentalism. It is opposed to un
wholesome forms of hysterical friend
ship. It. gives tone to their religious
thoughts and impulses. Above all, it
tends to encourage action governed
by ideals, as opposed to that resting
on caprice. It gives them better
standards of what is possible and im
possible, when the responsibility for
action is thrown upon them.
In like manner, the association
with wise, sane and healthy women
has its value for young men. This
value has never been fully realized,
even by the strongest advocates of
coeducation. It raises their ideals of
womanhood, and the highest manhood
must bp associated with such an ideal.
Meanly and Kitnes*.
While the work of the teachers must
make the kernel of the university, we
must rejoice that here at Palo Alto
even the husks are beautiful. Reality
and fitness are great forces in educa
tion. Every object with which the
young mind comes iti contact leaves
on it. its trace. "Nothing is unim
portant in the life of man," and the
least feature of our surroundings has
its influence, greater or less. "There
was a child went forth every day,"
Walt Whitman tells us. "and the first
object that it looked upon, that ob
lect it became." It may be for a mo
ment or an hour, or "for changing
vcb s of years." The essence of civ
'Mv.ation is exposure to vfiilnc: ami
humanizing influence " ' n- in
i university," ♦ "o <>-. "is
ivnrth more than a dol'ar ' ■' '" ,1 "and
" ery dollar spent in tinker n nuiv< r
itv beautiful will be i en,aid with in


( liancellor David Starr .lonian.
terest in the enriching of the students'
lives.
It has been a reproach to America
that for the best of her sons and
daughters she has done the least. She
lias built palaces for lunatics, idiots,
crippled and blind, —nay, even for
criminals and paupers. But the col
lege students —"the young men of
sound mind and earnest purposes, the
noblest treasures of the State," to
quote the words of President White,
"she has housed in vile barracks."
The student has no need for luxury.
Plain living has ever gone with high
thinking. But grace and fitness have
an educative power too often forgot
ten in this utilitarian age. These
long corridors with their stately
arches, these circles of waving palms,
will have their part in the students'
training as surely as the chemical lab
oratory or the seminary-room. Each
stone in the quadrangle shall teach its
lesson of grace and genuineness, and
this Valley of Santa Clara shall occu
py a warm place in every student's
heart. Pictures of this fair region will
cling to his memory amid the figures
of the draughting-room. He will not
forget the fine waves of our two moun
tain ranges, overarched by a soft blue
Grecian sky, nor the ancient oak trees,
nor the gently sloping fields, changing
from vivid green to richest yellow, as
the seasons change. The noble jnllars
of the gallery of art, its rich treas
ures, the choicest remains of the
ideals of past ages—all these, and a
hundred other things which each one
will find out for himself, shall fill his
mind with bright pictures, never to be
rubbed out in the wea,r of life. Thus
in the character of every student shall
be left some imperishable trace of the
beauty of the Stanford farm, the estate
of Palo Alto.
Influence of Character.
Above and beyond all learning is
the influence of character, the impulse
to virtue and piety which comes from
men whose lives show that virtue and
piety really exist. For the life of the
most exalted as well as the humblest
of men, there can be no nobler motto
than that inscribed by the great
scholar of the last century over his
home in Hammarby: "Innocue vivito;
numen adest." Live blameless; God
is near. "This," said Linnaeus, "is
the wisdom of my life."
Religious Freedom.
Whsn the University was founded,
it was provided that in its religious
life, as in its scientific investigations,
it should be wholly free from outside
control. No religious sect or organi
zation and no group of organizations
should have dominion over it. The
University should exist for its own
sake, to carry out its own purposes,
and to bring out its own results in
its own way.
In this regard the die is cast, once
for all. The choice of the founders
of the University was deliberate and
final. They chose the path of intel
lectual and religious freedom, in the
very interest of religion itself. Re
ligion is devotion in action. In its
higher reaches it must be individual,
because it is a function of the indiv
idual soul which must stand in per
petual protest against the religion
that finds its end in forms and cere
monies and organizations.
The .requirement was a simple re
flection of Mr. Stanford's own relig
ious character, as expressed in the
words of one very near to him: "If
a firm belief in a beneficent Creator,
a profound admiration for Jesus of
Nazareth and His teachings, and the
certainty of a personal life hereafter,
constitute religion, then Leland Stan
ford was a religious man. The nar
row walls of a creed could not confine
him; therefore, he was not a pro
fessed member of any church, for in
each confession of faith he found
something to which he could not sub
scribe. But for the principles of re
ligion he hijd a profound veneration;
in h's heart were the true sentiments
of Christianity, and ho often said that
in his opinion the Golden Rule was
the cornerstone of all religion."
RelMon must form the axis of per
sonal character, and its prime import

ance the university cannot ignore. To
attain its culture it may use indirect
rather than direct means, the influ
ence of effort and character rather
than the imposition of forms. To ac
cept ecclesiastical help is to invite
ecclesiastical control toward ecclesi
astical ends. In the grant of endow
ment it was required that the trustees
should "prohibit sectarian instruction,
but have taught in the university the
immortality of the soul, the existence
of an all-wise and benevolent Crea
tor. and that obedience to His laws
is the highest duty of man."
The founders believed truly that
freedom of thought and action would
promote morality and religion, that a
deeper, fuller religious life would
arise from the growth of the individ
ual, that only where the "winds of
freedom blow" will spring up the
highest type of religious development.
For character is formed from within
by the efforts and strivings and as
pirations of the individual. It can
never be imposed from without. The
will is made strong from choosing
the right, not from having right ac
tion enforced upon it. The life of man
is "made beautiful and sweet through
self-devotion and through self-re
straint." But this must be chosen
voluntarily, else it fails of its purpose.
Growth Through Ages.
It was Mr. Stanford's hope to leave
the University free to grow through
the coming ages. He would extend
no dead hand from the grave to limit
its activities or to control its move
ments. The deed of gift is in favor
of education pure and simple. It has
no hampering clause, and the only end
in view is that of the help of human
ity through the extension of knowl
edge. "We hope," he said, "that this
institution will endure through long
ages. Provisions regarding details of
management, however wise they may
be at present, might prove to be mis
chievous under conditions which may
arise in the future."
The growth of the University must
remain the best evidence of the
founder's wisdom. He had the sagac
ity to recognize the value of higher
education and the patriotism to give
the rewards of a successful life to its
advancement. He had the rare wis
dom to discriminate between the real
and the temporary in university organ
ization and management, and his pro
vision is for the genuine and the per
manent, not for that "which speedily
passes away." Still more rare, he had
the forethought to leave to each suc
ceeding generation, the duty of adapt
ing its details of administration and
methods to the needs of the time.
If the founders had said: "We will
found a university so strong that it
may endure for all the centuries,
whose organization shall be so free
and flexible that in each age it shall
reflect the best spirit of the time,"
they could not have given it greater
freedom of development than it has
today. For the glory of the univer
sity must lie in its freedom, in that
freedom which cannot fall into li
cense, nor lose itself in waywardness
—that freedom which knows but one
bond of control, the eternal truth of
God.
Perpetual Power.
When the University opened its
doors in 1891, Millicent Shinn printed
these words of prophecy: "Greater
than the achievement of lasting hon
or among one's fellow-men of later
generations, is it to become a living
power among them forever. It rarely
happens to one man and woman to
have both the power and the skill to
thus live after death, working and
shaping beneficently in the lives of
many—not of tens nor of hundreds,
but of thousands and tens of thou
sands, as the generations follow on.
Herein is the wisdom of money spent
in education, that each recipient of in
fluence becomes in his time a center
to transmit the same in every direc
tion. so that it multiplies forever in
geometric .ratio. The power to mold
unborn generations for good, to keen
one's hards mightily on human af
fairs after the flesh has been dust for
years, seems not onlv more than mor

tal, but more than man. Thus does
man become co-worker with God in
the shaping of the world to a good
outcome."
And this I said in my opening day
address, "The Golden Age of Califor
nia begins when its gold is used for
purposes like this. From such deeds
must rise the new California of the
coming century, no longer the Califor
nia of the gold-seeker and the adven
turer, but the abode of high-minded
men and women, trained in the wis
dom of the ages, and imbued with the
love of nature, the love of man, and
the love of God. And bright indeed
will be the future of our State if in
the usefulness every hope and prayer
of the founders shall be realized."
University Life
With those words of mine, spoken
twenty-four years ago, the University
began. "We come together today," I
said, "for the first time as teacher and
students. With this relation, the life
of the University begins. It is such
personal contact of young men and
young women with scholars and in
vestigators which constitutes the life
of the University. It is for us as
teachers and students in the Univer
sity's first year to lay the foundations
of a school which may last as long as
human civilization. Ours is the
youngest of the universities, but it is
heir to the wisdom of all the ages,
and with this inheritance it has the
promise of a rapid and sturdy growth
"But the future, with its glories and
responsibilities, will be in other
hands. It is ours at the beginning to
give the University its form, its ten
dencies, its customs. The power of
precedent will cause to be repeated
over again everything that we do —
our errors as well as our wisdom, it
becomes us, then, to begin work mod
estly, as under the eye of the coming
ages. We must lay the foundations
broad and firm, so as to give full sup
port to whatever edifice the future
may build. Ours is the humbler task,
but not the least in importance, and
our work will not be in vain if all we
do is done in sincerity. As sound as
the rocks from which these walls are
hewn should be the work of every
teacher who comes within them. To
the extent that this is true will the
University be successful. Unless its
work be thus 'wrought in sad sincer
ity' nothing can redeem it from fail
ure. In this feeling, and realizing,
too, that only the help we give to the
men and women whose lives we reach
can justify our presence here, we are
ready to begin our work.
"Our University has no history to
fall back upon; no memories of great
teachers to haunt its corridors; in
none of its rooms appear the traces
which show where a great man has
lived and worked. No tender asso
ciations cling, ivv-like, to its fresh,
new halls. It is hallowed by no tra
dition. it is hampered by none.
Traditions and associations it is ours
to make. From our work the future
of the University will grow, as the
splendid lily from the modest bulb."
Dr. Jordan delivered the annual
Founders' Day address in the Assem
bly Hall this morning upon the sub
ject of "The Foundation Ideals of Stan
ford University."
From an historical as well as a per
sonal viewpoint it is eminently fit
ting that Dr. Jordan should discourse
upon this theme, which will farm a
companion piece to the Chancellor's
"The Story of a Good Woman." The
latter also first appeared as a Found
ers' Day address, and was a eulogy
of the life of Mrs. Jane Lathrop Stan
ford, and a narrative of the history
of the University during the so-called
"dark days" between 1893 and 1899,
when the ultimate fate of the institu
tion was in constant doubt.
In treating his subject this morning
Dr. Jordan gave expression to the
ideals which inspired Senator Leland
Stanford in his conception of Stanford
University. Selecting the successful
system then in practice at Cornell
University as the most suitable for the
needs of Stanford, the Senator called
upon Andrew D. White, who was
mainly responsible for the efficiency
of Cornell, where he was then acting
president, to assume the duties of
chief executive at Stanford. In declin
ing White .recommended David Stan-
Jordan, then president of the Universi
ty of Indiana, for the position.
When the present Chancellor name
to Stanford he was the youngest uni
versity president, in po'nt of years, in
the country, and when he resigned he
was the oldest in point of service, a
fact of no little significance.
The important share which Dr.
David Starr Jordan had in forming, di
recting. and developing the "founda
tion 'deals" of Stanford University
need no comment.
The address of Dr. Jordan follows:
I)r. Jordan Introduces Speech.
When Charles Darwin felt himself
growing old, he sat down in his home
in Kent to write the story of his life —
fo.r his children. He wrote, he said, as
might a spirit from another world,
looking down on this one. not swayed
by any emotion, of hope, of fear, or
eagerness or uncertainty as to the
final end. And so, today, T wish in
some such disembodied fashion to tell
the story of the founding of a univer
sity, and of the purposes and ideas
with which it started out.

Twenty-four years is a short time
in the history of a nation or a univer
sity, which is a small and swiftly
changing nation within itself. It is a
long time in the life of a man, as those
who with me have spanned it can tes
tify.
The story of today will not go far
beyond the first day of October, 1891,
when we gathered in the northwest
gate of the quadrangle for the open
ing day.
Founder and President.
Purpose must come before action,
and in the very beginning there were
only two to frame this purpose, the
founder and the president. Leland
Stanford was then scarcely older than
I am now, and I was a mere "youth
of promise," from the simple-minded
east, a "new man," as the San Francis
co journals kindly put it, and Mr.
Stanford had a reputation wider than
the nation, a philosopher and a lover
of li s kind as well as a business man
and a statesman.
A ('auspicious Figure.
Leland Stanford had been for a gen
eration the most conspicious figure in
California. He was a .rich man, weal
thy through his own effort, and he
hoped to leave humanity better for his
riches. Especially he wished to bring
to the California he loved, and who, af
ter California's fash-on, ha.l f'nst, loved
him, the abundance of life, which is
the best gift of the University. Leland
Stanford had held many relations with
California. He was an actual pion
eer. When the Civil War broke out he
had no doubt of his position and he
stood for free speech in Sacramento,
when freedom was dangerous. He was
the war governor of the state, trusted
by Lincoln, and like Lincoln, he knew
how to count the cost in a difficult
crisis. He had been one of the four
men of Sacramento who saw the vision
of a railway over the Sierras. In 1891
he was United States Senator from
California, known to every one and be
loved by all who came near him.
Typically American.
His wide influence did not rise from
his wealth. Wealth and influence
sprang alike from his personality. He
was broad-minded and long-headed,
and his simplicity of life kept him al
ways in touch with the people. "He
was active," it was said, "when other

men were idle; he was generous when
other men were grasping; he was lof
ty when other men were base." He
was thoroughly a man, and a man of
the type we like to call American.
One word of praise of Stanford
clings to my memory. At his funeral
in 1893, Horatio Stebbins in his state
ly fashion told how the Greeks did
honor to a slain hero. Then turning
to the pallbearers, stalwart men from
the Southern Pacific, he said: "Gentle
up your strength a little, for 'tis a man
ye bear."
University Idealized.
The story of the death of the only
son is known to Stanford people. The
boy, young Leland, fell ill in Rome
from the mosquito-borne Roman fever.
After coming back to Florence while
convalescent, he died of failure of the
heart. After the long vigil of a dreary
night, Mr. Stanford awoke one morn
ing with these words on his lips: "The
children of California shall be my chil
dren." And this thought grew crystal
line as the dream of a great universi
ty. And in this plan, nis wife, Jane La
throp Stanford, gave him most loyal
service, which continued unshaken
throughout twelve years of lonely wid
owhood. The story of her love and de
votion I have told as well as I could on
another occasion, the parallel to this.
< aliforiiia tlie .Motif.
So the decision was made that the
beloved Palo Alto farm —famed for the
finest horses in the world —should be
come a university campus. The Uni
versity buildings should have a motif
from California. To this end the old
mission of San Juan Capistrano, near
the seashore above San Diego, founded
by Father Junlpero Serra more than a
century before, was chosen to give the
University its form. Appeal was made
to the greatest living architects, Henry
Hobson Richardson, of Boston, for
the best was none too good for the new
University. Richardson died before
any work was begun, but his partners,
Shepley, Rutan and Coolidge, took up
the plans in all essential respects just
as we see them now in stone. Freder
ick Law Olmsted devised the garden
effects, but his plans are as yet car
ried out only in part. The streets were
laid out, and at Mr. Stanford's request.
I named them for the early padres,
who led in the missions of California.
Among these are Salvatierra Street,
named for the Jesuit father who first
urged the California missions; Serra
Avenue, fo,r Junipero Serra, the Fran
ciscan who first began the work of
building them, performing marvels of
energy and patience in long marches up
and down the coast from La Paz to
Monterey, and in dealing with the be
setting Indians for whose salvation,
temporal and spiritual, the missions
themselves were planned. Lasuen
street is named for Firmin Lasuen, the
wise and self-contained successor to
the impulsive and enthusiastic Padre
Serra. Po.rtola, Arguello, and Alvara
do were the first governors of Califor
nia; Crespi its first historian, Costan
zo its first civil engineer. These with
Ortega, Rivera, and the rest, were
members of Portola's party of explora
tion who first saw the Golden Gate
and the bay belvnd it. They likened it
to a "Mediterranean Sea," and they
named it for their patron saint, San
Francisco of Assisi, who knew the lan
guage of the birds and even that of
the fishes. Meanwhile, and with char
acteristic energy, Mr. Stanford set out
to make his vision into fact. Articles
of endowment were drawn up, and
buildings we.re provided. A president
was found and he was sent forth to
choose fifteen professors. It was not
wise to have too many professors till
we knew whether students would
come. The press notices were not en
thusiastic. The New York Mail and
Express said: "There is as much need
of a university in California as there
is in Switzerland for an asylum for de
cayed sea-captains." And it was
prophesied that even the fifteen would
for years "lecture in marble halls to
empty benches." Rut the benches
were not empty, as we all know; the
never to be forgotten pioneers of '95
were all there, altogether to the num
ber of 465, and on the first of Octob
er, with all bright auspices of earth
and sky. of wealth and generosity, the
University began. Of the fifteen pro
fessors, oldest of the old guard, par
takers in all joy, worry and success,
ten still remain,—Branner, Stillman,
Marx, Jenkins, Sanford, Campbell. An
derson, Gilbert, G.riffin, and Elliott.
Meanwhile, these were the ideas or
the Founder, as he gave them to me in
many evenings together, the
stones of the quadrangle were leaping
to find their places.
How I came in the matter you will
find in the autobiography of President
White, of Cornell, if you are interested
to read.
Possibilities of Knowledge.
The need to train his own son first
turned Mr. Stanford's thoughts to edu
cational matters. His early acquaint
ance with Professor Agassiz, perhaps
the greatest of American teachers, di
rected his thought into channels of
wisdom. From Agassiz he derived a
realizing sense of the possibilities of
human knowledge and the impelling
force of man's intellectual needs, —
that "hunger and thi.rst after truth
which only the destitute student
knows." "Man's physical needs are
slight," he said, "but his intellectual
needs are hounded only by his capacity
to receive.'
Major System Valued.
The major-subject system, especially
characteristic of Stanford, but later
taken in part by several other univer
sities, among them Harvard, may be
traced in some degree back to Agassiz.
It was first devised in Indiana,, in
1887, by a committee of three, D,r. Bry
an. now president of Indiana, Dr. von
Jagemann. now professor in Harvard,
and myself. In framing the plan I
had in mind the oft repeated words of
Atrassiz: "A spec'alty is the backbone
of education." "The mind is made
strong by the thorough possession of
something." And those of us who be
lieved with President White in the de
mocracy of the mental powers, realized
that in the higher education of a stu
dent it is the man himself who can
best choose what the backbone of his
training should be. For in making a
student, there are but two types of im
pulses strong enough to count, to love

the work itself and to know how the
work is related to his future life.
Mr. Stanford believed that an essen
tial part of education was thorough
knowledge in some one line, so firmly
held as to be effective for practical re
sults. He believed in early choice of
profession. The course of study, how
ever broad and however long, should
in all its parts look toward effective
1 fe. The profession chosen early gives
a purpose and stimulus to all the in
termediate training. He saw clearly
the need of individualism in education,
and that the course of study should be
built around the individual man he is.
The supposed needs of the average
man, developed by a consensus of edu
cational philosophers do not suffice for
the actual man in actual life. We must
be fed with the food that is good for
us. It is for 11s that it must be adap
ted, not for some average man in some
overage age. The ready-made curri
culum belongs to the same category
as ready-made clothing. It is some
thing cheap and easy for the man with
out individual needs.
Democracy and Knowledge.
No other university has recognized
so distinctly as ours the absolute de
mocracy of knowledge. The earlier
traditions of Cornell pointed in this di
rection, and for this reason Mr. Stan
ford found in Cornell, rather than in
Harvard Yale, or Michigan, the
nearest existing approach to his
own ideal. It was Ezra Cornell's
hope "to found an institution where
any person could find instruction in
any study." Cornell and Stanford, in
so far as they are loyal to these tra
ditions, know neither favored students
nor favored studies. No class of men
is chosen to the exclusion of others,
and no class of studies is given a fal
lacious importance through force of
academic pressure or through inertia
of academic tradition. While various
kinds of knowledge are of varying
worth td different persons, each has
its own value to the world, and the
value to the individual must he de
termined in each case by itself. The
university should be no respecter of
persons. It is not called on to approve
or condemn the\various orders of ge
nius that come to it for training.
There has been no greater hindrance
to educational progress than the hler
rchy of studies, the fiction that certain
kinds of work had an invisible value
not to be measured by tangible results.
That the work of a university should
be essentially specialized, fitting the
individual for definite forms of higher
usefulness, was an idea constantly pre
sent with Mr. Stanford. He had no
interest in general education as an end
in itself. He had no desire to fit men
for a life of leisure, or for any life
which did not involve a close adaption
of means to ends.
No Educational Millinery.
As a practical man, accustomed to
go to the heart of things, Mr. Stanford
had little respect for educational mil
l'nery and for the conventionalities
which have grown up about the great
institutions of the Old World. He saw
clearly the value of thoroughness, the
need of freedom, the individuality of
development, but cared little for the
machinery by which these ends were
achieved. So it was decreed that tho
new university should be simple in its
organization, with only those details
of structure which the needs of the
times should develop within it. If it
must have precedents and traditions,
it must make its own. "I would have
this institution," he said, "help to fit.
men and women for usefulness in this
life, by 'ncreasing their individual
power of production, and by making
them good company for themselves and
others." Or, in my own words to
young men, spoken in this same time:
"The whole of your life must be spent
in your own company, and only the
educated man is good company for
himself."
And besides, "The world turns asid<>
to let any man pass who knows whi
ther he is going."
In proportion to the extent to which
it widens the range of human know
ledge and of human power, in that de

gree does an institution deserve the
name of university. A man content
with the truth that now is, and without
ambition to venture into the unknown,
is not the proper man to be a university
professor. The truth that now is be
longs to the lower schools. The value
of its original work is the best single
test by wh'ch a university may be
judged; and as it is the best, so is it
also the severest. The incentive for
research should be from within. It
cannot be applied from without.
In its public relations, the university
stands for infinite patience, the calm
tasting of ideas and ideals. It con
ducts no propaganda, it controls no
affairs of business. There is no one
it wishes to elect to office. It is the
judge of the principles of wisdom and
the ways of nature. The details of
action it must leave to men whose
business it is to guide the currents of
the moment.
Freedom and Truth.
It was our hope that we might give
to our students the priceless legacy of
the educated man, the power of know
ing what really is. The higher edu
cation should bring men into direct
contact with truth. It should help to
free them from the dead hands of old
traditions and to enable them to form
opinions worthy of the new evidence
each new day brings before them. An
educated man should not be the slave
of the past, not a copy of men who
have gone before him. He must be in
some degree the founder of a new in
tellectual dynasty; for each new think
er is a new type of man. Whatever
is true is the truest thing in the uni
verse, and mental and moral strength
alike come from our contact with it.
And so wo believed that influence that
gees out from these halls should em
phasize the value of truth. The es
sence of scholarship is to know some
thing which is absolutely true; to
have, in the words of Huxley, "some
knowledge to the certainty of which
no authority could add nor take away
one jot or tittle, and to which the
tradition of a thousand years is but
as the hearsay of yesterday." The
scholar, as was once said of our great
chemist, Benjamin Silliman, must have
"faith in truth as truth, faith that
there is a power in the universe good
enough to make trutli-telling safe and
strong enough to make truth-telling ef
fective." The personal influence of gen
uineness, as embodied in the life of a
teacher, is one of the strongest moral
forces which the school can bring to
its aid; for moral training comes not
mainly by precept, but by practice.
We may teach the value of truth to
our students by showing that we value
it ourselves.
Educational Instrument.
Mr. Stanford insisted as a vital prin
ciple that the university exists for
the benefit of the students, present,
past, and future. It has no exist
ence or function save as an instru
ment of education. To this principle
all others should be subordinate. In
his opening address, he said to the
students of the Pioneer Class: "You
are the most important factor in this
university. It is for your benefit that
it has been established."
No Test in Numbers.
That the new university would in
time attract great numbers of stu
dents, Mr. Stanford believed as a mat
ter of course, although he found In
California few who shared his optim
ism. But he was never deceived with
the cheap test of numbers in estimat
ing the value of institutions. He knew
that a few hundred men well trained
under high influences would count for
more than as many thousand, hurried
in droves over a ready-made curricu
lum by young tutors, themselves
scarcely out of college. So it was de
creed that numbers for numbers' sake
should never be a goal of Stanford
University. And he further made the
practical request that not one dollar
directly or indirectly should be spent
in advertising. The university has no
goods for which it is anxious to find
customers.
The greatest nepd of the student is
the teacher Mr. Stanford said: "In

order that the president may have the
assistance of a competent staff of pro
fessors, we have provided that the
best talent obtainable shall be pro
cured and that liberal compensation
shall always lie offered." Again lie
said: "Ample endowment may have
been provided, intelligent management
may secure large income, students
may present themselves In numbers,
but in the end the faculty makes or
mars the university."
Facility (Greatest Need.
Compared with the character of the
faculty, every other element in the
university is of relatively little im
portance. The chief duty of the col
lege president is the choice of teach
ers. If he lias learned the art of sur
rounding himself with men who are
clean, sane, and scholarly, most other
matters of university administration
will take care of themselves, lie can
not fail if he has good men around
him. And in the choice of teachers
the element of personal sanity seemed
of first importance to Mr. Stanford—
the ability to see things as they are.
The university chai.r should be a cen
ter of clear-seeing from which right
acting should rad ate.
Mr. Stanford said, "I hope the Uni
versity may begin where the State
University leaves off." By this he
meant to lay stress on technical, pro
fessional. and research work, activi
ties which were at that time very lit
tle developed at the State University.
He spoke approvingly of an institu
tion which should combine the special
features of Johns Hopkins and Cor
nell.
A professor to whom original in
vestigation is unknown should have
no place in a university. Men of com
monplace or second-hand scholarship
are of necsssity men of low ideals,
however much the fact may be dis
guised. A man of high ideals must be
an investigator. He must know and
think for himself. Only such as do
this can be really great as teachers.
Universities already begin to recog
nize that their most important profes
sors may be men who teach not in
classes, but only by contact with indiv
iduals, devoting time and strength to
advanced research. The presence and
example of the men who really know
may be worth to the student body a
hundred-fold more than the precepts
and drill of the others. They set
standards of thought. They help to
create the university spirit, without
which any college is but a grammar
school of a little higher pretensions.
University Atmosphere.
In the address on the first day in the
old quadrangle, I said: "If our work
is successful, our ideals will appear in
the daily life of the school. In a
school, as in a fortress, it is not the
form of the building, but the strength
of the materials, which determine its
effectiveness. With a garrison of
hearts of oak, it may not matter even
whether there be a fortress. What
ever its form, or its organization, or
its pretensions, the character of the
university is fixed by the men who
teach. "Have a university in shan
ties, nay in tents," Cardinal Newman
has said, "but have great teachers in
it." The university spirit flows oik
from these teachers, and its organiza
tion serves mainly to bring them to
gether. "Colleges only serve us," says
Emerson, "when their aim is not. to
drill, but to create; when they gath
er from afar every ray of various
genius to their hospitable halls, and
by their concentrated fires set the
heart of their youth in flames."
Strong men make universities strong.
A great man never fails to leave a
ureat mark on every youth with whom
he conies in contact. Too much em
phasis cannot be laid on this: that
the real purpose of the university or
ganization is to produce a university
atmosphere—such an atmosphere as
gathered itself around Arnold at Rug
b.v. around Dollinge.r at Munich,
around Linnaeus at Upsaln. around
Werner at Freiberg, around Agassiz
at Cambridge, around Hopkins at Wil
liamstown, around White at Ithaca,
around all great teachers everywhere.
Agassi/, once said: "The physical
suffering of humanity, the wants of
the poor, the craving of the hungry
and naked, appeal to the sympathies
of every one who has a human heart.
Hut there are necessities which only
the destitute student knows. There is
a hunger and thirst which only the
highest charity can understand and re
lieve; and 011 this solemn occasion
let me say that every dollar given for
higher education, in whatever depart
ment of knowledge, is l'kely to have
a greater influence on the future char
acter of our nation than even the
thousands, the hundred thousands,
and millions which'we have spent, or
are spending, to raise the many to ma
terial ease and comfort."
Presidential Powers.
Mr. Stanford laid much stress on
the work of the President of the Uni
versity. The hoard of trustees were
directed to give to him such powers
as would enable him, with his col
leagues. to control all educational pol
icies, and such that for their success
he might justly lie held responsible.
At some future time the presidency
of the American university may lie an
outworn office, its function to he taKOn
by a committee from the faculty, as
some now urge that it should be.
Hut this cannot be done in the period
of formation of the American univer
s'ty, and no American university has
yet passed its period of youth and
growth. In that lies its strength. Its
hope lies in its imperfection. It is
not born full-grown, as the German
universities have claimed to be. With
perfection, decline sets in, as these
univers'ties have clearly shown. Ev
ery forward movement needs a lead
er. "An institution is but the length
ened shadow of a man."
It is for the president to take the
initiative in all educational affairs, to
give the university its color and its
personality. lie must know how to
take advice and how to value it. The
more checks and balances on his ac
tion the better, but none should de
prive him of his initiative. It is for
him to seek and develop those rare
elements of feeling and character by
which one university is known from
another. And in our University we
tried to weld together such elements
to form what we fondly hoped men
would call the "Stanford Spirit."
Value of Keonomy.
It was the idea of the founders that
each student should be taught the
value of economy—that lavish expen
ditures bring neither happiness nor
success. "A student," it was said by
one of the founders, "will lie better
fitted to battle with the trials and trib
ulations of life, if he lias been taught
the worth of money, the necessity of
saving and of overcoming a desire to
imitate those who are better off in the
world's goods. For, when he has
learned how to save and how to con
trol inordinate desires, be will be rel
atively rich During the past three
and a half years of close observation
on my part, the importance of econ
uniy bas impressed itself forcibly up
on me, and I wish it to be taught to
all students of the university. Na
ture has made the surroundings of
the university beautiful, and the sub
stantial character of the buildings
gives them an appearance of luxury.
I wish this natural beauty and com
parative luxury to impress upon the
students the necessity of their preser
vation for the generations that are to
follow. The lesson thus taught will
remain with them through life and
help them to teach the lesson to
ethers. The un'versitv buildings and
grounds are for their use while stu
dents. in trust for students to come."
\i*l of
The value of the study of political
and social science as a remedy for
defects of government was clearly
seen by Mr. Stanford. "All govern
ments." he said, "at" governments by
public opinion, and in the long run
ever', people is a■ well governed as it
deserves." Hence increase of knowl
edge brin-'s about bett r government.
For help in such matters the people
bavr a ri hi to look to their un ! ', : r

sities and university men. It was his
theory that the art of government is
still in its infancy. "Legislation lias
not, as a rule, been a ainst the peo
ple, but it has not done the good tli it
it might." "No greater biow can be
struck at labor than that which ren
ders ts products insecure." In the
externum of volir't irv co-operation,
he saw a remedy for many present ills,
as lie siw in the lav ef mutual help
the essence of i ur Christian civiliza
tion. He said, in laying the corner
stone: "Out of these suggestions
urows the consider tion of the great
advantages, especially to the laboring
man, of cooperation, by which each
individual has the benefit of the intel
lectual and physical forces of his as
sociates. It is I \ tli • intelligent ap
plication of these |) j c'iiles that there
will le found th? greatest lever *.o
elevate the mass o r humanity, and
laws should h< f:;iincd to protect and
develop co-operat ve associations. . . .
They will accomplish all that is

sought to lie secured by labor leagues,
trades unions and other federations of
workmen, and will be free from the
objection of even impliedly attempt
i 11 to take the unauthorised 01
wrongful control ( 112 the property,
capital, or time of others."
li<>>:ilt > and Co-ojicmtieii,
One result of voluntary co-opera
tion, in .Mr. Stanford's view, would bo
the development of the spirit of loy
> alty. the most precious attribute of
[ the laboring man in any grade, in any
j field, to the interest or cause which
' he serves. One great evil of the pres
ent era of gigantic industrial organ
izations is that it takes no account of
the spirit of loyalty, without which
no man can do li s best work. The
huge trust does away with tlie feeling
of personal association. The equally
huge trades union, in many of its op
erations. strikes directly at the per
sonality of the individual workman.
It makes him merely a pawn to be
moved hither and thither in the game
of industrial war. In the long run,
j no enterprise can flourish, unless
' those who carry it on throw them
selvi s, heart and soul,' into its ser
vice. On the other hand..no one can
do a greater injury to the cause of
labor than to take loyalty out of the
category of working virtues. IJ is one
if the traditional good traits of ihr
healthy college man to be loyal to bis
j t'ollege. This virtue Mr. Stanford
would have cultivated in all effective
ways, and in loyalty on both sides lie
would find a practical < lution of most

112 the la! or troubles of today. That
he carried his ideas into his own prac
tice ir shown by the unflinching devo
tion of all his own employees of what
ever grad j throughout his life. They
were taught to bel eve in him. to be
lieve in th > worth of their own work,
a: d thi s to have respect for tliem
selw-. Much of the dheont ill of the
day has its origin in lack of self-re
spect. The pawn that is moved in the
game of sympathetic strike lias no
control over his own actions, and
then f< re : o respect for his own mo
tives. Th <!< veiop rent of intelligent,
vclur.tary co-i.peration. n the long
r ni, lrakeg the wtvkman more than a
machi '.e. If lie is such, in the long
rti" again, ho will re e've whatever
he deserves. 11 1 will be a factor in
c'vi'i r ior, when the unskilled, un
thinking laborer is not.
\\ iisi < i I abor.
\he - ■ it economic waste in labor
oft m engaged Mr. Stanford's atton
t'on, avd he found its remedy in edu-

•'tin". "Orce," ho faid, "tho great
"n )o c:f labor was to supply the
necessities of life; now, hut a small
portion of our people are so engaged.
' o: d. clothing and shelt.fr are com
non in our country to every provident
'lerscn, excepting, of course, in occa
sional accidental cases. The great
demard for I ilor is to supply what
may he termed Intellectual wants, to
which there is no limit, except that
of intelligence to conceive. If all the
j relations and obligations of man
j were properly understood, it would
I net he nec«vsary for people to make a
| burden of labor. Th > great masses of
I the toilers are now compelled to per
form such an amount of labor as
makes life often wearisome. \n intel
ligent system of education would cor
rect. this inequality. It would make
I
the humblest laborer's work more
I valuable, it would increase both the
| demand and supply for skilled labor,
and reduce the number of the non
producing class. It would dignify la
hor, and ultimately would go far to
wipe out the mere distinctions of
wealth and ancestry. It would achieve
| a. bloodless revolution and establish
j a republic of industry, merit and
; learning.
"Ilow near to that state we may be,
j or how far from it, we cannot tell. It
■ stents very far when we contemplate
the great standing a litres of Europe,
where over five millions of men (or
about one for every twelve adult
male i are marching about with gnus
on their shoulders to preserve the
•tea(' • of nations, while hovering near

them is an innumerable force of po
lice to preserve the peace of individ
uals; but when we remember the pos
sibilities of e vilizution and the power
of education, we can foresee ;i time
when these soldiers and policemen
shall be changed to useful, producing
citizens, engaged in lilting the bur
dens of the people instead of increas
ing them. And yet. extravagant as are
the nations of Europe in standing ar
mies and preparations for war, their
xtravagance in the waste of labor is
still greater. Education, by teaching
the intelligent use of machinery, is
the only remedy for such waste."
Education a Itirtbriglit.
Mr. Stanford believed that no edu
cational system could be complete in
which entrance to the university was
a detached privilege of the chosen
few. lie believed in the unbroken lad
der from the kindergarten to the uni
versity, a ladder that, each one should
be free to climb, as far as his ability
or energy should permit. He believed,
with lan Maclaren. in keeping the
path well trodden from the farmhouse
to the university, lie asked that this
sentence from the president's first, ad
dress be placed on the University Reg
ister: "A generous education is the
birthright of every man and woman in
America." In Emerson's words:
"America means opportunity," and
opportunity comes through training to
receive it. To have such a train'ng
is to be truly free born, and this is
the birthright of each child of the re
public.
A friend at Aix-les-Mains once ar
gued with him that there is already
too much education, and that to in
crease it further ! s simply to swell the
volume of discontent. "I insisted."
Mr. Stanford said, "that there can not
be too much education any more than
too much health or intelligence. Do
you happen to know any man who has
been too well educated. Where does
he live? What is his address? If you
cannot find such a man, you cannot
speak of overeducation." There has
been unwise education or misfit, edu
cation. Some highly educated men
are neither wise nor lit, and there is a
kind of education that comes from
experience and not from books. But
with all this, too thorough or too
good a training no one ever had. Ig
norance is shadow. Education is light.
Nothing is more unpractical than
darkness, nothing is more practical
than sunshine.
Secret of Human Power.
Science is knowledge tested and set
in order, and each advance in knowl
<l ge cirrics with it a corresponding
increment of power. A machine, to
Mr. Stanford, was not a mere saver of
lal or. but an aid to labor, increasing
its efficiency and therefore adding to
the value of men. Hv greater knowl
edge of the forces of nature we ac
quire greater skill in turning these
forces '11 to man's service through the
harness of machinery. In increase of
scientific knowledge he found the se
cret of human power. An education
which does not disclose the secret of
power is unworthy the name. "We
may always advance toward the infi
nite," was a favorite saying of his.
He could find no limit to the develop
in lit of civilization. The possibilities
of human progress expressed to him
the measure of infinite goodness, in
his own words: "The beneficence of
the Creator toward man on earth, and
the possibilities of humanity, are one
and the same."
But in his forecast of the myriad
triumphs of applied science, he did not
forget that knowledge itself must pre
cede any use man can make of it.
Pure science must always go before
applied science. The higher forms of
thought have their place in mental
growth as necessities in the concrete
preparation for action,
In the new university he decreed
that "the work in applied science::
he decreed that "the work in applied
shall be carried along with that
in the pure sciences and the hu
manities. and that, so far as may be.
all lines of work included in the plan
of the university shall be equally fos
tered."
Itcnct'itN el' Vsseeialion.
Mr. Stanford's belief that literature
and engineering should be pursued
side by side was shown by his wish
to provide for each with equal gene.r

osity. And the students of each are
tlii' gainers by this relation. The de
votee of classical culture is strength
ened by his association with men to
whom their college work is part of
the serious duty of life. The student
of engineering stands with both feet
on tlie ground, li s success in life
depends on the exactness of his
knowledge of machinery and of the
basic principles of mechanics and
maihematics. He must be in dead
earnest if lie would succeed at all. On
the other hand, the student of realities
uains by his association with the poet,
the philosopher and the artist. The
finer aspects of life are brought to his
notice, and from this association re
sults tolerance and breadth of sym
( oeditcationa! \(ha»t:iges.
That worn n should receive higher
education as well as men was an ax
iom 'o Mr. Stanford. Coeducation was
taken for granted from the first, pud
the young women of Stanford have
■ ( v ;■ had to question the friendliness
I their welcome. "We have provid
ed." Mr. Stanford says"in the articles
of endowment, that the education of
tlie sexes shall be equal—deeming it.
of special importance that those who
are to be mothers of the future gen
eration shall be fitted to mold and di
rect th,' infantile mind at its most crit
ical period."
The leading argument for coeduca
tion is akin to one just indicated for
the uiron in one institution of the
various lines of literature, art, sci
ence. and applied technology.
In women's education, as planned
for women alone, the tendency is to
ward (he study of beauty and order.
Literature and language take prece
dence over science. Expression is
valued more highly than action. In
carrying this to an extreme, the ne
c ssary relat on of thought to action
becomes obscured. The scholarship
developed tends to be ineffective, be
cause it is not related to life. The
educated women are likely to master
technique, rather than art; method
than substance. She may know a
good deal, but be able to do nothing.
Often her views of life must undergo
nainful changes before she can find
her place in the world.
In schools for men alone, the re
verse condition often obtains. The
::cnse of reality obscures the element
of beauty and fitness. It is of great
advantage to both men and women to
meet on a plane of equality in edu
cation. Women are brought into con
tact, with men who can do things—
men in whom the sense of reality is
strong, and who have definite views in
life. This influence affects them for
good. It turns them away from sen
timentalism. It is opposed to un
wholesome forms of hysterical friend
ship. It. gives tone to their religious
thoughts and impulses. Above all, it
tends to encourage action governed
by ideals, as opposed to that resting
on caprice. It gives them better
standards of what is possible and im
possible, when the responsibility for
action is thrown upon them.
In like manner, the association
with wise, sane and healthy women
has its value for young men. This
value has never been fully realized,
even by the strongest advocates of
coeducation. It raises their ideals of
womanhood, and the highest manhood
must bp associated with such an ideal.
Meanly and Kitnes*.
While the work of the teachers must
make the kernel of the university, we
must rejoice that here at Palo Alto
even the husks are beautiful. Reality
and fitness are great forces in educa
tion. Every object with which the
young mind comes iti contact leaves
on it. its trace. "Nothing is unim
portant in the life of man," and the
least feature of our surroundings has
its influence, greater or less. "There
was a child went forth every day,"
Walt Whitman tells us. "and the first
object that it looked upon, that ob
lect it became." It may be for a mo
ment or an hour, or "for changing
vcb s of years." The essence of civ
'Mv.ation is exposure to vfiilnc: ami
humanizing influence " ' n- in
i university," ♦ "o <>-. "is
ivnrth more than a dol'ar ' ■' '" ,1 "and
" ery dollar spent in tinker n nuiv< r
itv beautiful will be i en,aid with in


( liancellor David Starr .lonian.
terest in the enriching of the students'
lives.
It has been a reproach to America
that for the best of her sons and
daughters she has done the least. She
lias built palaces for lunatics, idiots,
crippled and blind, —nay, even for
criminals and paupers. But the col
lege students —"the young men of
sound mind and earnest purposes, the
noblest treasures of the State," to
quote the words of President White,
"she has housed in vile barracks."
The student has no need for luxury.
Plain living has ever gone with high
thinking. But grace and fitness have
an educative power too often forgot
ten in this utilitarian age. These
long corridors with their stately
arches, these circles of waving palms,
will have their part in the students'
training as surely as the chemical lab
oratory or the seminary-room. Each
stone in the quadrangle shall teach its
lesson of grace and genuineness, and
this Valley of Santa Clara shall occu
py a warm place in every student's
heart. Pictures of this fair region will
cling to his memory amid the figures
of the draughting-room. He will not
forget the fine waves of our two moun
tain ranges, overarched by a soft blue
Grecian sky, nor the ancient oak trees,
nor the gently sloping fields, changing
from vivid green to richest yellow, as
the seasons change. The noble jnllars
of the gallery of art, its rich treas
ures, the choicest remains of the
ideals of past ages—all these, and a
hundred other things which each one
will find out for himself, shall fill his
mind with bright pictures, never to be
rubbed out in the wea,r of life. Thus
in the character of every student shall
be left some imperishable trace of the
beauty of the Stanford farm, the estate
of Palo Alto.
Influence of Character.
Above and beyond all learning is
the influence of character, the impulse
to virtue and piety which comes from
men whose lives show that virtue and
piety really exist. For the life of the
most exalted as well as the humblest
of men, there can be no nobler motto
than that inscribed by the great
scholar of the last century over his
home in Hammarby: "Innocue vivito;
numen adest." Live blameless; God
is near. "This," said Linnaeus, "is
the wisdom of my life."
Religious Freedom.
Whsn the University was founded,
it was provided that in its religious
life, as in its scientific investigations,
it should be wholly free from outside
control. No religious sect or organi
zation and no group of organizations
should have dominion over it. The
University should exist for its own
sake, to carry out its own purposes,
and to bring out its own results in
its own way.
In this regard the die is cast, once
for all. The choice of the founders
of the University was deliberate and
final. They chose the path of intel
lectual and religious freedom, in the
very interest of religion itself. Re
ligion is devotion in action. In its
higher reaches it must be individual,
because it is a function of the indiv
idual soul which must stand in per
petual protest against the religion
that finds its end in forms and cere
monies and organizations.
The .requirement was a simple re
flection of Mr. Stanford's own relig
ious character, as expressed in the
words of one very near to him: "If
a firm belief in a beneficent Creator,
a profound admiration for Jesus of
Nazareth and His teachings, and the
certainty of a personal life hereafter,
constitute religion, then Leland Stan
ford was a religious man. The nar
row walls of a creed could not confine
him; therefore, he was not a pro
fessed member of any church, for in
each confession of faith he found
something to which he could not sub
scribe. But for the principles of re
ligion he hijd a profound veneration;
in h's heart were the true sentiments
of Christianity, and ho often said that
in his opinion the Golden Rule was
the cornerstone of all religion."
RelMon must form the axis of per
sonal character, and its prime import

ance the university cannot ignore. To
attain its culture it may use indirect
rather than direct means, the influ
ence of effort and character rather
than the imposition of forms. To ac
cept ecclesiastical help is to invite
ecclesiastical control toward ecclesi
astical ends. In the grant of endow
ment it was required that the trustees
should "prohibit sectarian instruction,
but have taught in the university the
immortality of the soul, the existence
of an all-wise and benevolent Crea
tor. and that obedience to His laws
is the highest duty of man."
The founders believed truly that
freedom of thought and action would
promote morality and religion, that a
deeper, fuller religious life would
arise from the growth of the individ
ual, that only where the "winds of
freedom blow" will spring up the
highest type of religious development.
For character is formed from within
by the efforts and strivings and as
pirations of the individual. It can
never be imposed from without. The
will is made strong from choosing
the right, not from having right ac
tion enforced upon it. The life of man
is "made beautiful and sweet through
self-devotion and through self-re
straint." But this must be chosen
voluntarily, else it fails of its purpose.
Growth Through Ages.
It was Mr. Stanford's hope to leave
the University free to grow through
the coming ages. He would extend
no dead hand from the grave to limit
its activities or to control its move
ments. The deed of gift is in favor
of education pure and simple. It has
no hampering clause, and the only end
in view is that of the help of human
ity through the extension of knowl
edge. "We hope," he said, "that this
institution will endure through long
ages. Provisions regarding details of
management, however wise they may
be at present, might prove to be mis
chievous under conditions which may
arise in the future."
The growth of the University must
remain the best evidence of the
founder's wisdom. He had the sagac
ity to recognize the value of higher
education and the patriotism to give
the rewards of a successful life to its
advancement. He had the rare wis
dom to discriminate between the real
and the temporary in university organ
ization and management, and his pro
vision is for the genuine and the per
manent, not for that "which speedily
passes away." Still more rare, he had
the forethought to leave to each suc
ceeding generation, the duty of adapt
ing its details of administration and
methods to the needs of the time.
If the founders had said: "We will
found a university so strong that it
may endure for all the centuries,
whose organization shall be so free
and flexible that in each age it shall
reflect the best spirit of the time,"
they could not have given it greater
freedom of development than it has
today. For the glory of the univer
sity must lie in its freedom, in that
freedom which cannot fall into li
cense, nor lose itself in waywardness
—that freedom which knows but one
bond of control, the eternal truth of
God.
Perpetual Power.
When the University opened its
doors in 1891, Millicent Shinn printed
these words of prophecy: "Greater
than the achievement of lasting hon
or among one's fellow-men of later
generations, is it to become a living
power among them forever. It rarely
happens to one man and woman to
have both the power and the skill to
thus live after death, working and
shaping beneficently in the lives of
many—not of tens nor of hundreds,
but of thousands and tens of thou
sands, as the generations follow on.
Herein is the wisdom of money spent
in education, that each recipient of in
fluence becomes in his time a center
to transmit the same in every direc
tion. so that it multiplies forever in
geometric .ratio. The power to mold
unborn generations for good, to keen
one's hards mightily on human af
fairs after the flesh has been dust for
years, seems not onlv more than mor

tal, but more than man. Thus does
man become co-worker with God in
the shaping of the world to a good
outcome."
And this I said in my opening day
address, "The Golden Age of Califor
nia begins when its gold is used for
purposes like this. From such deeds
must rise the new California of the
coming century, no longer the Califor
nia of the gold-seeker and the adven
turer, but the abode of high-minded
men and women, trained in the wis
dom of the ages, and imbued with the
love of nature, the love of man, and
the love of God. And bright indeed
will be the future of our State if in
the usefulness every hope and prayer
of the founders shall be realized."
University Life
With those words of mine, spoken
twenty-four years ago, the University
began. "We come together today," I
said, "for the first time as teacher and
students. With this relation, the life
of the University begins. It is such
personal contact of young men and
young women with scholars and in
vestigators which constitutes the life
of the University. It is for us as
teachers and students in the Univer
sity's first year to lay the foundations
of a school which may last as long as
human civilization. Ours is the
youngest of the universities, but it is
heir to the wisdom of all the ages,
and with this inheritance it has the
promise of a rapid and sturdy growth
"But the future, with its glories and
responsibilities, will be in other
hands. It is ours at the beginning to
give the University its form, its ten
dencies, its customs. The power of
precedent will cause to be repeated
over again everything that we do —
our errors as well as our wisdom, it
becomes us, then, to begin work mod
estly, as under the eye of the coming
ages. We must lay the foundations
broad and firm, so as to give full sup
port to whatever edifice the future
may build. Ours is the humbler task,
but not the least in importance, and
our work will not be in vain if all we
do is done in sincerity. As sound as
the rocks from which these walls are
hewn should be the work of every
teacher who comes within them. To
the extent that this is true will the
University be successful. Unless its
work be thus 'wrought in sad sincer
ity' nothing can redeem it from fail
ure. In this feeling, and realizing,
too, that only the help we give to the
men and women whose lives we reach
can justify our presence here, we are
ready to begin our work.
"Our University has no history to
fall back upon; no memories of great
teachers to haunt its corridors; in
none of its rooms appear the traces
which show where a great man has
lived and worked. No tender asso
ciations cling, ivv-like, to its fresh,
new halls. It is hallowed by no tra
dition. it is hampered by none.
Traditions and associations it is ours
to make. From our work the future
of the University will grow, as the
splendid lily from the modest bulb."
