# Judicial Council
## CIA Protest Opinion 
### 
(Why did the student Judicial Council
acquit nine students who were accused of
Illegally demonstrating- against the Central
Intelligence Agency last Nov. 1? There was
no question on the facts of the case. No one
doubted that a sometimes noisy demonstra
tion took place at Encina Hall, and that these
nine took part in it. The dean of students had
pictures to prove it, and the defendants them
selves did not deny it)
(Yet the council found them all not guilty,
and by doing so outraged a number of stu
dents, faculty and administrators. The tension
is strong between the ASSU loft and the
dean's office, reaching beyond even to Build
ing 10. Most of the criticism of the council's
decision, especially among those not directly
involved in the case, is by necessity unin
formed, since the council's reasoning has not
been set forth in detail.
(The following 10,000 words, the full text
of the council's opinions, should help to bring
the issues into clear focus.)
OPINION OF THE JUDICIAL COUNCIL
Eric TREISMAN delivered an opinion in
which Rick STEWART and Lorie TARSHIS
joined:
I
THE UNIVERSITY POLICY on Campus
Demonstrations, which was approved by the
Committee on University Policy on June 3,
1964, provides as follows:
**'Campus demonstrations may be con
ducted in areas which are generally avail
able to the public, provided such demon
strations:
1. Are conducted in an orderly manner;
2. Do not interfere with vehicular or
pedestrian traffic;
3. Do not interfere with classes, sched
uled meetings and ceremonies; or
with other educational processes of
the University;
4. Are not held (a) within University
buildings; (b) within University sta
dia, amphitheaters or fields while
University functions are in progress
therein; or (c) in private residential
areas of the campus."
The policy, on its face, abridges the right to
speak freely, to assemble peaceably and to
petition the government for a redress of griev
ances. It purports, however, not to limit the
content of speech, for which we would strike
it down without hesitation, but the form. The
policy does not tell us what we may and may
not say, for what purposes we may assemble,
or on what matters we may seek government
al relief. It tells us how we may express our
selves, where we may assemble, and when we
may protest. There is, of course, nothing ille
gitimate or unreasonable, in principle, with
the latter sort of regulation. We have a sub
stantial and perfectly justifiable interest in
"maintaining on the campus an atmosphere
conducive to academic work."
There is no categorical reason why the Uni
versity should not be able to formulate rules
which, although affecting speech, are intended
to prevent disorder, preserve dialogue, and pro
tect private rights. Such rules, however, must
not wantonly or clumsily trespass upon the
sanctuary of free expression. Our First
Amendment freedoms are fragilely fine and
must be closely sheltered against abuse. So,
when a rule governing the form of exercise
of those freedoms is made and sought to be
enforced, we will regard it with the utmost
circumspection. We will look to see whether it
accomplishes its permissible purposes by the
narrowest practical means and does not result
in prohibitions beyond its sanctioned scope.
The University Policy in question does not
forbid all disorder, all interference with traf
fic, all interuptions of classes, or all irregular
conduct within University buildings. It forbids
only such disorder, etc., as takes place in the
course of a demonstration. Understanding
what is meant by the word "demonstration,"
then, is the key to interpreting the Policy.
"Demonstration" does not have a plain mean
ing. The Policy does not define the word, nor
does other University policy, nor the ASSU
Constitution or By-Laws, nor our precedents.
Webster's Third International Dictionary de
fines the term, in the relevant sense, as fol
lows:
4.: A public display of group feeling (as
of approval, sympathy, or antagon
ism) esp. towards a person, cause, or
action of public interest.
Let us see where this leads us.
THE VICE-PRESIDENT of the United
States last year paid a visit to Stanford. A
large group of students and teachers, intend
ing publicly to display their antagonism to
ward him or toward an action of public inter
est, greeted his appearance on the stage of
Memorial Auditorium with silence. As the
Dean of Students forthrightly acknowledged
at our hearing in this case, it is arguable that
this expression of dissent was a "demonstra
tion within a University building" and, hence,
a violation of the Policy on Campus Demon
strations.
It goes without saying that the University
has no interest in regulating forms of expres
sion sufficient to justify a prohibition of "con
spiracies of silence," even in the presence of
national leaders, or, to put the matter more
strongly, it would be a flagrant abridgement
of Constitutional rights for the University to
attempt to compel those who are not inclined
to do so to applaud its guests.
If the Demonstration Policy should encom
pass displays of group feelings of this sort,
it is overbroad. If it does not, then more prob
ably it would include the sort of display that
followed the non-applause, to wit: a walk-out
by a large portion of the audience, which oc
curred between the Vice-President's speech
and a question-and-answer period. And here,
too we think that the Policy would sweep too
broadly.
In any case, whether overbroad or not, the
Policy is indisputably vague. It does not tell
us, with any degree of specificity whatsoever,
what kind of conduct is to be considered a
demonstration. Vagueness is a species of over
broadness. When a potential protester cannot
determine whether his protest will be deemed
a demonstration forbidden by a vague rule, he
will be inclined, in order to stay within the
bounds of permitted conduct, to allow himself
a wide margin for error. He will forego acts

that might be forbidden by the rule but which
the rule cannot, on pain of overbroadness, for
bid. Thus the vague rule is, in effect, over
broad. It encroaches, unawares, as it were,
upon an area protected by the First Amend
ment.
However that all may be, one may say, it is
clear that the actions of the defendants in this
case were a demonstration. But this argument
is beside the point, for we do not decide for
this case only but for all possible cases of this
type. We cannot allow a Policy to stand which,
although it perhaps may not reach out beyond
its permissible scope to include these defen
dants, will possibly, if continued in force, ex
pose to disciplinary action other students
whose conduct is protected and, more signifi
cantly, will inevitably deter perfectly privi
leged dissent.
We do not, however, decide this case purely
in the abstract, for there are, as we shall now
reveal, other defects of overbroadness and
vagueness in the Demonstration Policy which
are intimately tied to the facts of the demon
stration in question.
THE POLICY PROHIBITS demonstrations
that are, for example, disorderly. It does not,
in so many words, prohibit the disorderly con
duct of individual participants in an otherwise
orderly demonstration. It would be unreason
able to say that a demonstration is orderly so
long as some of the participants therein are
orderly. So we have to conclude that a demon
stration as a whole is disorderly if a certain
portion of the demonstrators are disorderly.
(The Policy does not tell us how many demon
strators must be disorderly before the demon
stration is itself disorderly.) Since the Policy,
as we have said, forbid disorderly demonstra
tions and not isolated acts of disorderliness,
even within a demonstration, it follows that
every participant in such a demonstration,
whether himself disorderly or not, could be
said to have violated the Policy. (If such is the
case, then we have before us a question of
unequal application of the Policy, for there
were in the instant demonstration participants,
known to the Administration, who were not
charged with a violation; but we do not deal
with this question because we find such inter
pretation of the Policy as would make it ap
plicable to orderly participants unacceptable,
for the following reason.) Because no other
interpretation of the Policy seems possible, it
is again overbroad. To punish one person, an
orderly demonstrator, for what another per
son, a disorderly demonstrator, does would be
a denial of due process of law. And it would
be an undue infringement of free expression
if one were deterred from participating, in
what one hoped would be an orderly demon
stration, for fear that another would incrimi
nate one by becoming disorderly.
The defendants here are charged with hav
ing participated in a demonstration that was
not conducted "in an orderly manner." The
Policy sets no standards by which we can de
cide whether or not their conduct was orderly.
A rule or law merely forbidding "disorderly
conduct" without reference to speech would
itself be highly suspect on account of vague
ness, and, a fortiori, a rule that prohibits the
disorderly exercise of First Amendment rights,
without more, is acutely infected with the vec
tor of vagueness.
The Policy proscribes demonstrations which
"interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic."
It is fairly obvious that what this provision
means is that demonstrators must not block
the street or adjoining sidewalks. "Pedestrian"
is ordinarily used to refer to a person afoot
in or about the street; although etymologically
the word may refer to anyone afoot, we usual
ly do not speak of someone walking, say, in
side a building as a pedestrian; the additional
word "traffic" clinches this interpretation.
There should be no problem of vagueness here,
but one has been imported by the Administra
tion in charging the defendants with having
interfered with pedestrian traffic, even though
they are not alleged to have demonstrated in
or near the street. Because we are unwilling
to say that the Administration's interpretation
of the prohibition in question is wholly un
reasonable, we must note a problem of vague
ness. It should be said, too, that there is a
question of overbroadness, for it is difficult to
see how any demonstration could fail, on the
Administration's interpretation, to interfere
with someone who wished to walk from one
side of it to the other.
We should note, too, that there is vagueness
in the word "interfere." The Policy does not
tell us just what kind or degree of interference
constitutes a violation. During our hearing in
this case, one of the defendants testified that
he intended his mere presence in the demon
stration to interfere psychologically with the
intentions of CIA-interviewees. Is that inter
ference as contemplated by the Policy, or is
something more needed? How much more? Of
what?
DEMONSTRATIONS, according to the Pol
icy, must not "interfere with classes, sched
uled meetings and ceremonies, or with other
educational processes of the University." We
may assume that it is reasonable, eminently
so in fact, for the University to seek to pre
vent interference with "classes," and perhaps
also with "ceremonies." Insofar as "scheduled
meetings" are concerned, however, there are
two sorts of difficulties. One is with the mean
ing of the phrase. It appears that "scheduled
meetings" is qualified by the phrase "other
educational processes of the University." One
must not interfere, that is, with such sched
uled meetings as are educational processes of
the University. But what is an educational
process? Is a scheduled meeting of the ASSU
Legislature an educational process? Is a job
interview with a representative of the CIA an
educational process? How so? We are not told.
And what, for that matter, is a meeting? If
one person arranges with another to meet him
at a certain place to discuss a test and finds
the place jammed with demonstrators, has a
scheduled meeting, part of the educational
process, been interfered with?
The other difficulty with the phrase "sched
uled meetings" is shared by that provision of
the Policy which rules out demonstrations
that are held within University buildings, with
in stadia, amphitheaters or fields (while Uni
versity functions—what is a University func
tion?—are in progress therein), or in private
residential areas of the campus. We do not
have to treat at length with the problems
raised by this provision. It is sufficient to ask
the following obviously loaded questions:
Could the Alabama legislature constitutionally
pass a law forbidding demonstrations which in
any way interfere with scheduled meetings of
the Ku Klux Klan? Could a small Louisiana
town, consistent with the First Amendment,
punish a Negro for his accusatory presence in
a segregated public library? Could the Presi
dent of San Jose State College suspend a
group of students who, bearing placards, dis
tributed leaflets at a football game, protesting
discrimination against Black athletes? Could

the governor of Illinois, except in the face of
mass violence, call out the National Guard to
forbid the entry into the private residential
areas of Cicero by marchers seeking inte
grated housing? We admit that the answers to
these questions are not open and shut, but that
is all we need to show. We phrase the ques
tions in terms of racial discrimination not in
order to pre empt the issue but, in fact, for an
heuristic purpose. We, speaking generally,
recognize the right to demonstrate against
segregation, even around scheduled meetings,
in public buildings and stadia, and in private
neighborhoods. We fail to perceive any
thoroughgoing distinction between segregation
and other evils, such as to justify demonstra
tions of this sort against one and not against
the other. Racial discrimination, on a con
scious level, may not be a serious problem at
Stanford, relatively speaking:, but there are
here and in the society of which we are a part
other evils, arguably even more vicious, and
we believe that the University can no sooner
cut off or cut short the right to protest them
than other agenfries of a governmental char
acter could pass such sweeping restrictions on
the form of expression.
This is not to say that the University cannot
prevent any interference with scheduled meet
ings, simply that it cannot prevent all such
interference. It is not to say that the Univer
sity cannot make reasonable regulations as to
the place and manner of protest, it is to say
that the University cannot absolutely immu
nize certain activities or locations from ex
posure to all forms of "demonstrative" dis
sent. The Policy is, in still another respect, un
constitutionally overbroad.
THERE ARE AT LEAST three objections to
the approach that we have taken toward the
University policy on Campus Demonstrations.
One is that, although the Policy may be inter
preted so as to appear overboard and vaRU'?.
the Council should construe it in such a way
as to bring it within constitutional bounds.
The short answer to this objection is that even
if we were able to put a constitutional con
struction on the Policy, to do so would require
a complete re-writing, and we do not believe
that the making of University policy is the
function of the Judicidl Council.
The second objection is that we have before
us conduct which itself infringed free expres
sion, and it is inappropriate that we should
call upon the right of free speech in defense
of such action. The answer is that even if the
conduct in question infringed free speech (and
we do not say that it did) and even if we were
defending that conduct (and we are not), we
could not punish one infringement by means
of another. Two wrongs do not make a right.
The third objection to our approach is that
the Council is not a court of constitutional
adjudication. Another objection, so closely re
lated to this one as to be practically the same,
is that the University, being a private institu
tion, is not bound in its policy-making capacity
by constitutional principles. There are at least
four sufficient answers to this objection.
(1) Article I, Section 1, C, 1, of the ASSU
By-Laws provides that "Stanford students
have the right to provide for their own regu
lations by means of a judicial system incorpo
rating traditional and accepted safeguards of
individual liberties." This right is reaffirmed
by Paragraph 3, a, of the Tri-Partite Compact
(see concurring opinion of Richard SUCH).
We are bound in our decisions, and the parties
to the Compact are bound in their policy-mak
ing capacities, to uphold the traditional and
accepted safeguard of individual liberties par
excellence, the First Amendment.
(2) We cannot separate our roles as citizens
in a democracy from our roles as judges of
student conduct. It would be hypocritical in
the extreme, not to say morally schizophrenic,
to demand observance of constitutional liber
ties in public affairs and to ignore those liber
ties in our quasi-private affairs. There is no
surer way of bringing about a dilution of First
Amendment freedoms outside our jurisdiction
than to thin them down within it. The duty
strictly to follow constitutional standards is
especially compelling within a University, to
which the outside world looks for a correct
enunciation and application of those standards.
That the so-called Interim Judicial Body does
not take this view in its decisions is to us only
an occasion for dismay.
(3) We should have to apply what would
amount to constitutional principles even if
there were no Constitution. Freedom of ex
pression, the uninhibited interchange and con
frontation of ideas, the unconstrained moral
as well as scientific evamination and eval
uation of society and the world are the very
essence of a University. Society may consider
our freedom to be license, our ideas dangerous,
our judgments preposterous, and we are de
pendent on society (to f a degree that has been
highly exaggerated), but everytime that we,
for financial or other reasons, attempt to in
'ratiate ourselves to society by darning or
re-channeling the free flow of ideas we become
less a fount of knowledge and more a mill
stream. Perhaps it is because we have gone
so far in that direction already that the con
duct now before us is looked upon, from some
quarters, with such seriousness, or that the
occasion for that conduct arose at all. In any
case, we re-affirm the fundamental principle
that if there is a right anywhere to speak
freely, to assemble peaceably, and to petition
for a redress of grievances, it is here. And
if anyone can tolerate an unaggravated abuse
of those rights, it is we. We expect to be re
lentlessly assailed with speech and conduct of
the most agitating and unnerving sort—it is
our way of life. Any unreasonable limitation
on expression strikes a deadly blow at what
we are about. Wherever in this opinion, there
fore, we speak of "First Amendment free
doms,'' "constitutional rights," and so on, one
may read "the freedom of expression inherent
in the idea of a University" and the meaning
will be the same, or stronger.
(4) The First Amendment, as the other
provisions of the Bill of Rights, is generally
said to apply only to "state action." "State"
is, of course, understood to refer to any gov
ernmental agency. The First Amendment does
not, for example, prohibit a father from silenc
ing his children, for his action is not the
action of government. Nor does the Amend
ment say that the owner of a private business
may not ban political activity in the company
cafeteria, because a commercial enterprise is
not an agent of the state. Stanford is not, nor
are we, strictly speaking, a public body. It
does not follow, however, that the University
is a purely private organization, like a family
or a corporation. Stanford is chartered by the
State of California, which exempts it from
taxation; it is a creature of the State, and a
specially privileged one. Although governed
ultimately in an essentially medieval manner,
Stanford has all the trappings of a modern
governmental entity: an Academic Council, an
Executive, Legislature and Judiciary elected
by the students, a Constitution approved by

the student body, By-Lawi passed by the
Legislature, a police force, special traffic and
parking regulations, public thoroughfares, a
fire department, elementary schools, a post
office, and so on. The University has opened its
facilities to the public at large. It performs a
function of benefit to the public; it can even
b' 1 saM that the University, in educating Cali
fornia residents, takes upon itself a burden
that the State would otherwise have to bear
Most importantly, Stanford in fact governs; it
regulates not only the academic but also the
rivate behavior of more than twelve thous
and individuals; it punishes misbehavior. The
very act of our writing this opinion has a gov
ernmental character. If a label is needed, then
we would say that Stanford is a quasi-gov
ernmental agency; it is affected with the pub
lic interest. That the University and its agen
cies, in the exercise of their quasi-govern
mental powers, are bound by constitutional
restrictions on state action is a proposition
that cannot lightly be dismissed.
WE FIND that the University Policy on Cam
pus Demonstrations is, in the respects men
tioned above, overbroad and vague. We find
that, because of its overbreadth and vague
ness, the Policy violates the First Amendment
and the freedom of expression inherent in the
idea of a University. We therefore hold the
Policy to be entirely unenforceable in this case
and in any case that may come before us.
We wish to make it clear that we do not rule
out the possibility that the University may be
able to make a new Policy which will protect
the legitimate and reasonable interests of the
community and which will not be subject to
the objections that we have raised above. We
should, however, enter the following caveat:
the Tri-Partite Compact provides that "all Uni
versity constituencies are entitled to express
their views prior to the formulation of Uni
versity policies respecting matters in which
they have a legitimate interest."
In the absence of such a Policy, we should
point out, those interests are not unprotected.
The University has access to the criminal law
of the State, and, although bringing that law
to bear has disadvantages from several points
of view, it has the advantage of not carrying
with it the full onus of moral disapprobation
that is implicit in our decisions. There is also
available, in certain cases, the protection of
the Fundamental Standard.
All members of the Council joining in this
Part of the Opinion of the Council, the de
fendants are NOT GUILTY of violating' Uni
versity Policy on Campus Demonstrations.
n
THE DEFENDANTS were not charged with
violating the Fundamental Standard. We are
obligated, however, in every case that comes
before us, to inquire as to whether or not
that Standard has been violated.
Under the Fundamental Standard, the
charge, insofar as it stems from violation
of the University Policy, meets the same in
surmountable objections as does the charge
under the University Policy itself. Insofar
as it stems from the general considerations of
Part A of the Fundamental Standard, it de
mands a determination beyond the competence
of this council (see the concurring opinion of
Richard Such). But there is also a specific
charge of Fundamental Standard dimensions
that has been levelled against these defend
ants: that by causing the front door of Encina
Hall to be locked the demonstration, and thus
these defendants, interfered with the right of
another student; that is, with the right of one
Robert S. Bruch to be interviewed by the CIA.
(The two other "thwarted" interviewees had
never seriously contemplated CIA employ
ment; indeed, there was uncontradicted testi
mony that their intentions were to confront
the CIA interviewer with what they consid
ered to be the immorality of his position and
that their rights as they saw them had been
interfered with only by the University Admin
istration, if they had been interfered with at
all. On the basis of this uncontradicted testi
mony, the Council finds it unnecessary to con
sider any violation of the rights of these two.)
We have had no trouble In finding that such
a right was interfered with; but our determin
ation cannot stop there. At some ultimate
logical point, interference with some right is
necessary to the exercise of any right; thus
we find it imperative to examine the extent
of the interference, the cause of the interfer
ence, and the nature of the right interfered
with in this case.
On the facts, there can be no contention that
the extent of interference was more than
minimal. Bruch had been warned in advance
that the front door might be locked, and act
ing in accordance with previously-made ar
rangements he was forced to do no more than
make a phone call and walk to a side entrance
in order to get his interview. Had his parking
place been taken by an overtime or otherwise
unauthorized parker, Bruch would have been
no more put out. There was no evidence that
Bruch's way was blocked by the demonstrat
ors, or his person interfered with in any man
ner; we have a photograph of him standing
more or less calmly in front of the locked door.
The minimality of the defendants' interference
alone, of course, does not excuse them; it is
no justification for a violation that it be slight.
But it may be justification for the interference
with a right that it be done in the name of a
more important right, and that we find to be
the case here.
THOMAS I. EMERSON lists, in his book
Toward a General Theory of the First Amend
ment, four affirmative values in a policy of
free expression. The first is that of individual
self-fulfillment: thought and its communica
tion are the fountainhead of all expression of
the human personality and the basis of all in
dividual freedom. The second is that of attain
ing truth: given that the soundest judgments
are reached through considering every argu
ment on any given proposition, the suppres
sion of any opinion or expression of opinion
tends to foster error. The third is that of en
couraging participation in decision-making:
just as the truest judgment is attained
hrough consideration of every argument, the
most acceptable policy is attained with the
participation of everyone affected by such pol
icy, and the protection of expression is neces
sary to insure that participation. The fourth
is that of maintaining a balance between sta
bility and change; history has given us the
lesson which cannot be arrived at intuitively:
the suppression of expression of opinin de
stroys the orderings and saps the strength of
the society which engages in suppresion, with
out weakening the opinion sought to be sup
pressed. Emerson's first value is what might
be called the private interest in free expres
sion. The second, third, and fourth values are
the social, public, societal interest. There is
general agreement that the mere private value
in expression is outweighed by the interests of
society at large: thus pornography is illegal
unless it have "redeeming social value"; thus

Melkeljohn and other philosophers of the
First Amendment feel it protects only politl.
cal expression, with all other speech receiving
only the due process protection of the Fifth
and Fourteenth Amendments. This Is so de
spite the undeniably intimate interrelation of
public and private values in exprssion.
The interference with Bruch's interview
was an interference with what was essentially
his private interest in speech To penalize the
demonstrators for this interference would be
to penalize, and thus to interfere with, commu
nication and expression in the political realm
—communication, that is, in the highest public
interest. This is not to say that no political
demonstrator could be punished: a violent
demonstration could be of such social disutil
ity that its social value would be clearly out
weighed. But the demonstration in this case
did not approach violence. The right inter
fered with, although of undeniable social util
ity, seems to us to have had a social utility
not so great as that of the interfering demon
stration, and the interference itself was slight.
Under these circumstances, we cannot find
that the defendants have violated the Funda
mental Standard.
Because the Council is equally divided on
the issue raised by this Part of the Opinion
of the Council, Richard SUCH concurring
in the result, we find the defendants NOT
GUILTY of violating the Fundamental
Standard.
We should make it plain that we consider
only the Fundamental Standard questions
arising from interference with Bruch's right
to enter by the front door, which interference
was occasioned by a complex interaction be
tween representatives of the Administration
and the demonstrators, including the latters'
alleged unsuccessful attempt to prevent the
door, when opened, from being closed. No
other question of Fundamental Standard di
mensions was raised in the allegations or
proved at our hearing.
Dan BERNSTEIN, David MANNHEIMER,
Geoff SMITH, Richard SUCH, and Melinda
WRAY join in Part I of the Opinion of the
Council. Richard SUCH is the author of Part
I; Eric TREISMAN is the author of Part 11.
SEPARATE OPINIONS
Richard SUCH, concurring in the result in
Part II of the Opinion of the Council:
I CONCUR IN THE RESULT in Part II of
the Council's Opinion. Although I agree sub
stantially with practically everything that is
said in that Part of the Opinion, I believe, for
the reasons set forth below, that there are
dangers in the Council's approach to the Fun
damental Standard question. I am consoled in
that, because the Council is equally divided
in the result as to that question, none of the
answers proposed here has the force of prece
dent.
I
Article I, Section I, A and B of the ASSU
By-laws read as follows:
A. The Fundamental Standard is: Stu
dents are expected to show, both within and
without the University, such respect for
order, morality, personal honor, and the
rights of others as is demanded of good
citizens.
B. The Associated Students of Stanford
University recognize that the maintenance
of student rights and privileges depends
upon mature and responsible conduct. Fail
ure to observe the Fundamental Standard
may be grounds for expulsion from the
University. In partial interpretation of the
general requirements of the Fundamental
Standard, the Associated Students of Stan
ford University specifically recognize their
responsibility:
1. to condemn any action which is of
fensive to or jeopardizes the rights, privi
leges, and safety of others, and to main
tain good order in the University commu
nity;
2. to respect the property of the Uni
versity, other students, and the commu
nity as a whole;
3. to be cognizant of and to uphold
ASSU and University policies and regu
lations. . . .
4. To be cognizant of and to uphold
Federal and State law.
It is plain that the Fundamental Standard is
unlike an ordinary law. It does not proscribe
undesirable conduct of a specific sort but in
stead lays down a general affirmative moral
principle. It is analogous not to a rule like
"Do not steal" but to a rule like "Do unto
others . . . There are obvious shortcomings
to a judicial system based on such a Standard,
which are, primarily, a failure to provide po
tential offenders with adequate warning that
their conduct may be considered impermissible
and the lack of such touchstones of unper
mitted conduct as would promote efficient and
consistent judicial determinations. But an
elaborate Code, defining all possible offenses
with particularity, would not be a feasible
alternative to our Standard, even if we were
able to find one ready-made, for such a Code
could only be administered by lawyers. And,
furthermore, the Standard has an extraordi
nary advantage that a Code could not have
it allows us to be guided in our decisions not
by hard-and-fast rules of guilt or innocence
but by flexible criteria of right and wrong.
We should not lose sight of the fact, however,
that this advantage is purchased at the ex
pense of adequate warning to defendants and
clear decisional tests. Where the lack of such
warning and such tests work a particular in
justice to defendants that is not counterbal
anced by the advantage to them of a thor
oughgoing inquiry into all considerations rele
vant to a moral evaluation of their conduct
then, unless aggravating circumstances ap
pear, we ought to declare that the defendants
conduct is beyond the competent scope o
Fundamental Standard adjudication and judg(
it on the basis of relevant ASSU By-Laws oi
University policy, if any.
THE NOTION that some cases may lie be
yond the limits of a judicial system only ap
pears unfamiliar. The Law, unlike our sys
tem, values fair notice and efficient, consisten
decision-making above moral evaluation, and
where the injustice done to defendants be
cause of the lack of such evaluation is no
counterbalanced by the advantages to then
of fair notice and clear decisional tests, wher
the legal system exceeds its inherent limits
tions, it provides the executive pardon. W
have no provision in our system for an appea
to the mercy of th Sovereign, and so, when i
breaks down, we are forced frankly to an
knowledge it and to decline to exercise ot
jurisdiction.
When we find a student guilty of violatin
the Fundamental Standard, we determine the
he has not shown such respect as is demande
of good citizens for order, morality, person?
honor or the rights of others (a determin;
tlon of considerably greater gravity tha
would seem from the other Separate Opin
ion). We do not simply decide whether or not
he has done such and such a thing but wheth
er in doing that thing he has failed to show
such respect, etc. We make a moral judgment.
Philosophers agree that an action cannot be
morally evaluated without taking into account
the intention with which it was done; some
say, in fact, that it is logically impossible to
evaluate intentions and actions independently,
for an action cannot be defined except in
terms of the intention that caused it. Profes
sor Davidson used to give the example of a
man who waved to a friend and thereby, un
intentionally, gave a signal for the revolution
to begin. Now surely that man could not be
Charged with moral responsibility for the en
suing insurrection—for failing to show such
respect for order as is demanded of good
citizens. Even if he had intended to start the
revolution, moreover, the evaluation of his ac
tion would have to wait until a determination
had been made as to whether his intention
was justifiable. So, in deciding a Fundamen
tal Standard question, we must consider the
intention with which an act was done and
whether that intention was good or bad.
No one would squarely deny this proposi
tion. We are aware, however, of two argu
ments that attack it in a round-about fashion.
The first admits that intentions might be
evaluated but holds that, in evaluating them,
we could not apply purely personal and sub
jective moral standards. There is a grain of
truth in this position, which is that surely we
cannot find that a given person is not guilty
pf having violated the Standard because he
thought that he was doing the right thing,
nor can we find him guilty because we, apply
ing our own personal and subjective stand
ards, believe that his motives were unjusti
fiable. Then the argument, suppressing a
premise, goes on to conclude that the person's
intention cannot be considered at all. The
suppressed premise is, of course, that there
are no impersonal or intersubjective stand
ards that can be brought to bear in evaluating
the person's intentions. I emphatically reject
this notion. The Fundamental Standard, if it
signifies nothing else, means that we must
measure a person's motives and conduct
against a generally accpted community stand
ard, that we should determine whether what
he has done, and why he has done it, are com
patible with what is expected of good citizens.
The very word "citizens" implies a community
standard. Such a standard is admittedly not
strictly objective, but any beginning philoso
phy student should be able to demolish the
doctrine of objective values.
THE SECOND ARGUMENT is more round
about still. It takes as its paradigm one of
the two sorts of "civil disobedience" cases, in
which a person for a just cause breaks a just
law (the other sort is when a person for a
just cause breaks an unjust law). The argu
ment then cites the maxim of nonviolent re
sistance which states that in such a case the
person recognizes the justice of the law and
willingly subjects himself to its sanctions
in order to demonstrate, or to "witness," the
depth and firmness of his commitment to the
just cause. Applying the paradigm, then, to
the case of the Fundamental Standard, a just
"law," the argument concludes that a per
son's intentions are to be set to one side, or
perhaps even commended, and then his action
is to be evaluated independently; if it appears
that the action violated the Standard, then
the person should be punished, for, in truth,
he chose to be punished. The argument en
tirely misconceives the nature of Fundamental
Standard adjudication. It may be an accurate
model of how that sort of civil disobedience
is, and should be, handled in the courts. But
that is because courts apply laws and not
moral principles; they look to see whether
an act has been committed and whether the
person intended to commit the act, and only
in certain well-defined instances will they look
to see whether the act was done for a good
reason. We, however, must always look to see
whether a. person has acted as a good citizen
should. And to say that a good citizen always
obeys just laws has not more meaning here
than to say that one should observe the Fun
damental Standard because the Fundamental
Standard says one should.
Let me give an example of how Fundamen
tal Standard decision-making works. Suppose
it is alleged that a student has stolen $100
from his roommate, and suppose further that
the student admits having done so. A court of
law would cease its inquiry here. But we go
on to see for what reason the student stole
the money, and what other mitigating factors
there might be. As it turns out, he stole the
money in order to pay for his mother's emerg
ency operation, there were no other means of
obtaining the money, no doctor would operate
without it, and further, the roommate was as
rich as Croesus. It would still be larceny in
court, but we would with only a little hesita
tion find the student not guilty of a Funda
mental Standard violation.
Let me change the facts and suppose that
the student's roommate had originally stolen
the money from the student because of an
intense dislike for the student's mother. Here,
with even less hesitation, we would find the
roommate guilty of violating the Standard.
NOW, GOING BACK to the first set of facts,
not for his mother's operation that the student
let us change them in one respect only: it was
not for his mother's operation that the student
had stolen the money for his girl friend's
abortion: perhaps we should add that the girl
had taken a certain drug early in her preg
nancy and that there was one chance in ten
that her child would be born an imbecile. This
is, of course, a much more difficult case than
the other two. It is not fair to say that the
student had notice that his action would vio
late the Standard, and we could not give him
the benefit of a clcarcut rule of decision, based
on community standards. In order to determ
ine whether or not he violated the Standard
in stealing the money we would have to take
into account his purpose. And, in order to de
termine whether or not his purpose was justi
fiable, we would have to make a moral evalua
tion of the abortion. Was it merely "delayed
birth control"? Or was it "metaphysical mur
der"? Were the risks of defective birth suf
ficiently great? What if they were one in
twenty? Or one in five? It is patent that these
are not the sort of questions that we could
satisfactorily answer. They are, so to speak,
none of our business. But the questions would
tiave to be answered if we were to say that
the student had or had not violated the Stan
dard. It would not do to say that, no matter
.vhat the student's intentions were, this sort
)f violation of the rights of others is intoler
ible. Thus, we could not give to the student
'he one great advantage that our sytscm has

The Judicial Council opinion is printed as a
3ald advertisement by the Associated Students
>112 Stanford University.

to offer. It is in a case like this that we should
have to say that the questions raised are be
yond the scope of competent Fundamental
Standard adjudication, and unless it appeared,
as it does not here, that the student's con
duct, even assuming the highest moral pur
pose, was not a reasonable means to that end,
we would have to find him not guilty.
I believe that the case now before us in
analogous to the preceding hypothetical. Some
of the defendants expressed to us a belief that
we would not find them guilty of a violation
of the Standard, and I cannot say that that
belief was entirely unreasonable; they did not
know, nor should they necessarily have known
that their conduct was impermissible; they did
not, therefore, have adequate warning. The
facts of this case are so ambiguous that we
cannot now give the defendants that to which
they are entitled, a decision based upon clear
and consistent principles. We look to see
whether these injustices, inherent in Funda
mental Standard decision-making, are counter
balanced by the virtue of that system, our
capacity to inquire into all matters relevant
to the moral evaluation of the defendants'
actions.
I FIND that capacity lacking. Whether the
defendants' violated the Standard depends
upon their purposes in engaging in the dem
onstration. These purposes were vividly ex
pressed to us in our hearing. The defendants
were moved by a deep and sincere sense of
righteous indignation and feeling of moral
anguish at what they regard to be irrational
acts of tyrannical and barbarian dimensions,
in which they believe the CIA to be impli
cated. They demonstrated in order to express
that sense and feeling, to affect the consci
ences of others, and to discourage complicity
in those acts. In order to evaluate the motives
of these defendants, we would have to answer
the staggering questions of the justifiability
of civil disobedience, of American action in
Vietnam and of the role of the CIA in our
government and in the world. Although indi
vidually we might have no difficulty in resolv
ing these issues, they are plainly not the sort
of questions that are within our competence
as members of the Judicial Council to answer.
Even if we could answer them, we should
decline as a matter of policy to attempt to do
so, for I believe that it would be unwise, not
to say unconstitutional, to get into the busi
ness of evaluating political opinions and moti
vations. We cannot say, on the other hand,
that the defendants' motives are irrelevant,
nor can we take the absolutist position that,
no matter what the defendants' motives they
could not justify what the defendants did.
What if they wished to protest the actual and
avowed formulation of concrete plans for a
program of deliberate genocide? Then, surely,
their intentions would justify the very mini
mal disorder and interference with the rights
of others that occurred here. But I am not
saying that the intentions of these defendants
were justifiable (nor that they were not). For
I do not believe that we can pass on that
question. And, because passing on that ques
tion is essential to our method of adjudication,
we come to the limits of our judicial system.
The conclusion does not entail that all con
duct motivated by political intentions is im
mune from ASSU disciplinary proceedings;
when an enforceable ASSU or University
policy on demonstrations, having the nature of
a law and not of a general moral principle
and, therefore, not requiring an evaluation
of intentions is created, then we can enter
tain such proceedings. I would expressly re
serve judgment as to whether the conduct
of the defendants in this case would be culp
able under reasonable regulations of that sort.
BUT OUR INQUIRY should not stop quite
here. There is still room within the system to
raise the question whether or not, assuming,
as we must, the highest and most unimpeach
able purpose on the part of he defendants,
their conduct was reasonably related to the
accomplishment of that purpose. We should
have no trouble with this question if a public
speech by a CIA agent were seriously dis
rupted, or if there had been acts of violence
or wanton destruction; we would have to de
liberate at greater length if there had been a
disorderly sit-in in a building where a vital
University function was in progress—but that
is not this case. I find that, with one possible
exception, there was no such unreasonable
relation here.
That exception requires additional discus
sion. One of the defendants, Yale Braunstein,
was charged with recklessly shoving a sign,
supported by a stick, through the front door
of Encina, in an effort to prevent the closing
of the door, and thereby narrowly missing the
head of an individual on the other side of the
door. The evidence as presented to us permits
no conclusion but that Yale Braunstein in
serted his sign in the doorway with the credit
able intention of preventing the door, as it
was being forcibly closed, from striking or
catching such persons as he reasonably be
lieved to be in danger of being so struck or
caught. The weight of the evidence, taking
into account the angle at which the sign was
inserted and the fact that Mr. Braunstein's
view of the interior of the doorway was ob
scured, shows that he did not act recklessly.
I, therefore, would find that each and every
of the defendants are not guilty of violating
the Fundamental Standard.
I would like to add to what Eric Treisman
has said in Part II of the Council's opinion,
that in my view the First Amendment was
intended, among other things, to provide, to
all groups and all opinions, access to the point
of governmental decision-making. If access
to that point cannot be had except by means
of demonstrations that are to a degree dis
orderly, then the First Amendment protects
those demonstrations. I think that Stanford,
so long as its governmental apparatus re
mains closed to students and teachers, should
not expect to be able constitutionally to pun
ish any non-violent demonstration involving
a question of Administrative policy, as does
the demonstration here. When the point of
decision-making in the University is more
accessible, when the Board of Trustees is
finally "opened up," when we begin to have
a democratic ordering of our own affairs,
then the scope of First Amendment protec
tion of demonstrations will be narrower.
II
AS ALL JUDICIAL BODIES, we have an
interest in the integrity of our decisions. It
is appropriate, then, that we comment upon
the Dean of Student's contemplated exercise
of what he considers to be his "right of ap
peal to the Interim Judicial Body." Note that
we are not considering whether or not the
Dean of Students should have such a right,
just whether or not he does.
Stanford students, we repeat, are guaran
teed "the right to provide for their own regu
lations by means of a judicial system incor
porating traditional and accepted safeguards
of individual liberties." We should think that

such safeguards include the right not to "be
subject for the same offense to be twice put
in jeopardy of life or limb."
Article IV, Section 5, G, 4, of the ASSU
Constitution provides "an accused person in
any judicial hearing" with the right of ap
peal "from the decision of . . . the Judicial
Council to the President of the University or
his representative." Article I, Section I, C, 2,
h, of the ASSU By-Laws guarantees to each
student the right "to appeal his case to the
President of the University or his representa
tive." Section I, D, 1, of the same Article
provides, in language that is obscure, to say
the least, that "decisions of the ASSU judicial
councils may be appealed, if appropriate" and
that, on appeal, "the ASSU Constitution and
By-Laws shall continue to be recognized as
the controlling body of law." Section I, D, 2,
of that Article says that "when the case is
decided by the Dean of Students, the student
may appeal the decision to such student-fac
ulty Appeals Board as may be established by
agreement between the ASSU and the Presi
dent of the University," and "until such stu
dent-faculty Appeals Board is'established, the
student may appeal the decision to an appel
late board of three persons appointed by the
President of the University from a panel of
not more than six nominated by the Executive
Committee of the Academic Council." The
"Resolution for Approval by Constituencies of
Stanford University" (the Tri-Partite Com
pact), in addition to reiterating "all rights
guaranteed [students] by the ASSU Constitu
tion and By-Laws as of September 1, 1965,"
contains provisions identical to those in Sec
tion I, D of the By-Laws.
Although providing for appeals by students,
the ASSU Constitution, the ASSU By-Laws,
and the Tri-Partite Contract nowhere contem
plate an appeal from a decision of the Judi
cial Council by anyone other than a student/
defendant. It is as clear as it would be if there
were explicit language to the same effect, that
the students in adopting and the Board of
Trustees in approving the ASSU Constitution,
the Legis'ature in passing the ASSU By-
Laws, the Committee on University Policy,
the Executive Committee of the Academic
Council, and the Legislature in accepting the
Tri-Partite Compact did not intend that the
Dean of Students or any non-student/defend
ant in a Judicial Council proceeding should
have any right of appeal to any person or
body. And it is also patent that neither the
President of the University, at least not with
out the approval of the Board of Trustees, nor
any subordinate administrator can independ
ently create, contrary to the ASSU Constitu
tion, a right of appeal by someone neither a
student nor a defendant, and no party to the
Tri-Partite Compact may modify it unilater
ally.
11l
BEARING IN MIND this last proportion,
we note, finally, that Article I, Section I, D,
of the ASSU By-Laws and the Tri-Partite
Compact contemplate a "separate University
tribunal," the jurisdiction of which "shall be
limited to the issues on which ASSU Consti
tution and By-Laws conflict with University
laws or policy," a "student-faculty Appeals
Board," and "until such student-faculty Ap
peals Board is established," "an appellate
board of three persons appointed by the Pres
ident of the University from a panel of not
more than six nominated by the Executive
Committee of the Academic Council." The
Interim Judicial Body conforms to the de
scription of not one of these bodies, and its
existence is, therefore, in clear breach of the
Tri-Partite Compact.
Eric TREISMAN and Rick STEWART join
in Parts II and 111 of this opinion. David
MANNHEIMER joins in Part 111.
DISSENTING OPINION
Geoff Smith, with whom Dan BERNSTEIN,
David MANNHEIMER, and Melinda WRAY
join, concurring in the result in Part II of
the opinion of the Council with respect to
defendants BRAUNSTEIN, BROWNING,
GOLDMAN, PARNES, SIEGEL and SAPIR
and dissenting in Part II with respect to
defendants GERSON, GREENBERG, and
SMYTHE:
WE ARE OF THE OPINION that a viola
tion of the Fundamental Standard has oc
curred when the following elements are
proved:
1. The rights of a member of the Stan
ford community are interfered with.
2. This interference would not have oc
curred but for the conduct of the person
charged.
3. The person charged believed or has
sufficient reason to believe that his conduct
would infringe the rights of others.
4. The person charged cdn show no rea
son why the Council should consider his
conduct justified in light of the circum
stances.
Once the decision has been made to allow a
potential employer to conduct on-campus in
terviews under the auspices of the Placement
Service, those students who properly arrange
such interviews have a right to attend them.
Such interviews are arranged as part of a
general scheme of student services provided by
the University and to which a properly regis
tered student has a right just as he has a right
to attend the classes for which he registers
and be treated at the Health Center. No one
can be allowed to say that because they be
lieve either the doctrines espoused in a class
or medical treatment to be his fel
low students lose their right to attend the
class or have their illnesses treated. Likewise,
even if a student feels that his fellow students
are immoral in seeking employment with the
CIA, they do not lose their right to seek such
employment on the basis of his opinion. Were
this so, a person would enjoy his rights only
so long as there were no person or group of
persons with the ability to stop him from ex
ercising those rights.
It is clear from the evidence that in three
cases the right of interviewees to attend their
interviews was interfered with. The immedi
ate cause was that the Dean of Students did
not open the door to the west wing [of Encina
Hall], but we must ask why this happened.
The Dean's uncontradicted testimony was that
he kept the door closed because he feared that
if it were opened to permit the interviewees to
enter, at least some of the persons gathered in
front of the door could attempt to enter the
west wing. The west wing was abandoned ex
cept for the interviews and therefore only
those students who had signed up for them
had legitimate business in the west wing. It
was reasonable for the Dean to conclude that
those protestors who wished to enter hoped to
carry the protest into the building. This would
have been a clear violation of a policy that
the Dean in good faith believed it was his duty
to enforce, including preventing possible viola
tions. Faced with the conduct of some of the
protestors and the presence of many more, not

only was the Dean reasonable in locking the
door, he appears to have had no other satis
factory choice. To have allowed the protestors
to enter would almost surely have precluded
the interviews and might have created a situa
tion beyond the control of the campus authori
ties. But for the conduct of certain of the de
fendants which created a threat to enter the
building, the rights of the interviewees would
not hace been interfered with.
AS THE DEAN'S CONDUCT was not only
reasonable but foreseeable and the protestors
were aware of the general circumstances, they
should have been aware that their conduct
would cause the door to be kept closed and
this would at least to some degree interfere
with the interviews. Even if it were argued
that the defendant should not have antici
pated the Dean's actions, the record shows
that some of them persisted in their threaten
ing conduct after it was obvious that the Dean
was keeping the door closed. It was the Dean's
avowed purpose to have the interviews take
place and the evidence does not show or sug
gest any reason he would not open the door
except the threat posed by the protestors. The
protestors should have realized the conse
quences of their conduct.
Nothing is more clear than that we cannot
punish the defendants for their mere presence
at the demonstration. The porch of Encina
Hall is an area generally available to the pub
lic. This was not an improper place for citizens
to peaceably assemble and express their po
litical beliefs. Can it be said that the presence
of a peaceful protestor interfered with the
rights of others? Aside from the Dean's alle
gation, there is no evidence that the protestors
blocked pedestrian traffic. At times the porch
was ouite crowded but the defendants testified
that people were allowed to come to and from
the door. The major cause of congestion ap
pears to have been a table supplied for the
press. Nor can the Dean's decision to make
special arrangements for the interviews or to
have the campus police on hand make an oth
erwise peaceful protest proscribed conduct.
Were this allowed, police officials could make
criminal any meeting to which they dispatched
special guards. Finally, we cannot punish
those defendants who engaged in no threaten
ing conduct even though in fact their presence
probably added to the magnitude of any im
plied threat to enter the building. Peaceful
protestors cannot be made guilty because some
of the protestors were less than peaceful. To
do so would force them to choose between
abandoning their rights of free expression and
possible judicial liability.
But some of the defendants did more than
picket peacefully in front of the door. They
attempted to force their way into the west
wing and in one case where entry was made,
created a disturbance intended to disrunt the
interviewing process. Mr. TREIMAN believes
that this conduct is entitled to the special pro
tection of the First Amendment because the
defendants were engaged in a political demon
stration and in such cases we must balance the
social disutility of their conduct against the
public interest in unrestrained sneech. I refer
to the "special protection of the First Amend
ment" because while all legislation results
from a balancing of individual freedom against
the needs of the state, a different balance, fa
voring freedom of speech, is applied in First
Amendment cases. Thus the Supreme Court
allows municipal governments to apply re
strictions to commercial leaflets which would
be held an abridgement of the First Amend
ment if applied to leaflets dealing with public
issues. Talley v. California, 362 U.S. 60.
NO ONE DENIES that the protection of the
First Amendment has been extended to cer
tain conduct which has been closely tied to
speech. The Supreme Court granted this pro
tection to peaceful picketing in a situation
similar to the case here. Edwards v. South
Carolina. 372 U.S. 229, and a shaky majority
was willing to accept the silent and accusatory
presence of a Negro in a segregated public
library as symbolic speech. Brown v. Louisi
ana. 383 U.S. 131. But neither the Supreme
Court nor a majority of this council would
hold the protestors entitled to the special pro
tection of the first Amendment had they en
tered the building and physically forced the
representative of the CIA to engage in a dia
logue. This would be true no matter how little
the man was actually harmed or how great
society's interest might be in hearing the CIA
defend its policies. If a person were to set fire
to the headquarters of an organization in or
der vividly to protest that organization's ac
tivities, no court would consider that symbolic
speech such that they would reformulate the
*aw of arson to take into account the social
utility of having many people made aware
that our fire setter objected to the organiza
tion weighed against the cost of replacing the
building.
The essence of the First Amendment, the
concept of free speech and indeed the spirit
of this Univrsity is that the truth is best dis
covered by allowing different views of that
truth to compete in the market place of ideas.
Each person is free to seek adherents to his
view by persuading them that he is right. No
one should be allowed to coerce another into
accepting his beliefs, nor does anyone have
the right to deny another the right to prose
lytize.
In every case of "speech-plus" we must de
termine whether the conduct should be judged
by the usual standards for that conduct or
whether the conduct is so enmeshed with
speech that to deprive the conduct of the pro
tection of the First Amendment would be to
deprive the speech of that protection.
Thus if we were to find the defendant's con
duct protected, we would have to find: (1) that
they were engaged in an attempt at persua
sion and (2) that their conduct was a neces
sary element of that persuasion. Were we con
vinced that the protestors were engaged in a
good faith attempt to persuade people that the
CIA should not be on campus we cannot say
that attempts to force the door to the west
wing were necessary elements of that per
suasion.
SEVERAL ARGUMENTS have been made
urging that this conduct was necessary. One
is that since the demonstrators do not control
the channels of communication, they are
forced to engage in conduct which will attact
the attention of the media. While we must al
ways remember to protect the little man's
methods of communication, the handbill, the
sound truck etc., this does not give them li
cense to command the major means of com
munication by anti-social conduct. As a matter
of practical politics this may be necessary but
surely we cannot say they have a right to do
so.
A second argument, following the line of
the Sit-In cases, holds that the defendants
were only trying to gain entry to a place
where they had a right to be. But the inside
of an abandoned University building is not
a public place and there is no right to enter

if the University denies that right for good
cause.
A final argument is that the demonstrators
had to get to the CIA representative to talk
to him. The CIA representative was aware
that the demonstrators wanted to talk with
him. He made it clear that he did not want
to talk to them. No matter what the Council
thinks of his position we do not believe the
First Amendment guarantees each person an
audience nor that it will protect him if he at
tempts to force his views on a particular un
willing listener.
To proscribe the conduct in question does
not impair the defendant's right to present
their views in public forums and to seek ad
herents by persuasion.
WE ARE MORE INCLINED to believe that
the conduct in quesiton was an attempt to
coerce the representative of the CIA to speak
with the protestors and/or an attempt to
coerce the University from sponsoring any
further interviews of this type. Such coercion
is antithetical to the idea of a University and
not entitled to the protection of the First
Amendment. Thus no matter how slight the
interference with the rights of others we do
not consider it justifiable because the pro
testors were to some degree exercising their
rights under the First Amendment at the
same time they engaged in this conduct.
Aside from those persons who intended
only peaceful protest and those who engaged
in overt threatening conduct, there was a
group of protestors who while they did not
themselves engage in overt conduct, either
wanted to do so or would have entered the
building had the more active protestors suc
ceeded in opening the door. Even should they
declare themselves to be of this class we could
not find them guilt. A basic canon of our
common law is that we cannot punish intent
without an act. Had the defendants been
charged with a conspiracy to force entry to
the building the case would be different. Then
the act of one member of the conspiracy, in
furtherance of the conspiracy, is considered
the act of all. But even here, it would be neces
sary to prove the act of conspiracy; the actual
agreement. Similarly, it has been neither
charged nor proved that any of the defend
ants aided or abetted those who engaged in
overt conduct.
HAVE THE DEFENDANTS SHOWN ANY
REASON WHY THE COUNCIL SHOULD
CONSIDER THEIR CONDUCT JUSTIFIED?
While it may be true that in our civil courts,
judges do not look to the question of justifi
cation except in passing sentence, it is obvious
that the civil judiciary considers justification
at many stages. This is most often at the pri
mary level. A policeman will not ticket a man
who is breaking the speed limit if that person
is rushing an injured person to the hospital.
Similarly, a prosecutor may not press a case
of petty theft if he finds a woman has stolen
milk for her infant. Finally, the right to a
trial by one's peers carries with it the implicit
notion that one will not be punished if the
jury considers your conduct justified.
It is clear that a judicial council which
combines all of the above functions must not
ignore justifications. The argument is even
more compelling in cases arising under the
Fundamental Standard for to a large extent
we are making a basically moral judgment.
To say a person has violated the Fundamental
Standard is to say that he has not been a
good member of our community.
THE DEFENDANTS have raised the ques
tion of justification by claiming that we can
not find them guilty because they were at
tempting to stop an immoral process being
carried on by an immoral body as part of a
general immoral conspiracy of the "military,
industrial, educational complex". Mr. SUCH
believes that since the Council cannot come to
a decision without considering the defend
ants' contentions, and since these questions
are not justiciable, we must decline to decide
them and therefore cannot find any of the de
fendants guilty. While perhaps as individuals,
members of this council should consider the
nature of the CIA and its relation to our soci
ety, I do not believe that it is necessary to
make so difficult an assessment in order to
decide this case. I believe that it is enough
to answer this question: In a university com
munity is it ever justifiable for one group of
people to attempt to suppress an opinion or
belief, repugnant to their point of view, by
any means other than persuasion? Unless the
answer is in the negative, the University will
be set on a slippery slope leading in due time
to the end of this institution as a place for
free inquiry and the exchange of ideas. If we
were to accept the premise that moral superi
ority justifiies interfering with the rights of
others, then indeed we would soon be in the
business of constantly deciding if the defend
ants before us are in the morally superior
position.
For these reasons I would find defendants
Gerson, Greenberg and Smythe guilty of vio
lation of the Fundamental Standard. Because
the rights of the interviewees were interfered
with to so minimal an extent, I do not believe
such a de minimus violation would warrant
any punishment.
* * •
MEMORANDUM of Dan BERNSTEIN, Geoff
SMITH, Lorie TRASHIS, and Melinda WRAY:
We express no view as to the issues raised
in Parts II and 111 of Richard SUCH's opin
ion.
MEMORANDUM of David MANNHEIMER:
I express no view as to the issues raised
in Part II of Richard SUCH's opinion.
MEMORANDUM of the COUNCIL:
The Judicial Council would like to have the
record show that in its judgment the tactics
used by some of the defendants during the
hearings were decidedly ill-advised. The Coun
cil's responsibility was to determine as accur
ately as it could whether the charges brought
against the defendants were valid; some of
the defendants, instead of helping to throw
light upon this important question, chose to
use the forum offered by the Council to
charge the CIA, the University administration
and various others, with a wide variety of
crimes. Our meetings were not the place to
bring these charges; they could not be heard
there; and they confused the issues we had
to adjudicate.
Henry LEVINSON and Barbara PACKER
did not take part in the decision of this case.
* * *
SEPARATE FINDINGS WITH RESPECT
TO YALE BRAUNSTEIN
Richard SUCH deliver the Opinion of the
Council:
For the reasons expressed in Part I of the
concurring opinion of Richard SUCH, see
above, we find Yale Braunstein not guilty of
violating the Fundamental Standard in in
serting his sign in the doorway of Encina.
Henry LEVINSON, Barbara PACKER, and
Eric TREISMAN took no part in the decision
as specifically to Yale BRAUNSTEIN.
