# “He Who Would Get the Kernel Must First Crack the Shell”
## WHO’S WHO AND WHY IN PALO ALTO 
### 
(1) Think of the countless obstacles
the pioneers of old had to overcome
as they journeyed forth to lay the
foundation for a future that might
hold some promise' for them. Some
achieved their goal, others failed. Then
consider your own environment and
chances for the future. Your lot is a
path of roses compared with that of
tho pioneers. jfist lay aside a small
amount each week and start an ac
count with the First National Bank of
Palo Alto. They have a capital of
$100,000.00, and $24,000 surplus, and
are members of the Federal Reserve
System of Banking. The officers and
everyone connected with this bank
have always practiced service and
courtesy to their patrons. You are
treated with consideration whether
you are a large or small depositor or
whether you are a temporary visitor in
this favored locality. A man putting
his money in a bank should always
make sure that the institution is finan
cially solid and this is just such a
bank. They pay 4 per cent interest on
Term Deposits. Name the directors of
this banking institution. What is the
margin of security including stock
holders' liability?

(2) In purchasing jewelry, the buyer
puts more faith in the seller than any
other commodity that men buy and
sell. This article is about a jewelry
store that has been in business in
Palo Alto for a number of years, and
their reputation for being dependable
is second to none. In addition to their
exceptional stock of watches, jewelry,
rings, SILVERWARE, cut glass, etc.,
they do expert watch and jewelry re
pairing. This is the store to select your
•"Gifts That Last." Nielsen and Culver
are the kind of fellows we like to men
tion in our columns, because they have
a sociable and intelligent personality
—ones who know how to make friends
and keep them. Go see this store and
look over their high class line of jew
elry and you are sure to make all of
your purchases in this line from them.
Every article they sell not only bears
the guarantee of the manufacturers,
but their personal guarantee goes with
it as well. If you have a broken piece
of jewelry, no matter how fine it is,
they will repair it for you. What are
Mr. Culver'? initials, and where is
their store located. Also what other
department do they conduct? What is
their leading line of Silverware?

(3) It ticV les everybody's vanity to
a certain dc pre e to have his friends
say how we ! his homo is furnished,
and perhaps many of these friends se
cretly wish they knew where they
could buy furniture of equal looks.
There is no secret of obtaining the
right kind cf furniture if one knows
the place to shop. The Palo Alto Fur
niture Company is such a place. They
not only hf nd!e high-class furniture
for the parlor, bofl-roora and dining
room, but their kitchen department is
well stocked with ranges and
utensils and for the floor they have
Linoleum of the latest designs and
patterns. It is easily cleaned and al-

Introducing to You the Live Progressive Firms and People Who Make
up the Business Interests of Palo Alto
First Prize —$10.00 Theatre Tickets contributed by
* VARSITY AND STANFORD THEATRES
Second Prize —One Dozen Photographs contributed by
SHATTUCK STUDIOS
Third Prize —One Hand Painted Oil Picture of Chapel
contributed by FREEMAN'S ART STORE
Fourth Prize —One Box of Chancellor (after dinner) Cigars
contributed by FRANKLIN'S SMOKE HOUSE

ways sanitary. Just go to this store !
once and let them show you their col
lection of home furnishings. They are
sure to suit your individual taste, no
matter how exacting. They are featur
ing a complete line of stoves and
ranges. The best in the world is
Wedgewood. Where is this large fur
niture store located? and what make
of water heaters do, they recommend?
How many square feet of Inlaid Lin
oleum are they now laying in the Rus
sel Cafeteria?

(4) No matter who you are and what
your life is, it can be made happier
and better through the influence of
music. This up-to-date store that we
are writing about is the home of the
best there is in music, and they are
representatives for Brunswick and
Columbia phonographs. The Music
Shop at 273 University Avenue is the
music house of Palo Alto, for they not
only carry and sell phonographs and
pianos, but they carry all kinds of
musical instruments, sheet music,
player rolls and records. If you are
fond of string instruments, they have
anything from the ukelele to the cello.
They are exclusive representatives in
Palo Alto for two well-known phono
graphs which are recognized for their ;
many exceptional qualities. These ma
chines play disc records of any make.
If you like a lot of noise moulded into
music, then they have drums for your
choice. The proprietor here is a music
loving man, himself, and he delights in
showing his line to patrons. A visit
from you will be appreciated. What
make of Band Instruments does he
carry? Who are the manufacturers of
the Victor and Brunswick? What is
the price of the Gretsch Sac., Melody
C, Finish No. 2?

(5) Two of the best places to eat in j
Palo Alto are home and here. That is
what the editor thought after trying
one of this restaurant home-cooked
meals. All of you people do not know
of this restaurant or you would be
Johnny on the spot every time Old
Man Hunger gripped your frame. They
not only cater to the man who is in a
hurry with counter service but they
have linen-covered tables for the
ladies. However, the same service is
had at both places and at the same
prices. If you have lots of time to sit
and enjoy your meal, then sit at the
tables, but if you are a business man
with only a few minutes to "grab"
your lunch, the counter service will be
most ideal. The location of this home
like place is 105 Alma Street. The
proprietor of this restaurant has a
most affable manner and he does all
in his power to please his patrons.;
Anything that you want is not too
much trouble for him to get. He uses
the best grade of meats and come
fresh from the meat market when he
needs them and not a week before, j
Who is the energetic proprietor of the
"Popular" restaurant? What is the
price of their noon lunch? What brand
of coffee do they use? How much are
their meal tickets?

(6) Clothes cost too much money to
be carelessly cleaned and pressed, i
Your tailor should be picked just as
your doctor or your grocer. It is just
as important. If you send your clothes
to first one cleaner and then anothf r,
in the ert'd your clothes will be ruined,
and with none to blame but yourself.
The Stanford Dyeing and Cleaning
Works commands a high position in
the cleaning and pressing business of
Palo Alto, and they always guarantee
their work. These people know how to
press a suit. They press it to its
natural form and not "against the
srain." They also use an odorless pro
cess in their cleaning and every meth
od of handling clothes that is modern
is used by them. They have a call and
delivery system and for them to keep
your wardrobe in prefect trim at all
times is no trouble for you. They will
call at your home at regular intervals
tor your clothes and return them
promptly. This prompt service is a
great item in their business. They also
do repairing. What does this firm
charge for cleaning and pressing a
suit, and where is their plant located?
What does 444 mean?

(7) Chiropractic was born 27 years
•,'Ko. The suspicion, distrust and re
sentful criticism aimed at it in the

beginning has been dispelled. Chiro
practors have proven their worth in
healing the sick and lame with their
chiropractic adjustments. With all of
this human service in California they
were held under the yoke of the med
ical board. But thanks to the fair
minded people of this state, that is
over.
Dr. Minor and Dr. Hall wish to thank
all Iheir friends for the support they
gave them. These two doctors are
graduates of the Palmer School of
Chiropractic in Davenport, lowa. They
have practiced Chiropractic for years.
People come for miles around to Doc
tors Minor and Hall.
They are located at 153 University
Avenue. Give both the 'doctors' first
names and give two reasons why Chi
ropractic is beneficial to one's health.

(8) Don't junk your old tires. Take
them to a reliable tire shop and get
their opinion on their condition. They
may be vulcanized and run for several
thcHtsand miles more. And if you want
an honest opinion as to this, take your
tires to Palo Alto Vulcanizing Works.
Tires are this man's sole business,
and we make no mistake when we say
that he knows his business thoroughly.
Vhen he has patched a tube or vul
canized a "shoe" for you, then he has
made a friend. A guarantee goes with
evefy job he does and this is a guar
antee of absolute satisfaction. There
is no money value set on it, but it is a
personal guarantee that you get what
you want and no matter what it cost
him, he'll see that you get it. In addi
tion to the vulcanizing and repair de
partment, this man also carries a stock
of Goodyear tires and he has y ur size.
You don't want to meet a more con
genial man than Mr. Bogges with a
smile for you. Where is the shop lo
cated? What is his price for a Good
year Ford all-weather fabric tire?
What is the price of the 40x10 solid
truck tire that Mr. Bogges has in his
window?

(9) It is a source of discomfort and
worry for some people to buy a new
pair of shoes, but if you are careful in
selecting the correct size in the right
grade of shoes, you will not have this
inconvenience to contend with. At the
Lentos Shoe Store they will not only
sell you a new pair of shoes, but they
will make your old ones like new for
you. They conduct a modern electrical
shoe repairing shop in connection with
the shoe store and they do the work
just like it is done at the factories.
Let your next pair of shoes come from
this store and they will last you much
longer, for when you have worn off
the original soles, just return them
and they will put new ones on at a
small cost. They use the very best
double wear genuine leather soles and
the name and trade mark is stamped
cn them. When you have work done
here, it is well guaranteed, and there
is something back of the guarantee.
Then if it is in the power of these
people to do you a good turn, they
certainly will take pleasure in doing
it. They work for others as well as
themselves. What brand of pure
leather do they use on their soles, and
where is the store located?

. (10) Is milk and cream an important
part of your daily meals? If not, you
are one out of a hundred. Then with
this in view, it is only natural for peo
ple to be sure that their milk and
cream is' absolutely light. And to be
"right" it should contain a certain per
cent of butterfat, as well as be clean
and free from all foreign matter. The
milk, cream, butter and dairy products
you get at the Altomont Creamery are
all that the name implies—sanitary.
They feature pasteurized and guaran
teed dairy products. You can ask for
no better merchandise in this line. So
the next time you need any dairy
products of any sort, whether it be
butter, milk, cream, or cottage cheese,
just go to the Altomont Creamery. It
will be filled with satisfaction.
These people will give you service, as
their business depends upon it. If they
did not give you good service on your
first trip, you would not return again,
and they want your future friendship
and business. What is the location of
this firm's retail store, and what do
they get per quart for their milk. What
does pasteurized mean? and what does
guaranteed milk mean?

(11) When the pioneers blazed a
trail across the continent in '49 there
was also organized a man that blazed
the way in the paint industry, W. T.
Floyd. Since that time, this firm has
been beautifying Palo Alto with its
products. In addition to paints, they
also sell oils, glass, and if you are
looking for a waterproof paint, this is
the place to go. The Hadle Stormtight
Roof Paint firm has a very modern and
up-to-date store, and they are known
for their neatness and complete stock
of goods they carry. This store is a
credit to any city. This store which
this writing is for has the agency for
Acme Quality Paints and Varnishes,
the world's higest standard in paints.
Not only do they retail their products,
but wholesale as well. If you are a
paint man, you will know what firm we
are referring to for they carry one of
the largest stocks in these parts. What

is the name of this firm and what do
they recommend for floor varnish?
Just call at the local store and their
salesmen will gladly assist you. How
many square feet will a gallon of Acme
Quality Paint cover two coats?

(12) Just up the street at Mr. Ethen's
is he liveliest spot in Palo Alto. There is
something doing there most all of the
time and especially so after supper. It
is a place where gentlemen congregate
and exchange experiences of the day
over a friendly game of pocket bil
liards. But, in addition to the billiard
parlor, they also conduct a large bowl
ing alley and soda fountain where they
will make you a creamy milk shake
that will certainly make you return for
another in a short while. They are also
local agents for the United Cigar
Stores and carry a line of cigars that
cannot be had in any other establish
ment in the city. If you are looking for
a friend, you are sure to find him here.
It is a place where practically every
man frequents once in a while just for
the gentlemanly company he is sure to
find. If it is a box of candy you wisn
for your girl, then this is the place for
you to seek. They carry several differ
ent makes and it is kept in a specially
equipped refrigerator which insures
you of freshness at any time. How
many pocket pool tables have they?
What line of pipes do they carry? How
many alleys are there and name what
team is leading in the bowling tourna
ment now being conducted?

(13) Now comes a renowned meat
market which sells fresh meats. In
deed their meats are fresh. They make
it a point to keep them so, which is
responsible for the popularity and
wonderful business gained in the past
months. There are mrny tricks em
ployed by the meat buyers in judging
duality, and the Stanford Meat Com
pany is perfectly willing to share its
secrets with you. They buy only the
best, but they want you to know at
the time of your purchase that you
are getting what you want. Cleanli
ness is the watchword of this market.
The business is so great that their
daily purchases keep their meats
fresh. They seldom carry much over
from one day to another. We enjoy
writing about this market and its
owner for several reasons. One is they
say "never mind about buying, just
come in and look the good things
over." Give exact address. How long
have they been established? What are
their phone numbers? How often do
they get fresu fish at this market?

(14) In buying drugs, you want the
best, including purity and service,
which are two essential things to con
s'der when selecting from which to
buy these needs. Impure drugs are
worse than none at all, and poor ser
vice means aggravation and annoy
ance. Only the best drugs are ever
handled at the Young Drug Company
at the corner of University avenue
and Florence street. The proprietor
is a registered pharmacist and he en
deavors to keep a stock that will
meet with all requirements and cus
tomers do not have to go elsewhere
for anything usually found in an up-to
date drug store. In addition to drugs,
they carry a large stock of perfumery,
toilet articles, safety razors, and if
you happen to have a sweet tooth,
their candies will be appealing to you.
This store has the agency for all of
the Owl products, so you may obtain
these goods right here at home. What
is Ihe proprietor's name? Also what
line of remedies do they handle? What
is "Pom Pom" Luster?

(15) We are now presenting a firm
where fresh staple and fancy groceries
can be secured. It is a concern with
a conscience, and has an aim to please
the hard-to-suit in their lines. In fact,
you can close your eyes and buy here,
and every sale carries a guarantee of
satisfaction, and a little profit is all
they ask. Now just stop a second and
say to yourself, "Where is the best
stock of fruits, vegetables and gro
ceries carried in Palo Alto?" The best
brands of everything are the distin
guishing characteristics of this store,
along with its sanitary aspect. It is a
source of personal satisfaction to the
writer to write about this "quality"
store and the proprietor, Mr. Earle,
Ever since he started, years ago, his
popularity has met with a steady in
crease. He is not only a popular mer
chant. but is an alert business man,
and his idea is to always make the
place home-like when you do business
with him or his clerks, and so far he
has succeeded, and if he can make
Palo Alto a better city you can depend
upon him to take off his coat, roll up
his sleeves and help put it over. He
has for those who need it, a smile,
and has won their business or confi
dence. No merchant in Palo Alto is
more popular with his customers than
the owner of this store. Name the
owner and give his first name in full,
location and phone.

(16) Here is a works that makes a
lot of noise in a legitimate way. It is a
sheet metal establishment. They have
been making a big noise
for some time. They make a
of tin and sheet iron, and a 112

cialties are tanks, and irrigating pipe,
.spouting, skylights, cornice as well as
tin and copper sheet metal specialties.
The expert tinner is a great necessity
i'or those owning homes or business
places, as they look to them for re
l airs and parts. To be efficient, they
must be skilled in their calling and
geniuses as well. And these things are
apparent at the Palo Alto Sheet Metal
Works. There are many ways of tin
ning that will not stand the test. These
people use the right way. The owners
of this shop believe it better to be on
the level with their customers than
to climb upward by a crooked path.
Such a firm as this we surely like to
include in our feature. In fact, we can
not say enough for them, for they de
serve much more than a mere word of
praise. They deserve sure success.
Who is the proprietor of this shop and
Low long have they been established
here. Where are they located? What
size Warm Air Heater does it take to
heat a 7-room house? and give the
price of it.

(17) When a business establish
ment has reached the heights of suc
cess and prominence, it is either cred
ited to the skillful management or to
the quality of merchandise they han
dle. At the enterprising store at 317
University Avenue both of these items
are responsible for their standing in
Palo Alto. The most prominent resi
dents of the city are among their cus
tomer list. Their costumes can always
be depended upon for beiug the latest
styles and the good quality never
varies. "Where there is quality, there
is style." The Style Shop is well
known for both. (The store is attrac
tively decorated and the merchandise
is displayed in such a manner that it
becomes a profound pleasure to shop
with them). Their courteous sales
women also render great assistance
with their timely suggestions of "what
is being worn" and you leave the store
pleased witn your visit, feeling that
you have wasted no time whatever.
What is the slogan of this enterpris
ing store. Tell name of this classy
store's proprietor. A Big Clearance
Sale is now going on at the Smart
Shop. Everything in the store is re
duced for this Sale.

(18) The most widely known and
recognized decorations for any and all
occasions are flowers. They are recog
nized internationally and more can be
said with a small bunch of flowers
than can be said with a dozen tele
grams or any other form of communi
cation. "Say it with flowers" is a fit
ting slogan for their usefulness and
worth. The one flower shop in Palo
Alto that has created a reputation for
having in stock all of the different
(lowers in season is known as the
Palo Alto Flower & Seed Shop. They
carry a complete line of flowers for
the dining room table, to ship to your
friends or pot flowers to decorate your
home and porches. When you desire
to remember yourself to a friend, this
is the one place to come for they will
make up a beautiful boquet for you.
The proprietor here likes flowers him
self, which is symbolic of happiness.
His disposition is also like that of a
flower, bright and full of cheer. Who
is this proprietor? What is the num
ber of the shop? What kind of seeds
does he carry? What are the names
of the jardiners that they are selling
that come from Japan?

(19) Who is there in this city en
gaged in correction and the conserva
tion of eyesight? Many have come to
him and received great relief when
troubled with eye defects. His strict
attention to his business has won for
him a host of friends and patrons. Dr.
Cochran will be found very busy at
his offices at 122 University avenue
and you will make no mistake in con
sulting him about your eyes. He has
passed the State Board of Optometry
examinations and is recognized for his
excellent work, and is also a graduate
Dr. of Optometry. In addition to
working on your eyes, he will replace
broken lenses or make you a complete
pair of glasses. The eyes are the win
dows of the soul and when they are
wrong, the body is handicapped, for,
without clear vision, we can't see the
world as it is. Eye troubles are often
started when young and your chil
dren's eyes should be examined before
it is too late. Make an appointment
•with Dr. Cochran and get his opinion.
His office is completely equipped with
all of the modern instruments used in
this work. What are Dr. Cochran's ini
tials, and what is the range of prices
for his glasses? What is the store
motto?

(20) Most men like to know where
they can find a good barber shop, as
they are very particular about per
sonal appearance. They demand satis
factory work. When I suggest Mar
quee's Barber Shop, I know what I'm
talking about. They have a very sani
tary little shop with all the modern
equipment, also including five modern
chairs. They specialize in all kinds of
shampooing, scalp and facial treat
ments. If you want your hair to have
jompadour cut, or any other kind,
t let Marquee's do it for you. If

you are having trouble with your
scalp, they can help you. Dixol is the
scalp treatment they recommend. They
also bob children's hair, so bring them
in the next time you are down town.
Just ask anyone who has visited Mar
quee's shop, and they will tell you
how well satisfied they were. Where
ic their shop located? What brands of
hair tonic do they use and recom
mend?

(21) A most important institution of
business in any city, town or commun
ity is the reliable drug store. Here it
is that we depend for our health. And
It ere is where we go when we want
toilet articles, kodak supplies, foun
tain pens and a hundred other luxuries
and necessities. The Kenyon & Crow
Store is known for its large and com
plete stock of all of these articles, and
in fact, anything found in a first-class
store. In addition to their general line
of pure drugs, assortments of high
class cosmetics and sundries, they are
tlie Penslar Store in Palo Alto. This
line of household remedies is com
plete. There is one for every possible
need or use. Now is the time to begin
to think about Christmas Gifts. A
large collection of hand-colored Christ
mas Cards have just arrived. They
are wonderful in design and color.
Fountain pens and Pen and Pencil sets
in Christmas Boxes make a very fine
pi esent to your student friends, or a
big box of gift stationery. At this store
they conduct the largest Kodak print
ing and developing business 011 the
Peninsula, handling a full line of East
man Kodaks and Cameras. One of
the big features of this store is their
framed pictures and mirrors. They
have a framing department and are
able to frame for you any size picture
with most any style mounting you
desire. What profit-sharing system do
they practice? Find out the four lead
ing perfumes they handle? In what
line do they excell all other concerns
in this locality? What are the pro
prietors' nicknames?

(22) There is a mail in this town
much wiser than his sires; he ran
into a bramble bush and punctured all
four tires. When he saw his tires
were wrecked, with all his might and
main, he went to this tire shop and
had them fixed again. One of the first
things to learn if you own an auto
mobile is to know what vulcanizing
nrm gives Service that Serves. The
Retread Shop is recognized for their
expert tire repairing. You should con
sult these doctors when your tires get
sick for they surely have the dope
that cures. You cannot help but like
this firm for those connected with it
make every effort possible to please
you. They will always go out of their
way to do a good turn for you, and if
you have tire trouble on the street,
just notify them and they will render
assistance People who do business
here are really proud .of ttie fact and
it is simply because they give what
the customers want and should have
—"Satisfaction." Go to this shop and
meet these tire men and then tell us
what make of tires they sell and what
their price for a Ford-size cord tire in
the make begins with "F." Give two
reasons why this tire is the best on
the market for its size.

(23) Pleasure of motoring is in
creased if your car is in good working
condition. It is, therefore, advisable to
have your car looked over before you
start on this trip and when you have
your car worked on, be sure of* your
garage. The Palo Alto Garage on Em
reson street is indeed a thoroughly
dependable establishment in regard to
their repairing. Mr. J. M. Blackburn
employs only expert mechanics. The
Palo Alto Garage has the agency for
the Durant car and many others such
as the Chandler, Cadillac, and Cleve
land. Have you seen the new 1923
model Durant. Just step in and let
them sTiow you what a wonderful mod
el it is. The proprietor of this garage,
Mr. J. M. Blackburn, personally super
vises the garage at all times, and as
sures you of prompt service whether
you are buying a spark plug or filling
your tank with gas. They have Ever-
Ready Battery service, and they also
carry Associated Gasoline. They want
satisfied customers at the Palo Alto
Garage. That is their motto. Give two
reasons why the Durant car is more
practical. What is Mr. Blackburn's
first jiame? How long have they been
established?

(24) In writing of the leading busi
ness firms and institutions of Palo
Alto, we have come across an inter
esting shop at 367 University Avenue,
that well deserves mentioning. No, it
won't interest you men, particularly—
but has an especial appeal to the wo
men of Palo Alio and vicinity who
are lovers of beautiful things. This at
tractive shop is fairly overflowing with
wonderful creations of Laces, Em
broideries, Frocks, and Sport Skirts,
Reads for the Miss and Mistress —at-
tractively displayed, and just a) at
tractively priced. These are only a
112» w of the many beautiful and useful
articles to be found in this modern,
up-to-date shop—and the proprietor
takes great pleasure in dispensing I
courteous and attentive service to
every patron. We want you to tell us
the name of this worth while shop—
also the proprietor's name and cor
rect address. What are their prices on
their dresses? What price on stamped
pillow cases? Also stamped dresser
scarfs which come in packages.
(25) Look prosperous and save
money at the same time. This is what
so many people are trying to do and |
cannot quite manage it. The reason is
that they do not know where to buy
economically and where to get goods
hat stand wear and look well. It is
not economy to buy a cheap "hand-me
down" suit of clothes. It is a waste of
money. If you have a suit made by
the tailor that this article is about,
you will get a suit of clothes that will
last. This tailor has been sixteen years
in Palo Alto and has the finest trade
on the Peninsula. Specialist on ladies'
tailoring and sport suits. He holds a
gold medal given to him at the Lewis
and Clark Exposition for designing.
You will be surprised at the chicness
as well as the exceedingly low price
he charges for a suit. And another fea
ture of this tailor, all of the tailoring
is done on the premises. He does not
take your order and send it to San
Francisco or New York. Who is this
progressive tailor? His establishment
is upstairs at 123 University avenue.
Better stop in and let him take your
measure and you select your pattern
and style at the same time.
(26) The best friend of womankingis
that which takes the grievous burdens
from her shoulders. No woman likes
to bend over washtubs or ironing
boards, and it is the mission of the
University French Laundry to per
form this highest physical service for
her. This laundry is almost our own
concern. It takes soiled linen and
turns it into attractive wearing ap
parel. It is an extensive industry, em
ploying many people. Wagons are sent
out in every direction in Palo Alto to
collect and deliver laundry and to keep
the various articles separated, so that
you don't get your neighbors' clothes,
is a job of a highly specialized order.
The methods used at this laundry are
thoroughly modern, and the machinery
equipment makes the work most satis
factory. The manager of this laundry
takes an active interest in the welfare
of Palo Alto and his absolute support
can be counted upon when anything
for the betterment of the city is in
progress. Who is this energetic man
ager, and where is the laundry lo
cated? How many employes has he?
What is the phone number?
(27) Well, here we are. Just what
interests all%women in Palo Alto. I
know when you go to that party or
dance you want to look charming. It
just requires a little personal atten
tion. You have often been to some pub
lic place and admired some ladies'
hair of the transparent texture of her
skin. The kind that is clear and
smooth. Well, you can have that charm
just the same as she. You go and see
Mrs. Marie Montgomery who has
charge of this exclusive Beauty Shop.
You will find every kind of modern
equipment desired in this shop, and
their work is very satisfactory. So
many girls have bobbed hair nowa
days, and they find it quite a task to
keep it looking well. Just drop into the
Montgomery Beauty Shop, and they
will marcelle your hair, and give the
ends a round curl which improves it
very much. You will find their egg
shampoo very invigorating. They spe
cialize in scalp and facial treatments.
They do hair waving and curling of
all kinds. What is one of the finest
scalp treatment? All kinds of facial
treatments are given by Mrs. Mont
gomery. Tell us the price of her
I'lactique Facial Treatment?
(28) What is the name of the store
that comes into your mind so clearly
when you speak of Art Goods? It is
Edwin R. Freeman's Art and Photo
Shop. There is no other place in the
city where they have such a large as
sortment of Wonderful Gifts to select
from. The writer cannot begin to tell
you of the hundreds of articles in this
store. The candlestick and framed and
unframed pictures are the best that
Mr Freeman could make and buy.
They have the largest picture fram
ing department on the Peninsula, giv
ing you the largest assortment of
frames to choose from. Christmas sea
son is nearing. Your motto is to do
your shopping early, and if you are
looking for gifts to give your friends
that will make them long remembered
to you, go to Freeman's Art Store. If
you have a picture that you cherish,
bring it here and let them frame it, or
a negative, enlarge it. They have a
complete service for films, kodaks, and
enlarging. How is it that Mr. Freeman
can sell his Foto Art Prints cheaper
than others?
(29) Palo Alto with its amazing
wealth and attractive terms and prices

when you are indebted to the wide
awake firm at 111 Circle. Their long
experience, knowledge of values and
expert advice in such matters have
won for them a large number of satis
fled customers. Through their devotion
to the business of their clients, Mr.
Helm has gained an enviable reputa
tion. Whether it be the buying of a
home or the selection of a lot or acre
age, you can be sure of finding just
what you want at attractive terms and
price when you are dealing with this
firm. This company also has many
ranch lands, both raw and improved.
In fact, their operations along this line
is, indeed, second to none in Palo Alto.
They are authorities on ranch lands
and if you name the location, they can
come pretty close to telling you the
value. Therefore, their advice and per
sonal service in such matters is indeed
important. Just drop in at their office
and they will gladly assist you. They
have just moved to 111 Circle, former
ly at 257 University avenue. What is
the name of this firm and what other
line of business do they follow? What
is Mr. Helm's first name? What is the
name of Mr. Helm's new assistant?
(30) Did you ever notice how you
admire the clothes of others and can
not understand why you never look as
well when you know personally that
you spend more money on your wear
ing apparel than this particular fel
low? The secret can easily be solved
if you do your shopping at the right
place. To test this out, the next time
you need a suit of clothes, a hat, or
anything in the gents' furnishing line,
go to Wideman & Son. This is one
exclusive haberdashery. Their stock is
composed of such well-known makes
as Kuppenheimer Clothes, Knapp Felt
Hats and Caps, handled by only the
best stores, and the fact of the matter
is, their entire stock bears names just
as well-known and highly recommend
ed as these few mentioned. Winter is
here and now is the time to see that
you are equipped for it. You certainly
need a new suit or a new hat. If you
don't think you do, come here and
look at the difference in the style of
your old one and their new stock.
You'll change your mind immediately.
And another thing about this store:
everyone is courteous, even the clerks
greet you with a smile, and are glad
to show you everything. How long has
this firm been established? Give exact
address. What is their business agree
ment with customers?
(31) Here is just the place to visit
for lunches and home-made pastry. It
is known as Kapps lunchroom. They
serve a nice little lunch there, and the
coffee is delicious. It is a very clean,
sanitary shop, and you get quick ser
vice. They have home-made pies,
cakes, and doughnuts. The doughnuts
are those world-wide known "Bake
Rite." They sell for twenty-five cents
per dozen. When you are down town
drop into this shop. There is nothing
more tasty than hot doughnuts and
coffee. The process- by which these
doughnuts are made makes them light
er and fluffier than the average dough
nut. And those home-made pies such as
pumpkin and mince, certainly are en
joyable at this time of year. They also
serve a noon-day lunch for the busi
ness man that is a dandy. How many
chairs do thew have in this shop? How
many meat pies do they make a day
and what do they sell for? Give the
exact location of this shop?
(32) There is at least one cigar
store in Palo Alto that caters to
smokers and men who want the best
merchandise for their money. The
Franklin Smoke House makes a spe
cialty of fine cigars, all kinds of cigar
ettes and they carry a large stock of
tobaccos, pipes and smokers' acces
sories. The proprietors believe in giv
ing the people what they want and if
you happen to want something that is
not ordinarily carried in stock, just
let him know and he will order it for
you. If it is in the world, he will come
near gettng it for you. A Soda Foun
tain in connection with the Cigar Store
gives you a cold drink at any time.
Malted milks a specialty. You could
not think of a more suitable present
for a man than a box of cigars and
when you buy them, they should be
chosen by a man who knows you. The
proprietor will assist you. What are
the initials of this energetic proprietor
and what make of candy does he sell?
The Franklin Smoke House is the
most popular place in town for card
games. Bring your friends and play a
friendly game of "rummy." How many
card tables in this establishment?
(33) Where is the bakery where you
can get fresh bread —any and all kinds
of it? Where can you get "bread that
is light, doughnuts that delight, and
pies just right." This is the tale of a
bakery whose products bring to mind
mother's baking day. They are so good
that people come for blocks just to
buy right out of the oven. Their prod
ucts are baked under the most strin
gent sanitary conditions. It is entirely
fitting that the "Who's Who" should
call your attention to this bakery, for
in patronizing the Golden Poppy
Bakery, you not only get the best baked

goods, but you save money as well.
The mention of this name In Palo Alto !
tells a tale of quality goods in this line |
and every housewife is familiar with |
the name and the goods. The big fea
ture with this shop is the making of
whole wheat bread, made from the
finest of wheats, The manager meets
his trade personally and his own per
sonality is responsible to a large de
gree for the patronage which they
have. Who is the manager of this
local bakery and what system do they
use in baking? What are the best
sellers in French Pastry?
(34) A man is as old as he feels, but
a woman is as old as she looks. I won
der how many women in Palo Alto
know the value of personal appear
ance. It is one of the many things
women neglect. If you will just drop
in and see Madame Musy in the Wil
son building, 132 University avenue,
you will receive the personal atten
tion you have so long desired. Madame
Musy is there to please her patrons
and she desires satisfied customers.
It is every woman's idea to be beauti
ful and Madame Musy wishes to help
you. She has a wonderful shop and
does the finest work. Madame Musy is
known for the wonderful marcels she
known for the wonderful marcells she
will say that this is the nearest to
a natural wave that you ever have
had. Years of experience in this busi
ness is the answer for her excellent
work. If you will just give her a trial
I am sure you will be one of her
steady customers. How much does she
charge for a marcell? What is her
phone number? What does Madame
Musy recommend for falling hair?
(35) It tickles everybody's vanity to
a certain degree to have his friends
say how well his home is furnished,
and perhaps many of these friends
secretly wish they knew where they
could buy furniture of equal looks.
There is no secret in obtaining the
right kind of furniture if one knows
the place to shop. The Warren Furni
ture Company is such a place. They
not only handle high-class furniture
for the parlor, bedroom and dining
room, but their kitchen department is
well stocked with ranges and cooking
utensils, and for the floor they have
the Congoleum. This is recognized for
its qualities of not bulging and crack
ing. It's easily cleaned and always
sanitary. Just go to this store once
and let them show you their collection
of home furnishings. They are sure to
suit your individual taste, no matter
how exacting. They are featuring at
this time their Occidental Ranges and
Stoves. Where is this large furniture
store located, and what make of mat
tress do they recommend for its com
fort? They also sell them. W T hat make
of beds do they carry?
(36) Think of something good to eat
and then think of the Stanford Cafe.
They are synonymous. Not only do
they conduct a counter service that is
most appealing to the man who is in a
hurry but they have attractive tables
for those who have time to sit and
enjoy the meal from all angles. The
food at this cafe is prepared just as it
is at home. They would not think
about serving anything to their pat
rons that they would not eat them
selves and this is proof enough of its
purity. Sanitation is one of the chief
objectives of the proprietors of this
restaurant and is everywhere evident.
The service is rendered in a prompt
manner and you are not left studying
the menu all day. They take your or
der when you first sit down. This is
one thing the proprietors find that ap
peals to their customers. They want im
mediate service and they get it. They
also serve the finest of ice cream and
home-made pastry. Who is the pro
gressive proprietor of this cafe and
how many stools have they at the
gressive proprietors of this cafe and
cated? What brand of coffee do they
use?
(37) The most conveniently and cen
trally located market in Palo Alto to
do your shopping is the Palo Alto
Market. This market caters to the dis
criminating buyers of fresh and cured
meats. To the people that are careful
of the meats they eat, these people
are their friends. They handle nothing
but the very best inspected meats, and
the proprietor does not depend upon
the Federal and State authorities al
together. He makes a personal inspec
tion of them when they enter his
store. If they are not right, bingo!
they are sent back. When you enter
this establishment you are confronted
with an air of absolute cleanliness and
sanitation. Clean sawdust protects the
floor and the glass show cases and
marble counters make it impossible
for bits of meat to "hide" from the
scrutinizing eye of the butchers. The
market on a whole is kept in a state
of cleanliness that will meet the ap
proval of anyone. In fact, sanitation is
their main objective. What is the
exact location of this modern market
and what is their,phone number? How
long have they been established? What
line of hams do they carry? Also what
is their buying rule?

a holiday. It is a gentlemen's billiard I
parlor, conducted for gentlemen by gen
tlemen. Mr. Mahaney sees that these
principles are carried out in detail. At
Mahaney's they have live pool tables,
one snooker table and two billiard
tables, which gives every one a chance
to play the game they like. When you
get thirsty they have a soda fountain in
connection serving the finest of cold
drinks. All the standard brands of
cigars are carried here, and, believe me,
they are fresh. At their store No. 2,
next to the Stanford Theater, you will
find Mr. Krebs in charge, who is asso
ciated with Mr. Mahaney. A full line
of smokers' needs are carried here and
a big supply of cigars in boxes of 10,
25 and 50 in Christmas boxes will be
featured. Ladies' patronage is socilited
at this store. Get your Christmas Gifts
here for the men folks. What is Mr.
Mahaney's first name? Give the location
of store No. 1. What is Mr. Kreb's first
name?
(43) A famous banker once gave a
young man this advice: "Save your
money and look prosperous." We have
known young men to fail because they
did not realize the importance of being
well dressed. A good suit is a dis
tinctive asset to any man. If he is well
dressed, he immediately commands at
tention. If you want the right suit at
the right price, patronize Frazer & Co.
They are the home of good clothes in
Palo Alto, and in addition to these high
grade clothes, they carry such standard
lines of furnishings as Manhattan shirts
and Everwear hosiery. In fact, their
stock borders along high-class lines, and
it is the store in which to do your fall
shopping. They have many new styles,
cuts and materials awaiting your in
spection and their prices are very low,
consistent with the quality. The whole
store commands a high position in the
mercantile establishments of Palo Alto
because of the quality of merchandise
they handle. Meet these people and you
have met twentieth century merchants.
What make of clothing do they sell, and
what is the slogan of these clothes? Give
location, of the store.
(44) Just say "His Master's Voice"
and you have immediately spoken of the
best-known phonograph on the market.
The Victrola is made by pioneer manu
facturers in the business. It is the choice
of the greatest artists who indorse its
unerring register of the original voice
or instrument. Ralph C. Dodson's Music
Store, 340 University avenue, has Vic-,
trolas in many styles and prices. In
addition to the Victrolas this shop also
carries a large line of Victor records,
and new ones are added as soon as they
are released from the factory. A good
tip to the student is to have a "portable"
Victrola with you. If you want to dance
it is always handy and will give you
the music you like the best whenever
you want it. Go in and let them show
you their selection of Victrolas. They
will be glad to play for you any record
you would like to hear. You will ap
preciate meeting these people and they
will appreciate your patronage. Where
are the machines manufactured and how
long has this music shop been established?
What is the price of the style 100 Vic
trola? Have you heard the best seller
in records this month, "I Found a Four-
Leaf Clover," and what is the price of
this record ?
(45) Let's go to the movies. This
expression often shakes away gloom and
dullness and you gladly join the happy
ries a complete stock of crockery ware,
see a regular show. By "movies" the
people of Palo Alto mean the Varsity
and Stanford theaters. They know that
at these playhouses they will see the
best of screen offerings at prices con
sistent with conditions. These two cozy
theaters give the patrons day in and day
out the best in film plays that money
can buy. To those few in Palo Alto
that have not had the pleasure of at
tending these two modern playhouses,
they are missing one of the great joys
of life. The products of the most gifted
imaginations of the world are beautifully
and artistically portrayed with an ac
companiment of the finest of organ
music. You should get their regular
weekly program, which gives you the
names of the shows and the nights upon
which they will be exhibited. Tell us
the manager's name of the Varsity The
ater and how many seats have they?
Give us the exact location of the Stan
ford Theater. What is the Big Special
picture coming there next Monday?
(46) You may say what you want,
but say "Hardware" and the minds of
the people of Palo Alto will revert
automatically to the Palo Alto Hard
ware Company, "The Winchester Store."
This firm carries a complete line of
hardware, consisting of carpenters' and
mechanics' tools of every description;
cutlery as well as builders' hardware,
sporting goods, Bass Hcuter Paints,
Pennsylvania Vacuum Cup Tires—in
fact, everything you would expcct to find
in a modern up-to-date hardware store.
The Palo Alto Hardware Company is
known as the "Winchester Store," carry
ing a full line of Winchester products.
The Winchester Company puts out one
article each month at a special price—
the public are looking forward each
month for these big specials. The special
for November is a Winchester Flash

(3S) Time is money. Save time and
money. Spend the ten minutes allowed
on your street car transfer, buying
Christmas Cards or forgotten station
ery supplies at llyde's, 370 University
avenue, right at the transfer point.
There are but two transfer points, the
depot and opposite Hyde's new store.
Tou can get a basket for your many
packages here or a beautifully decor
ated one to send as a Christmas gift.
If you want a Fountain Pen, which one
does Hyde's guarantee? If you want to
give stationery to your sister, which
of Hyde's brands would you choose?
Which will have the bigger sale at
Hyde's for the kiddies, "Kritters of the
Kitchen Kingdom," or "The Chickens
Eating Corn"? What line of goods is
being especially featured at Hyde's
besides sttftionery, school supplies,
fountain pens, pictures, picture frames,
baskets, candles, beads, games, toys,
favors, memory books, and albums?
Call at Hyde's at the transfer point,
and they can answer the above ques
tions and also give you many sugges
tions for charming and inexpensive
Christmas presets. Their new store is
one of the finest of its kind in P. A.
(39) It is every man's wish to own
his own home. It makes for family
contentment and happiness. It saves
paying rent.
The University Realty Company sp&-
j cializes in providing people with
homes. Consult them as you would any
specialist.
Years of experience in this com
munity stands back of the University
Realty Company.
This Company can serve you in the
purchase or sale of real estate, in writ
ing all kinds of insurance, in renting
and leasing, in fact, in all matters per
taining to real estate and insurance.
How long has this Company been in
business in Palo Alto? Name one in
surance company that it represents.
(40) If you want to make your
friends happy, present them with a
good photograph of yourself. A photo
graph is a token of real friendship,
and is highly appreciated by everyone.
And when you are in Palo Alto and
desire a portrait of yourself and are
not satisfied with just ordinary work,
go to the Shattuck Studio and you will
be pleased. This is one man who is
"behind the camera, but not behind
the times." His portrait work is indic
ative of this. In his little studio on
University avenue he will be found
very busy most every day snapping
and developing and then touching up,
putting the finishing touches on, which
removes all blemishes. The art of fin
ishing portraits is not possessed by
everyone, but this photographer is in
deed an expert. Then, too, his prices
are exceedingly moderate, considering
the beauty and quality of work turned
out. You are always sure of a success
ful picture here. Do you know that
your picture is the only present your
friends cannot buy? Where is the
exact location of this studio? What
other photographic work do they do?
(41) Everyone knows Wagner, "The
Meat Man." He is a master in the meat
business. He came to Palo Alto eight
years ago and started business in a
small market in a small way on High
street. Today his business has ex
panded to such an extent that it has
outgrown the old market.
Mr. Wagner says he doesn't take the
credit for making his business what it
is in Palo Alto, but owes it to Mr. N.
Benson who has been with him ever
since he has located in this vicinity
and who will continue to manage the
local market. Mr. Benson has a great
many friends here in Palo Alto.
Mr. Wagnor owns the block of four
stores on the corner of University and
Florence streets, his new market being
the main Corner Store Room. This
wonder market is a palace of marble.
The counters are of marble and glass
and the latest word in modern sanita
tion. The woodwork is finished in
French gray and the walls in gray
with green trimmings. Cold storage
plant is of the latest modern auto
matic control and the best that money
can buy.
There is not a question in tlie
writer's mind but what this is one of
the most modern and finest equipped
markets in the state of California.
Mr. Wagner owns a chain of mar
kets extending to San Jose and Hol
lister and most of his time is con
fined to the purchasing end of the bus
iness. He has been in the meat bus
iness so long that he doesn't guess at
the quality of meat when he buys. He
knows that they are the best, so, when
purchasing the meat from him you
don't have to worry about its not being
of the best quality.
He is still going to be known as
"The Meat Man" in his new market
and will give the same service and
high quality meats that has made him
such a success.
It will pay you to watch for his ad
vertisements appearing in the daily
papers.
(42) This article is about one of the
liveliest spots in Palo Alto. There is
something doing here most all of the
time, and especially after dinner or on

Light, complete with battery for 89 cents.
The Palo Alto Hardware Company Car
rie sa complete stock of crockery ware,
dishes in plain and open sets and the
finest aluminum and enameled ware in
the city. How long has this store been
established? What is tie special price
on the 50-piece set of Gold Band Potter
Chinaware? What make of electric
washer do they sell?
(47) Fitting feet is a matter of no
little importance, for there .ire a very
few people that enjoy the fitting of a
n<iw pair of shoes, even when they fit
perfectly. However, Thoit's Shoe Store
is a firm that is noted all over the Coast
for its ability to produce shoes that
"feel just like the old ones." They are
the local distributors of Hanan Shoes
and other reputable makes of more mod
erate price. This store is a home store.
Its management is a good example to
follow, for courtesy and personal ser
vice is its aim. It is needless to speak
of the quality of their shoes, as this is
too well known, but we will say that they
carefully select as to quality, workman
ship and style. Their wearing qualities,
as well as looks, are second to none.
When you have met the proprietor of
the local firm you will have met a man
that is all for Stanford and Palo Alto.
Where is their modern shoe store lo
cated? How many members of the fam
ily can they fit in shoes? When was
this business established?
(48) There is one photographer in.
Palo Alto, "An Artistic Photographer,"'
who has gained a national reputation
and holds first prize in America for ex
cellency of work. He now has por
traits on exhibition in the National Salon.
Has also been awarded highest honors
in the states of New York, Ohio and
Michigan. He has probably photo
graphed more prominent and profes
sional people than any photographer in
America. Was with Hartsook Studios
for the past eleven years, specializing
principally in photographing moving pic
ture stars and theatricals in general. A
visit to his studio, 126 University ave
nue, which was formerly the Davey
Studio, will convince the most skeptical
of the superiority of his work. Who is
this artist who has made it possible for
the Palo Alto people to get something
different, something highly artistic*
without having to go to the larger
cities? And what makes a successful
artistic portrait? Remember Friend
ship's Perfect Gift—Your Photo.
(49) There is a wonderful industry
in this city that 1 belit*vo many do not
know about. Why is it so many people
go to San Francisco to purchase their
gifts when right here in Palo Alto there
is a shop that is known by exclusive
shops all over the United States and
whose goods have gone to England..
Australia, and Honolulu? Miss Herrick
conducts a shop the year round to servj;
you. When you are thinking of gifts,
go first to Miss Herrick's and you will
be surprised at the exclusive articles
you will find there and more reasonably
priced than elsewhere. This Studio must,
be seen to be appreciated. Give us the
names of two articles just received from
India. Tell us three articles made ex
clusively in Herrick Studios and sold
all over the United States.
(50) Here is one of the busiest stores
in Palo Alto. Segar Service Shop. Be
lieve me, the proprietor sure is popular
with the young fellows. There never is
a time but what you will see a bunch in
his store. The reason for that is his
service to every one, no matter if you
only buy a package of cigarette papers*
or if it is a brier pipe, you get the same
courteous treatment. A large assortment
of pipes have just arrived for the Christ
mas trade. Also jars of smoking to
bacco. A complete line of magazines
are carried here. In connection with this
modern Cigar Store we have a real Ser
vice Barber Shop, operated by Mr. Par
vin. They are all union barbers and ex
pert haircutters. This shop is the oldest
in town. If you only want a shave, don't
be afraid to come here. These barbers
don't bother the life out of you selling
you something else in the shop. Try
these boys the first chance you get. Get
an Almond Meal and Peroxide Steam
Facial Massage. Tell us Mr. Parvin's
first name. Tell us how many maga
zines Mr. Corns has for sale at the
Cigar Counter. Give us the exact loca
tion of these two establishments.
(1) Think of the countless obstacles
the pioneers of old had to overcome
as they journeyed forth to lay the
foundation for a future that might
hold some promise' for them. Some
achieved their goal, others failed. Then
consider your own environment and
chances for the future. Your lot is a
path of roses compared with that of
tho pioneers. jfist lay aside a small
amount each week and start an ac
count with the First National Bank of
Palo Alto. They have a capital of
$100,000.00, and $24,000 surplus, and
are members of the Federal Reserve
System of Banking. The officers and
everyone connected with this bank
have always practiced service and
courtesy to their patrons. You are
treated with consideration whether
you are a large or small depositor or
whether you are a temporary visitor in
this favored locality. A man putting
his money in a bank should always
make sure that the institution is finan
cially solid and this is just such a
bank. They pay 4 per cent interest on
Term Deposits. Name the directors of
this banking institution. What is the
margin of security including stock
holders' liability?

(2) In purchasing jewelry, the buyer
puts more faith in the seller than any
other commodity that men buy and
sell. This article is about a jewelry
store that has been in business in
Palo Alto for a number of years, and
their reputation for being dependable
is second to none. In addition to their
exceptional stock of watches, jewelry,
rings, SILVERWARE, cut glass, etc.,
they do expert watch and jewelry re
pairing. This is the store to select your
•"Gifts That Last." Nielsen and Culver
are the kind of fellows we like to men
tion in our columns, because they have
a sociable and intelligent personality
—ones who know how to make friends
and keep them. Go see this store and
look over their high class line of jew
elry and you are sure to make all of
your purchases in this line from them.
Every article they sell not only bears
the guarantee of the manufacturers,
but their personal guarantee goes with
it as well. If you have a broken piece
of jewelry, no matter how fine it is,
they will repair it for you. What are
Mr. Culver'? initials, and where is
their store located. Also what other
department do they conduct? What is
their leading line of Silverware?

(3) It ticV les everybody's vanity to
a certain dc pre e to have his friends
say how we ! his homo is furnished,
and perhaps many of these friends se
cretly wish they knew where they
could buy furniture of equal looks.
There is no secret of obtaining the
right kind cf furniture if one knows
the place to shop. The Palo Alto Fur
niture Company is such a place. They
not only hf nd!e high-class furniture
for the parlor, bofl-roora and dining
room, but their kitchen department is
well stocked with ranges and
utensils and for the floor they have
Linoleum of the latest designs and
patterns. It is easily cleaned and al-

Introducing to You the Live Progressive Firms and People Who Make
up the Business Interests of Palo Alto
First Prize —$10.00 Theatre Tickets contributed by
* VARSITY AND STANFORD THEATRES
Second Prize —One Dozen Photographs contributed by
SHATTUCK STUDIOS
Third Prize —One Hand Painted Oil Picture of Chapel
contributed by FREEMAN'S ART STORE
Fourth Prize —One Box of Chancellor (after dinner) Cigars
contributed by FRANKLIN'S SMOKE HOUSE

ways sanitary. Just go to this store !
once and let them show you their col
lection of home furnishings. They are
sure to suit your individual taste, no
matter how exacting. They are featur
ing a complete line of stoves and
ranges. The best in the world is
Wedgewood. Where is this large fur
niture store located? and what make
of water heaters do, they recommend?
How many square feet of Inlaid Lin
oleum are they now laying in the Rus
sel Cafeteria?

(4) No matter who you are and what
your life is, it can be made happier
and better through the influence of
music. This up-to-date store that we
are writing about is the home of the
best there is in music, and they are
representatives for Brunswick and
Columbia phonographs. The Music
Shop at 273 University Avenue is the
music house of Palo Alto, for they not
only carry and sell phonographs and
pianos, but they carry all kinds of
musical instruments, sheet music,
player rolls and records. If you are
fond of string instruments, they have
anything from the ukelele to the cello.
They are exclusive representatives in
Palo Alto for two well-known phono
graphs which are recognized for their ;
many exceptional qualities. These ma
chines play disc records of any make.
If you like a lot of noise moulded into
music, then they have drums for your
choice. The proprietor here is a music
loving man, himself, and he delights in
showing his line to patrons. A visit
from you will be appreciated. What
make of Band Instruments does he
carry? Who are the manufacturers of
the Victor and Brunswick? What is
the price of the Gretsch Sac., Melody
C, Finish No. 2?

(5) Two of the best places to eat in j
Palo Alto are home and here. That is
what the editor thought after trying
one of this restaurant home-cooked
meals. All of you people do not know
of this restaurant or you would be
Johnny on the spot every time Old
Man Hunger gripped your frame. They
not only cater to the man who is in a
hurry with counter service but they
have linen-covered tables for the
ladies. However, the same service is
had at both places and at the same
prices. If you have lots of time to sit
and enjoy your meal, then sit at the
tables, but if you are a business man
with only a few minutes to "grab"
your lunch, the counter service will be
most ideal. The location of this home
like place is 105 Alma Street. The
proprietor of this restaurant has a
most affable manner and he does all
in his power to please his patrons.;
Anything that you want is not too
much trouble for him to get. He uses
the best grade of meats and come
fresh from the meat market when he
needs them and not a week before, j
Who is the energetic proprietor of the
"Popular" restaurant? What is the
price of their noon lunch? What brand
of coffee do they use? How much are
their meal tickets?

(6) Clothes cost too much money to
be carelessly cleaned and pressed, i
Your tailor should be picked just as
your doctor or your grocer. It is just
as important. If you send your clothes
to first one cleaner and then anothf r,
in the ert'd your clothes will be ruined,
and with none to blame but yourself.
The Stanford Dyeing and Cleaning
Works commands a high position in
the cleaning and pressing business of
Palo Alto, and they always guarantee
their work. These people know how to
press a suit. They press it to its
natural form and not "against the
srain." They also use an odorless pro
cess in their cleaning and every meth
od of handling clothes that is modern
is used by them. They have a call and
delivery system and for them to keep
your wardrobe in prefect trim at all
times is no trouble for you. They will
call at your home at regular intervals
tor your clothes and return them
promptly. This prompt service is a
great item in their business. They also
do repairing. What does this firm
charge for cleaning and pressing a
suit, and where is their plant located?
What does 444 mean?

(7) Chiropractic was born 27 years
•,'Ko. The suspicion, distrust and re
sentful criticism aimed at it in the

beginning has been dispelled. Chiro
practors have proven their worth in
healing the sick and lame with their
chiropractic adjustments. With all of
this human service in California they
were held under the yoke of the med
ical board. But thanks to the fair
minded people of this state, that is
over.
Dr. Minor and Dr. Hall wish to thank
all Iheir friends for the support they
gave them. These two doctors are
graduates of the Palmer School of
Chiropractic in Davenport, lowa. They
have practiced Chiropractic for years.
People come for miles around to Doc
tors Minor and Hall.
They are located at 153 University
Avenue. Give both the 'doctors' first
names and give two reasons why Chi
ropractic is beneficial to one's health.

(8) Don't junk your old tires. Take
them to a reliable tire shop and get
their opinion on their condition. They
may be vulcanized and run for several
thcHtsand miles more. And if you want
an honest opinion as to this, take your
tires to Palo Alto Vulcanizing Works.
Tires are this man's sole business,
and we make no mistake when we say
that he knows his business thoroughly.
Vhen he has patched a tube or vul
canized a "shoe" for you, then he has
made a friend. A guarantee goes with
evefy job he does and this is a guar
antee of absolute satisfaction. There
is no money value set on it, but it is a
personal guarantee that you get what
you want and no matter what it cost
him, he'll see that you get it. In addi
tion to the vulcanizing and repair de
partment, this man also carries a stock
of Goodyear tires and he has y ur size.
You don't want to meet a more con
genial man than Mr. Bogges with a
smile for you. Where is the shop lo
cated? What is his price for a Good
year Ford all-weather fabric tire?
What is the price of the 40x10 solid
truck tire that Mr. Bogges has in his
window?

(9) It is a source of discomfort and
worry for some people to buy a new
pair of shoes, but if you are careful in
selecting the correct size in the right
grade of shoes, you will not have this
inconvenience to contend with. At the
Lentos Shoe Store they will not only
sell you a new pair of shoes, but they
will make your old ones like new for
you. They conduct a modern electrical
shoe repairing shop in connection with
the shoe store and they do the work
just like it is done at the factories.
Let your next pair of shoes come from
this store and they will last you much
longer, for when you have worn off
the original soles, just return them
and they will put new ones on at a
small cost. They use the very best
double wear genuine leather soles and
the name and trade mark is stamped
cn them. When you have work done
here, it is well guaranteed, and there
is something back of the guarantee.
Then if it is in the power of these
people to do you a good turn, they
certainly will take pleasure in doing
it. They work for others as well as
themselves. What brand of pure
leather do they use on their soles, and
where is the store located?

. (10) Is milk and cream an important
part of your daily meals? If not, you
are one out of a hundred. Then with
this in view, it is only natural for peo
ple to be sure that their milk and
cream is' absolutely light. And to be
"right" it should contain a certain per
cent of butterfat, as well as be clean
and free from all foreign matter. The
milk, cream, butter and dairy products
you get at the Altomont Creamery are
all that the name implies—sanitary.
They feature pasteurized and guaran
teed dairy products. You can ask for
no better merchandise in this line. So
the next time you need any dairy
products of any sort, whether it be
butter, milk, cream, or cottage cheese,
just go to the Altomont Creamery. It
will be filled with satisfaction.
These people will give you service, as
their business depends upon it. If they
did not give you good service on your
first trip, you would not return again,
and they want your future friendship
and business. What is the location of
this firm's retail store, and what do
they get per quart for their milk. What
does pasteurized mean? and what does
guaranteed milk mean?

(11) When the pioneers blazed a
trail across the continent in '49 there
was also organized a man that blazed
the way in the paint industry, W. T.
Floyd. Since that time, this firm has
been beautifying Palo Alto with its
products. In addition to paints, they
also sell oils, glass, and if you are
looking for a waterproof paint, this is
the place to go. The Hadle Stormtight
Roof Paint firm has a very modern and
up-to-date store, and they are known
for their neatness and complete stock
of goods they carry. This store is a
credit to any city. This store which
this writing is for has the agency for
Acme Quality Paints and Varnishes,
the world's higest standard in paints.
Not only do they retail their products,
but wholesale as well. If you are a
paint man, you will know what firm we
are referring to for they carry one of
the largest stocks in these parts. What

is the name of this firm and what do
they recommend for floor varnish?
Just call at the local store and their
salesmen will gladly assist you. How
many square feet will a gallon of Acme
Quality Paint cover two coats?

(12) Just up the street at Mr. Ethen's
is he liveliest spot in Palo Alto. There is
something doing there most all of the
time and especially so after supper. It
is a place where gentlemen congregate
and exchange experiences of the day
over a friendly game of pocket bil
liards. But, in addition to the billiard
parlor, they also conduct a large bowl
ing alley and soda fountain where they
will make you a creamy milk shake
that will certainly make you return for
another in a short while. They are also
local agents for the United Cigar
Stores and carry a line of cigars that
cannot be had in any other establish
ment in the city. If you are looking for
a friend, you are sure to find him here.
It is a place where practically every
man frequents once in a while just for
the gentlemanly company he is sure to
find. If it is a box of candy you wisn
for your girl, then this is the place for
you to seek. They carry several differ
ent makes and it is kept in a specially
equipped refrigerator which insures
you of freshness at any time. How
many pocket pool tables have they?
What line of pipes do they carry? How
many alleys are there and name what
team is leading in the bowling tourna
ment now being conducted?

(13) Now comes a renowned meat
market which sells fresh meats. In
deed their meats are fresh. They make
it a point to keep them so, which is
responsible for the popularity and
wonderful business gained in the past
months. There are mrny tricks em
ployed by the meat buyers in judging
duality, and the Stanford Meat Com
pany is perfectly willing to share its
secrets with you. They buy only the
best, but they want you to know at
the time of your purchase that you
are getting what you want. Cleanli
ness is the watchword of this market.
The business is so great that their
daily purchases keep their meats
fresh. They seldom carry much over
from one day to another. We enjoy
writing about this market and its
owner for several reasons. One is they
say "never mind about buying, just
come in and look the good things
over." Give exact address. How long
have they been established? What are
their phone numbers? How often do
they get fresu fish at this market?

(14) In buying drugs, you want the
best, including purity and service,
which are two essential things to con
s'der when selecting from which to
buy these needs. Impure drugs are
worse than none at all, and poor ser
vice means aggravation and annoy
ance. Only the best drugs are ever
handled at the Young Drug Company
at the corner of University avenue
and Florence street. The proprietor
is a registered pharmacist and he en
deavors to keep a stock that will
meet with all requirements and cus
tomers do not have to go elsewhere
for anything usually found in an up-to
date drug store. In addition to drugs,
they carry a large stock of perfumery,
toilet articles, safety razors, and if
you happen to have a sweet tooth,
their candies will be appealing to you.
This store has the agency for all of
the Owl products, so you may obtain
these goods right here at home. What
is Ihe proprietor's name? Also what
line of remedies do they handle? What
is "Pom Pom" Luster?

(15) We are now presenting a firm
where fresh staple and fancy groceries
can be secured. It is a concern with
a conscience, and has an aim to please
the hard-to-suit in their lines. In fact,
you can close your eyes and buy here,
and every sale carries a guarantee of
satisfaction, and a little profit is all
they ask. Now just stop a second and
say to yourself, "Where is the best
stock of fruits, vegetables and gro
ceries carried in Palo Alto?" The best
brands of everything are the distin
guishing characteristics of this store,
along with its sanitary aspect. It is a
source of personal satisfaction to the
writer to write about this "quality"
store and the proprietor, Mr. Earle,
Ever since he started, years ago, his
popularity has met with a steady in
crease. He is not only a popular mer
chant. but is an alert business man,
and his idea is to always make the
place home-like when you do business
with him or his clerks, and so far he
has succeeded, and if he can make
Palo Alto a better city you can depend
upon him to take off his coat, roll up
his sleeves and help put it over. He
has for those who need it, a smile,
and has won their business or confi
dence. No merchant in Palo Alto is
more popular with his customers than
the owner of this store. Name the
owner and give his first name in full,
location and phone.

(16) Here is a works that makes a
lot of noise in a legitimate way. It is a
sheet metal establishment. They have
been making a big noise
for some time. They make a
of tin and sheet iron, and a 112

cialties are tanks, and irrigating pipe,
.spouting, skylights, cornice as well as
tin and copper sheet metal specialties.
The expert tinner is a great necessity
i'or those owning homes or business
places, as they look to them for re
l airs and parts. To be efficient, they
must be skilled in their calling and
geniuses as well. And these things are
apparent at the Palo Alto Sheet Metal
Works. There are many ways of tin
ning that will not stand the test. These
people use the right way. The owners
of this shop believe it better to be on
the level with their customers than
to climb upward by a crooked path.
Such a firm as this we surely like to
include in our feature. In fact, we can
not say enough for them, for they de
serve much more than a mere word of
praise. They deserve sure success.
Who is the proprietor of this shop and
Low long have they been established
here. Where are they located? What
size Warm Air Heater does it take to
heat a 7-room house? and give the
price of it.

(17) When a business establish
ment has reached the heights of suc
cess and prominence, it is either cred
ited to the skillful management or to
the quality of merchandise they han
dle. At the enterprising store at 317
University Avenue both of these items
are responsible for their standing in
Palo Alto. The most prominent resi
dents of the city are among their cus
tomer list. Their costumes can always
be depended upon for beiug the latest
styles and the good quality never
varies. "Where there is quality, there
is style." The Style Shop is well
known for both. (The store is attrac
tively decorated and the merchandise
is displayed in such a manner that it
becomes a profound pleasure to shop
with them). Their courteous sales
women also render great assistance
with their timely suggestions of "what
is being worn" and you leave the store
pleased witn your visit, feeling that
you have wasted no time whatever.
What is the slogan of this enterpris
ing store. Tell name of this classy
store's proprietor. A Big Clearance
Sale is now going on at the Smart
Shop. Everything in the store is re
duced for this Sale.

(18) The most widely known and
recognized decorations for any and all
occasions are flowers. They are recog
nized internationally and more can be
said with a small bunch of flowers
than can be said with a dozen tele
grams or any other form of communi
cation. "Say it with flowers" is a fit
ting slogan for their usefulness and
worth. The one flower shop in Palo
Alto that has created a reputation for
having in stock all of the different
(lowers in season is known as the
Palo Alto Flower & Seed Shop. They
carry a complete line of flowers for
the dining room table, to ship to your
friends or pot flowers to decorate your
home and porches. When you desire
to remember yourself to a friend, this
is the one place to come for they will
make up a beautiful boquet for you.
The proprietor here likes flowers him
self, which is symbolic of happiness.
His disposition is also like that of a
flower, bright and full of cheer. Who
is this proprietor? What is the num
ber of the shop? What kind of seeds
does he carry? What are the names
of the jardiners that they are selling
that come from Japan?

(19) Who is there in this city en
gaged in correction and the conserva
tion of eyesight? Many have come to
him and received great relief when
troubled with eye defects. His strict
attention to his business has won for
him a host of friends and patrons. Dr.
Cochran will be found very busy at
his offices at 122 University avenue
and you will make no mistake in con
sulting him about your eyes. He has
passed the State Board of Optometry
examinations and is recognized for his
excellent work, and is also a graduate
Dr. of Optometry. In addition to
working on your eyes, he will replace
broken lenses or make you a complete
pair of glasses. The eyes are the win
dows of the soul and when they are
wrong, the body is handicapped, for,
without clear vision, we can't see the
world as it is. Eye troubles are often
started when young and your chil
dren's eyes should be examined before
it is too late. Make an appointment
•with Dr. Cochran and get his opinion.
His office is completely equipped with
all of the modern instruments used in
this work. What are Dr. Cochran's ini
tials, and what is the range of prices
for his glasses? What is the store
motto?

(20) Most men like to know where
they can find a good barber shop, as
they are very particular about per
sonal appearance. They demand satis
factory work. When I suggest Mar
quee's Barber Shop, I know what I'm
talking about. They have a very sani
tary little shop with all the modern
equipment, also including five modern
chairs. They specialize in all kinds of
shampooing, scalp and facial treat
ments. If you want your hair to have
jompadour cut, or any other kind,
t let Marquee's do it for you. If

you are having trouble with your
scalp, they can help you. Dixol is the
scalp treatment they recommend. They
also bob children's hair, so bring them
in the next time you are down town.
Just ask anyone who has visited Mar
quee's shop, and they will tell you
how well satisfied they were. Where
ic their shop located? What brands of
hair tonic do they use and recom
mend?

(21) A most important institution of
business in any city, town or commun
ity is the reliable drug store. Here it
is that we depend for our health. And
It ere is where we go when we want
toilet articles, kodak supplies, foun
tain pens and a hundred other luxuries
and necessities. The Kenyon & Crow
Store is known for its large and com
plete stock of all of these articles, and
in fact, anything found in a first-class
store. In addition to their general line
of pure drugs, assortments of high
class cosmetics and sundries, they are
tlie Penslar Store in Palo Alto. This
line of household remedies is com
plete. There is one for every possible
need or use. Now is the time to begin
to think about Christmas Gifts. A
large collection of hand-colored Christ
mas Cards have just arrived. They
are wonderful in design and color.
Fountain pens and Pen and Pencil sets
in Christmas Boxes make a very fine
pi esent to your student friends, or a
big box of gift stationery. At this store
they conduct the largest Kodak print
ing and developing business 011 the
Peninsula, handling a full line of East
man Kodaks and Cameras. One of
the big features of this store is their
framed pictures and mirrors. They
have a framing department and are
able to frame for you any size picture
with most any style mounting you
desire. What profit-sharing system do
they practice? Find out the four lead
ing perfumes they handle? In what
line do they excell all other concerns
in this locality? What are the pro
prietors' nicknames?

(22) There is a mail in this town
much wiser than his sires; he ran
into a bramble bush and punctured all
four tires. When he saw his tires
were wrecked, with all his might and
main, he went to this tire shop and
had them fixed again. One of the first
things to learn if you own an auto
mobile is to know what vulcanizing
nrm gives Service that Serves. The
Retread Shop is recognized for their
expert tire repairing. You should con
sult these doctors when your tires get
sick for they surely have the dope
that cures. You cannot help but like
this firm for those connected with it
make every effort possible to please
you. They will always go out of their
way to do a good turn for you, and if
you have tire trouble on the street,
just notify them and they will render
assistance People who do business
here are really proud .of ttie fact and
it is simply because they give what
the customers want and should have
—"Satisfaction." Go to this shop and
meet these tire men and then tell us
what make of tires they sell and what
their price for a Ford-size cord tire in
the make begins with "F." Give two
reasons why this tire is the best on
the market for its size.

(23) Pleasure of motoring is in
creased if your car is in good working
condition. It is, therefore, advisable to
have your car looked over before you
start on this trip and when you have
your car worked on, be sure of* your
garage. The Palo Alto Garage on Em
reson street is indeed a thoroughly
dependable establishment in regard to
their repairing. Mr. J. M. Blackburn
employs only expert mechanics. The
Palo Alto Garage has the agency for
the Durant car and many others such
as the Chandler, Cadillac, and Cleve
land. Have you seen the new 1923
model Durant. Just step in and let
them sTiow you what a wonderful mod
el it is. The proprietor of this garage,
Mr. J. M. Blackburn, personally super
vises the garage at all times, and as
sures you of prompt service whether
you are buying a spark plug or filling
your tank with gas. They have Ever-
Ready Battery service, and they also
carry Associated Gasoline. They want
satisfied customers at the Palo Alto
Garage. That is their motto. Give two
reasons why the Durant car is more
practical. What is Mr. Blackburn's
first jiame? How long have they been
established?

(24) In writing of the leading busi
ness firms and institutions of Palo
Alto, we have come across an inter
esting shop at 367 University Avenue,
that well deserves mentioning. No, it
won't interest you men, particularly—
but has an especial appeal to the wo
men of Palo Alio and vicinity who
are lovers of beautiful things. This at
tractive shop is fairly overflowing with
wonderful creations of Laces, Em
broideries, Frocks, and Sport Skirts,
Reads for the Miss and Mistress —at-
tractively displayed, and just a) at
tractively priced. These are only a
112» w of the many beautiful and useful
articles to be found in this modern,
up-to-date shop—and the proprietor
takes great pleasure in dispensing I
courteous and attentive service to
every patron. We want you to tell us
the name of this worth while shop—
also the proprietor's name and cor
rect address. What are their prices on
their dresses? What price on stamped
pillow cases? Also stamped dresser
scarfs which come in packages.
(25) Look prosperous and save
money at the same time. This is what
so many people are trying to do and |
cannot quite manage it. The reason is
that they do not know where to buy
economically and where to get goods
hat stand wear and look well. It is
not economy to buy a cheap "hand-me
down" suit of clothes. It is a waste of
money. If you have a suit made by
the tailor that this article is about,
you will get a suit of clothes that will
last. This tailor has been sixteen years
in Palo Alto and has the finest trade
on the Peninsula. Specialist on ladies'
tailoring and sport suits. He holds a
gold medal given to him at the Lewis
and Clark Exposition for designing.
You will be surprised at the chicness
as well as the exceedingly low price
he charges for a suit. And another fea
ture of this tailor, all of the tailoring
is done on the premises. He does not
take your order and send it to San
Francisco or New York. Who is this
progressive tailor? His establishment
is upstairs at 123 University avenue.
Better stop in and let him take your
measure and you select your pattern
and style at the same time.
(26) The best friend of womankingis
that which takes the grievous burdens
from her shoulders. No woman likes
to bend over washtubs or ironing
boards, and it is the mission of the
University French Laundry to per
form this highest physical service for
her. This laundry is almost our own
concern. It takes soiled linen and
turns it into attractive wearing ap
parel. It is an extensive industry, em
ploying many people. Wagons are sent
out in every direction in Palo Alto to
collect and deliver laundry and to keep
the various articles separated, so that
you don't get your neighbors' clothes,
is a job of a highly specialized order.
The methods used at this laundry are
thoroughly modern, and the machinery
equipment makes the work most satis
factory. The manager of this laundry
takes an active interest in the welfare
of Palo Alto and his absolute support
can be counted upon when anything
for the betterment of the city is in
progress. Who is this energetic man
ager, and where is the laundry lo
cated? How many employes has he?
What is the phone number?
(27) Well, here we are. Just what
interests all%women in Palo Alto. I
know when you go to that party or
dance you want to look charming. It
just requires a little personal atten
tion. You have often been to some pub
lic place and admired some ladies'
hair of the transparent texture of her
skin. The kind that is clear and
smooth. Well, you can have that charm
just the same as she. You go and see
Mrs. Marie Montgomery who has
charge of this exclusive Beauty Shop.
You will find every kind of modern
equipment desired in this shop, and
their work is very satisfactory. So
many girls have bobbed hair nowa
days, and they find it quite a task to
keep it looking well. Just drop into the
Montgomery Beauty Shop, and they
will marcelle your hair, and give the
ends a round curl which improves it
very much. You will find their egg
shampoo very invigorating. They spe
cialize in scalp and facial treatments.
They do hair waving and curling of
all kinds. What is one of the finest
scalp treatment? All kinds of facial
treatments are given by Mrs. Mont
gomery. Tell us the price of her
I'lactique Facial Treatment?
(28) What is the name of the store
that comes into your mind so clearly
when you speak of Art Goods? It is
Edwin R. Freeman's Art and Photo
Shop. There is no other place in the
city where they have such a large as
sortment of Wonderful Gifts to select
from. The writer cannot begin to tell
you of the hundreds of articles in this
store. The candlestick and framed and
unframed pictures are the best that
Mr Freeman could make and buy.
They have the largest picture fram
ing department on the Peninsula, giv
ing you the largest assortment of
frames to choose from. Christmas sea
son is nearing. Your motto is to do
your shopping early, and if you are
looking for gifts to give your friends
that will make them long remembered
to you, go to Freeman's Art Store. If
you have a picture that you cherish,
bring it here and let them frame it, or
a negative, enlarge it. They have a
complete service for films, kodaks, and
enlarging. How is it that Mr. Freeman
can sell his Foto Art Prints cheaper
than others?
(29) Palo Alto with its amazing
wealth and attractive terms and prices

when you are indebted to the wide
awake firm at 111 Circle. Their long
experience, knowledge of values and
expert advice in such matters have
won for them a large number of satis
fled customers. Through their devotion
to the business of their clients, Mr.
Helm has gained an enviable reputa
tion. Whether it be the buying of a
home or the selection of a lot or acre
age, you can be sure of finding just
what you want at attractive terms and
price when you are dealing with this
firm. This company also has many
ranch lands, both raw and improved.
In fact, their operations along this line
is, indeed, second to none in Palo Alto.
They are authorities on ranch lands
and if you name the location, they can
come pretty close to telling you the
value. Therefore, their advice and per
sonal service in such matters is indeed
important. Just drop in at their office
and they will gladly assist you. They
have just moved to 111 Circle, former
ly at 257 University avenue. What is
the name of this firm and what other
line of business do they follow? What
is Mr. Helm's first name? What is the
name of Mr. Helm's new assistant?
(30) Did you ever notice how you
admire the clothes of others and can
not understand why you never look as
well when you know personally that
you spend more money on your wear
ing apparel than this particular fel
low? The secret can easily be solved
if you do your shopping at the right
place. To test this out, the next time
you need a suit of clothes, a hat, or
anything in the gents' furnishing line,
go to Wideman & Son. This is one
exclusive haberdashery. Their stock is
composed of such well-known makes
as Kuppenheimer Clothes, Knapp Felt
Hats and Caps, handled by only the
best stores, and the fact of the matter
is, their entire stock bears names just
as well-known and highly recommend
ed as these few mentioned. Winter is
here and now is the time to see that
you are equipped for it. You certainly
need a new suit or a new hat. If you
don't think you do, come here and
look at the difference in the style of
your old one and their new stock.
You'll change your mind immediately.
And another thing about this store:
everyone is courteous, even the clerks
greet you with a smile, and are glad
to show you everything. How long has
this firm been established? Give exact
address. What is their business agree
ment with customers?
(31) Here is just the place to visit
for lunches and home-made pastry. It
is known as Kapps lunchroom. They
serve a nice little lunch there, and the
coffee is delicious. It is a very clean,
sanitary shop, and you get quick ser
vice. They have home-made pies,
cakes, and doughnuts. The doughnuts
are those world-wide known "Bake
Rite." They sell for twenty-five cents
per dozen. When you are down town
drop into this shop. There is nothing
more tasty than hot doughnuts and
coffee. The process- by which these
doughnuts are made makes them light
er and fluffier than the average dough
nut. And those home-made pies such as
pumpkin and mince, certainly are en
joyable at this time of year. They also
serve a noon-day lunch for the busi
ness man that is a dandy. How many
chairs do thew have in this shop? How
many meat pies do they make a day
and what do they sell for? Give the
exact location of this shop?
(32) There is at least one cigar
store in Palo Alto that caters to
smokers and men who want the best
merchandise for their money. The
Franklin Smoke House makes a spe
cialty of fine cigars, all kinds of cigar
ettes and they carry a large stock of
tobaccos, pipes and smokers' acces
sories. The proprietors believe in giv
ing the people what they want and if
you happen to want something that is
not ordinarily carried in stock, just
let him know and he will order it for
you. If it is in the world, he will come
near gettng it for you. A Soda Foun
tain in connection with the Cigar Store
gives you a cold drink at any time.
Malted milks a specialty. You could
not think of a more suitable present
for a man than a box of cigars and
when you buy them, they should be
chosen by a man who knows you. The
proprietor will assist you. What are
the initials of this energetic proprietor
and what make of candy does he sell?
The Franklin Smoke House is the
most popular place in town for card
games. Bring your friends and play a
friendly game of "rummy." How many
card tables in this establishment?
(33) Where is the bakery where you
can get fresh bread —any and all kinds
of it? Where can you get "bread that
is light, doughnuts that delight, and
pies just right." This is the tale of a
bakery whose products bring to mind
mother's baking day. They are so good
that people come for blocks just to
buy right out of the oven. Their prod
ucts are baked under the most strin
gent sanitary conditions. It is entirely
fitting that the "Who's Who" should
call your attention to this bakery, for
in patronizing the Golden Poppy
Bakery, you not only get the best baked

goods, but you save money as well.
The mention of this name In Palo Alto !
tells a tale of quality goods in this line |
and every housewife is familiar with |
the name and the goods. The big fea
ture with this shop is the making of
whole wheat bread, made from the
finest of wheats, The manager meets
his trade personally and his own per
sonality is responsible to a large de
gree for the patronage which they
have. Who is the manager of this
local bakery and what system do they
use in baking? What are the best
sellers in French Pastry?
(34) A man is as old as he feels, but
a woman is as old as she looks. I won
der how many women in Palo Alto
know the value of personal appear
ance. It is one of the many things
women neglect. If you will just drop
in and see Madame Musy in the Wil
son building, 132 University avenue,
you will receive the personal atten
tion you have so long desired. Madame
Musy is there to please her patrons
and she desires satisfied customers.
It is every woman's idea to be beauti
ful and Madame Musy wishes to help
you. She has a wonderful shop and
does the finest work. Madame Musy is
known for the wonderful marcels she
known for the wonderful marcells she
will say that this is the nearest to
a natural wave that you ever have
had. Years of experience in this busi
ness is the answer for her excellent
work. If you will just give her a trial
I am sure you will be one of her
steady customers. How much does she
charge for a marcell? What is her
phone number? What does Madame
Musy recommend for falling hair?
(35) It tickles everybody's vanity to
a certain degree to have his friends
say how well his home is furnished,
and perhaps many of these friends
secretly wish they knew where they
could buy furniture of equal looks.
There is no secret in obtaining the
right kind of furniture if one knows
the place to shop. The Warren Furni
ture Company is such a place. They
not only handle high-class furniture
for the parlor, bedroom and dining
room, but their kitchen department is
well stocked with ranges and cooking
utensils, and for the floor they have
the Congoleum. This is recognized for
its qualities of not bulging and crack
ing. It's easily cleaned and always
sanitary. Just go to this store once
and let them show you their collection
of home furnishings. They are sure to
suit your individual taste, no matter
how exacting. They are featuring at
this time their Occidental Ranges and
Stoves. Where is this large furniture
store located, and what make of mat
tress do they recommend for its com
fort? They also sell them. W T hat make
of beds do they carry?
(36) Think of something good to eat
and then think of the Stanford Cafe.
They are synonymous. Not only do
they conduct a counter service that is
most appealing to the man who is in a
hurry but they have attractive tables
for those who have time to sit and
enjoy the meal from all angles. The
food at this cafe is prepared just as it
is at home. They would not think
about serving anything to their pat
rons that they would not eat them
selves and this is proof enough of its
purity. Sanitation is one of the chief
objectives of the proprietors of this
restaurant and is everywhere evident.
The service is rendered in a prompt
manner and you are not left studying
the menu all day. They take your or
der when you first sit down. This is
one thing the proprietors find that ap
peals to their customers. They want im
mediate service and they get it. They
also serve the finest of ice cream and
home-made pastry. Who is the pro
gressive proprietor of this cafe and
how many stools have they at the
gressive proprietors of this cafe and
cated? What brand of coffee do they
use?
(37) The most conveniently and cen
trally located market in Palo Alto to
do your shopping is the Palo Alto
Market. This market caters to the dis
criminating buyers of fresh and cured
meats. To the people that are careful
of the meats they eat, these people
are their friends. They handle nothing
but the very best inspected meats, and
the proprietor does not depend upon
the Federal and State authorities al
together. He makes a personal inspec
tion of them when they enter his
store. If they are not right, bingo!
they are sent back. When you enter
this establishment you are confronted
with an air of absolute cleanliness and
sanitation. Clean sawdust protects the
floor and the glass show cases and
marble counters make it impossible
for bits of meat to "hide" from the
scrutinizing eye of the butchers. The
market on a whole is kept in a state
of cleanliness that will meet the ap
proval of anyone. In fact, sanitation is
their main objective. What is the
exact location of this modern market
and what is their,phone number? How
long have they been established? What
line of hams do they carry? Also what
is their buying rule?

a holiday. It is a gentlemen's billiard I
parlor, conducted for gentlemen by gen
tlemen. Mr. Mahaney sees that these
principles are carried out in detail. At
Mahaney's they have live pool tables,
one snooker table and two billiard
tables, which gives every one a chance
to play the game they like. When you
get thirsty they have a soda fountain in
connection serving the finest of cold
drinks. All the standard brands of
cigars are carried here, and, believe me,
they are fresh. At their store No. 2,
next to the Stanford Theater, you will
find Mr. Krebs in charge, who is asso
ciated with Mr. Mahaney. A full line
of smokers' needs are carried here and
a big supply of cigars in boxes of 10,
25 and 50 in Christmas boxes will be
featured. Ladies' patronage is socilited
at this store. Get your Christmas Gifts
here for the men folks. What is Mr.
Mahaney's first name? Give the location
of store No. 1. What is Mr. Kreb's first
name?
(43) A famous banker once gave a
young man this advice: "Save your
money and look prosperous." We have
known young men to fail because they
did not realize the importance of being
well dressed. A good suit is a dis
tinctive asset to any man. If he is well
dressed, he immediately commands at
tention. If you want the right suit at
the right price, patronize Frazer & Co.
They are the home of good clothes in
Palo Alto, and in addition to these high
grade clothes, they carry such standard
lines of furnishings as Manhattan shirts
and Everwear hosiery. In fact, their
stock borders along high-class lines, and
it is the store in which to do your fall
shopping. They have many new styles,
cuts and materials awaiting your in
spection and their prices are very low,
consistent with the quality. The whole
store commands a high position in the
mercantile establishments of Palo Alto
because of the quality of merchandise
they handle. Meet these people and you
have met twentieth century merchants.
What make of clothing do they sell, and
what is the slogan of these clothes? Give
location, of the store.
(44) Just say "His Master's Voice"
and you have immediately spoken of the
best-known phonograph on the market.
The Victrola is made by pioneer manu
facturers in the business. It is the choice
of the greatest artists who indorse its
unerring register of the original voice
or instrument. Ralph C. Dodson's Music
Store, 340 University avenue, has Vic-,
trolas in many styles and prices. In
addition to the Victrolas this shop also
carries a large line of Victor records,
and new ones are added as soon as they
are released from the factory. A good
tip to the student is to have a "portable"
Victrola with you. If you want to dance
it is always handy and will give you
the music you like the best whenever
you want it. Go in and let them show
you their selection of Victrolas. They
will be glad to play for you any record
you would like to hear. You will ap
preciate meeting these people and they
will appreciate your patronage. Where
are the machines manufactured and how
long has this music shop been established?
What is the price of the style 100 Vic
trola? Have you heard the best seller
in records this month, "I Found a Four-
Leaf Clover," and what is the price of
this record ?
(45) Let's go to the movies. This
expression often shakes away gloom and
dullness and you gladly join the happy
ries a complete stock of crockery ware,
see a regular show. By "movies" the
people of Palo Alto mean the Varsity
and Stanford theaters. They know that
at these playhouses they will see the
best of screen offerings at prices con
sistent with conditions. These two cozy
theaters give the patrons day in and day
out the best in film plays that money
can buy. To those few in Palo Alto
that have not had the pleasure of at
tending these two modern playhouses,
they are missing one of the great joys
of life. The products of the most gifted
imaginations of the world are beautifully
and artistically portrayed with an ac
companiment of the finest of organ
music. You should get their regular
weekly program, which gives you the
names of the shows and the nights upon
which they will be exhibited. Tell us
the manager's name of the Varsity The
ater and how many seats have they?
Give us the exact location of the Stan
ford Theater. What is the Big Special
picture coming there next Monday?
(46) You may say what you want,
but say "Hardware" and the minds of
the people of Palo Alto will revert
automatically to the Palo Alto Hard
ware Company, "The Winchester Store."
This firm carries a complete line of
hardware, consisting of carpenters' and
mechanics' tools of every description;
cutlery as well as builders' hardware,
sporting goods, Bass Hcuter Paints,
Pennsylvania Vacuum Cup Tires—in
fact, everything you would expcct to find
in a modern up-to-date hardware store.
The Palo Alto Hardware Company is
known as the "Winchester Store," carry
ing a full line of Winchester products.
The Winchester Company puts out one
article each month at a special price—
the public are looking forward each
month for these big specials. The special
for November is a Winchester Flash

(3S) Time is money. Save time and
money. Spend the ten minutes allowed
on your street car transfer, buying
Christmas Cards or forgotten station
ery supplies at llyde's, 370 University
avenue, right at the transfer point.
There are but two transfer points, the
depot and opposite Hyde's new store.
Tou can get a basket for your many
packages here or a beautifully decor
ated one to send as a Christmas gift.
If you want a Fountain Pen, which one
does Hyde's guarantee? If you want to
give stationery to your sister, which
of Hyde's brands would you choose?
Which will have the bigger sale at
Hyde's for the kiddies, "Kritters of the
Kitchen Kingdom," or "The Chickens
Eating Corn"? What line of goods is
being especially featured at Hyde's
besides sttftionery, school supplies,
fountain pens, pictures, picture frames,
baskets, candles, beads, games, toys,
favors, memory books, and albums?
Call at Hyde's at the transfer point,
and they can answer the above ques
tions and also give you many sugges
tions for charming and inexpensive
Christmas presets. Their new store is
one of the finest of its kind in P. A.
(39) It is every man's wish to own
his own home. It makes for family
contentment and happiness. It saves
paying rent.
The University Realty Company sp&-
j cializes in providing people with
homes. Consult them as you would any
specialist.
Years of experience in this com
munity stands back of the University
Realty Company.
This Company can serve you in the
purchase or sale of real estate, in writ
ing all kinds of insurance, in renting
and leasing, in fact, in all matters per
taining to real estate and insurance.
How long has this Company been in
business in Palo Alto? Name one in
surance company that it represents.
(40) If you want to make your
friends happy, present them with a
good photograph of yourself. A photo
graph is a token of real friendship,
and is highly appreciated by everyone.
And when you are in Palo Alto and
desire a portrait of yourself and are
not satisfied with just ordinary work,
go to the Shattuck Studio and you will
be pleased. This is one man who is
"behind the camera, but not behind
the times." His portrait work is indic
ative of this. In his little studio on
University avenue he will be found
very busy most every day snapping
and developing and then touching up,
putting the finishing touches on, which
removes all blemishes. The art of fin
ishing portraits is not possessed by
everyone, but this photographer is in
deed an expert. Then, too, his prices
are exceedingly moderate, considering
the beauty and quality of work turned
out. You are always sure of a success
ful picture here. Do you know that
your picture is the only present your
friends cannot buy? Where is the
exact location of this studio? What
other photographic work do they do?
(41) Everyone knows Wagner, "The
Meat Man." He is a master in the meat
business. He came to Palo Alto eight
years ago and started business in a
small market in a small way on High
street. Today his business has ex
panded to such an extent that it has
outgrown the old market.
Mr. Wagner says he doesn't take the
credit for making his business what it
is in Palo Alto, but owes it to Mr. N.
Benson who has been with him ever
since he has located in this vicinity
and who will continue to manage the
local market. Mr. Benson has a great
many friends here in Palo Alto.
Mr. Wagnor owns the block of four
stores on the corner of University and
Florence streets, his new market being
the main Corner Store Room. This
wonder market is a palace of marble.
The counters are of marble and glass
and the latest word in modern sanita
tion. The woodwork is finished in
French gray and the walls in gray
with green trimmings. Cold storage
plant is of the latest modern auto
matic control and the best that money
can buy.
There is not a question in tlie
writer's mind but what this is one of
the most modern and finest equipped
markets in the state of California.
Mr. Wagner owns a chain of mar
kets extending to San Jose and Hol
lister and most of his time is con
fined to the purchasing end of the bus
iness. He has been in the meat bus
iness so long that he doesn't guess at
the quality of meat when he buys. He
knows that they are the best, so, when
purchasing the meat from him you
don't have to worry about its not being
of the best quality.
He is still going to be known as
"The Meat Man" in his new market
and will give the same service and
high quality meats that has made him
such a success.
It will pay you to watch for his ad
vertisements appearing in the daily
papers.
(42) This article is about one of the
liveliest spots in Palo Alto. There is
something doing here most all of the
time, and especially after dinner or on

Light, complete with battery for 89 cents.
The Palo Alto Hardware Company Car
rie sa complete stock of crockery ware,
dishes in plain and open sets and the
finest aluminum and enameled ware in
the city. How long has this store been
established? What is tie special price
on the 50-piece set of Gold Band Potter
Chinaware? What make of electric
washer do they sell?
(47) Fitting feet is a matter of no
little importance, for there .ire a very
few people that enjoy the fitting of a
n<iw pair of shoes, even when they fit
perfectly. However, Thoit's Shoe Store
is a firm that is noted all over the Coast
for its ability to produce shoes that
"feel just like the old ones." They are
the local distributors of Hanan Shoes
and other reputable makes of more mod
erate price. This store is a home store.
Its management is a good example to
follow, for courtesy and personal ser
vice is its aim. It is needless to speak
of the quality of their shoes, as this is
too well known, but we will say that they
carefully select as to quality, workman
ship and style. Their wearing qualities,
as well as looks, are second to none.
When you have met the proprietor of
the local firm you will have met a man
that is all for Stanford and Palo Alto.
Where is their modern shoe store lo
cated? How many members of the fam
ily can they fit in shoes? When was
this business established?
(48) There is one photographer in.
Palo Alto, "An Artistic Photographer,"'
who has gained a national reputation
and holds first prize in America for ex
cellency of work. He now has por
traits on exhibition in the National Salon.
Has also been awarded highest honors
in the states of New York, Ohio and
Michigan. He has probably photo
graphed more prominent and profes
sional people than any photographer in
America. Was with Hartsook Studios
for the past eleven years, specializing
principally in photographing moving pic
ture stars and theatricals in general. A
visit to his studio, 126 University ave
nue, which was formerly the Davey
Studio, will convince the most skeptical
of the superiority of his work. Who is
this artist who has made it possible for
the Palo Alto people to get something
different, something highly artistic*
without having to go to the larger
cities? And what makes a successful
artistic portrait? Remember Friend
ship's Perfect Gift—Your Photo.
(49) There is a wonderful industry
in this city that 1 belit*vo many do not
know about. Why is it so many people
go to San Francisco to purchase their
gifts when right here in Palo Alto there
is a shop that is known by exclusive
shops all over the United States and
whose goods have gone to England..
Australia, and Honolulu? Miss Herrick
conducts a shop the year round to servj;
you. When you are thinking of gifts,
go first to Miss Herrick's and you will
be surprised at the exclusive articles
you will find there and more reasonably
priced than elsewhere. This Studio must,
be seen to be appreciated. Give us the
names of two articles just received from
India. Tell us three articles made ex
clusively in Herrick Studios and sold
all over the United States.
(50) Here is one of the busiest stores
in Palo Alto. Segar Service Shop. Be
lieve me, the proprietor sure is popular
with the young fellows. There never is
a time but what you will see a bunch in
his store. The reason for that is his
service to every one, no matter if you
only buy a package of cigarette papers*
or if it is a brier pipe, you get the same
courteous treatment. A large assortment
of pipes have just arrived for the Christ
mas trade. Also jars of smoking to
bacco. A complete line of magazines
are carried here. In connection with this
modern Cigar Store we have a real Ser
vice Barber Shop, operated by Mr. Par
vin. They are all union barbers and ex
pert haircutters. This shop is the oldest
in town. If you only want a shave, don't
be afraid to come here. These barbers
don't bother the life out of you selling
you something else in the shop. Try
these boys the first chance you get. Get
an Almond Meal and Peroxide Steam
Facial Massage. Tell us Mr. Parvin's
first name. Tell us how many maga
zines Mr. Corns has for sale at the
Cigar Counter. Give us the exact loca
tion of these two establishments.
(1) Think of the countless obstacles
the pioneers of old had to overcome
as they journeyed forth to lay the
foundation for a future that might
hold some promise' for them. Some
achieved their goal, others failed. Then
consider your own environment and
chances for the future. Your lot is a
path of roses compared with that of
tho pioneers. jfist lay aside a small
amount each week and start an ac
count with the First National Bank of
Palo Alto. They have a capital of
$100,000.00, and $24,000 surplus, and
are members of the Federal Reserve
System of Banking. The officers and
everyone connected with this bank
have always practiced service and
courtesy to their patrons. You are
treated with consideration whether
you are a large or small depositor or
whether you are a temporary visitor in
this favored locality. A man putting
his money in a bank should always
make sure that the institution is finan
cially solid and this is just such a
bank. They pay 4 per cent interest on
Term Deposits. Name the directors of
this banking institution. What is the
margin of security including stock
holders' liability?

(2) In purchasing jewelry, the buyer
puts more faith in the seller than any
other commodity that men buy and
sell. This article is about a jewelry
store that has been in business in
Palo Alto for a number of years, and
their reputation for being dependable
is second to none. In addition to their
exceptional stock of watches, jewelry,
rings, SILVERWARE, cut glass, etc.,
they do expert watch and jewelry re
pairing. This is the store to select your
•"Gifts That Last." Nielsen and Culver
are the kind of fellows we like to men
tion in our columns, because they have
a sociable and intelligent personality
—ones who know how to make friends
and keep them. Go see this store and
look over their high class line of jew
elry and you are sure to make all of
your purchases in this line from them.
Every article they sell not only bears
the guarantee of the manufacturers,
but their personal guarantee goes with
it as well. If you have a broken piece
of jewelry, no matter how fine it is,
they will repair it for you. What are
Mr. Culver'? initials, and where is
their store located. Also what other
department do they conduct? What is
their leading line of Silverware?

(3) It ticV les everybody's vanity to
a certain dc pre e to have his friends
say how we ! his homo is furnished,
and perhaps many of these friends se
cretly wish they knew where they
could buy furniture of equal looks.
There is no secret of obtaining the
right kind cf furniture if one knows
the place to shop. The Palo Alto Fur
niture Company is such a place. They
not only hf nd!e high-class furniture
for the parlor, bofl-roora and dining
room, but their kitchen department is
well stocked with ranges and
utensils and for the floor they have
Linoleum of the latest designs and
patterns. It is easily cleaned and al-

Introducing to You the Live Progressive Firms and People Who Make
up the Business Interests of Palo Alto
First Prize —$10.00 Theatre Tickets contributed by
* VARSITY AND STANFORD THEATRES
Second Prize —One Dozen Photographs contributed by
SHATTUCK STUDIOS
Third Prize —One Hand Painted Oil Picture of Chapel
contributed by FREEMAN'S ART STORE
Fourth Prize —One Box of Chancellor (after dinner) Cigars
contributed by FRANKLIN'S SMOKE HOUSE

ways sanitary. Just go to this store !
once and let them show you their col
lection of home furnishings. They are
sure to suit your individual taste, no
matter how exacting. They are featur
ing a complete line of stoves and
ranges. The best in the world is
Wedgewood. Where is this large fur
niture store located? and what make
of water heaters do, they recommend?
How many square feet of Inlaid Lin
oleum are they now laying in the Rus
sel Cafeteria?

(4) No matter who you are and what
your life is, it can be made happier
and better through the influence of
music. This up-to-date store that we
are writing about is the home of the
best there is in music, and they are
representatives for Brunswick and
Columbia phonographs. The Music
Shop at 273 University Avenue is the
music house of Palo Alto, for they not
only carry and sell phonographs and
pianos, but they carry all kinds of
musical instruments, sheet music,
player rolls and records. If you are
fond of string instruments, they have
anything from the ukelele to the cello.
They are exclusive representatives in
Palo Alto for two well-known phono
graphs which are recognized for their ;
many exceptional qualities. These ma
chines play disc records of any make.
If you like a lot of noise moulded into
music, then they have drums for your
choice. The proprietor here is a music
loving man, himself, and he delights in
showing his line to patrons. A visit
from you will be appreciated. What
make of Band Instruments does he
carry? Who are the manufacturers of
the Victor and Brunswick? What is
the price of the Gretsch Sac., Melody
C, Finish No. 2?

(5) Two of the best places to eat in j
Palo Alto are home and here. That is
what the editor thought after trying
one of this restaurant home-cooked
meals. All of you people do not know
of this restaurant or you would be
Johnny on the spot every time Old
Man Hunger gripped your frame. They
not only cater to the man who is in a
hurry with counter service but they
have linen-covered tables for the
ladies. However, the same service is
had at both places and at the same
prices. If you have lots of time to sit
and enjoy your meal, then sit at the
tables, but if you are a business man
with only a few minutes to "grab"
your lunch, the counter service will be
most ideal. The location of this home
like place is 105 Alma Street. The
proprietor of this restaurant has a
most affable manner and he does all
in his power to please his patrons.;
Anything that you want is not too
much trouble for him to get. He uses
the best grade of meats and come
fresh from the meat market when he
needs them and not a week before, j
Who is the energetic proprietor of the
"Popular" restaurant? What is the
price of their noon lunch? What brand
of coffee do they use? How much are
their meal tickets?

(6) Clothes cost too much money to
be carelessly cleaned and pressed, i
Your tailor should be picked just as
your doctor or your grocer. It is just
as important. If you send your clothes
to first one cleaner and then anothf r,
in the ert'd your clothes will be ruined,
and with none to blame but yourself.
The Stanford Dyeing and Cleaning
Works commands a high position in
the cleaning and pressing business of
Palo Alto, and they always guarantee
their work. These people know how to
press a suit. They press it to its
natural form and not "against the
srain." They also use an odorless pro
cess in their cleaning and every meth
od of handling clothes that is modern
is used by them. They have a call and
delivery system and for them to keep
your wardrobe in prefect trim at all
times is no trouble for you. They will
call at your home at regular intervals
tor your clothes and return them
promptly. This prompt service is a
great item in their business. They also
do repairing. What does this firm
charge for cleaning and pressing a
suit, and where is their plant located?
What does 444 mean?

(7) Chiropractic was born 27 years
•,'Ko. The suspicion, distrust and re
sentful criticism aimed at it in the

beginning has been dispelled. Chiro
practors have proven their worth in
healing the sick and lame with their
chiropractic adjustments. With all of
this human service in California they
were held under the yoke of the med
ical board. But thanks to the fair
minded people of this state, that is
over.
Dr. Minor and Dr. Hall wish to thank
all Iheir friends for the support they
gave them. These two doctors are
graduates of the Palmer School of
Chiropractic in Davenport, lowa. They
have practiced Chiropractic for years.
People come for miles around to Doc
tors Minor and Hall.
They are located at 153 University
Avenue. Give both the 'doctors' first
names and give two reasons why Chi
ropractic is beneficial to one's health.

(8) Don't junk your old tires. Take
them to a reliable tire shop and get
their opinion on their condition. They
may be vulcanized and run for several
thcHtsand miles more. And if you want
an honest opinion as to this, take your
tires to Palo Alto Vulcanizing Works.
Tires are this man's sole business,
and we make no mistake when we say
that he knows his business thoroughly.
Vhen he has patched a tube or vul
canized a "shoe" for you, then he has
made a friend. A guarantee goes with
evefy job he does and this is a guar
antee of absolute satisfaction. There
is no money value set on it, but it is a
personal guarantee that you get what
you want and no matter what it cost
him, he'll see that you get it. In addi
tion to the vulcanizing and repair de
partment, this man also carries a stock
of Goodyear tires and he has y ur size.
You don't want to meet a more con
genial man than Mr. Bogges with a
smile for you. Where is the shop lo
cated? What is his price for a Good
year Ford all-weather fabric tire?
What is the price of the 40x10 solid
truck tire that Mr. Bogges has in his
window?

(9) It is a source of discomfort and
worry for some people to buy a new
pair of shoes, but if you are careful in
selecting the correct size in the right
grade of shoes, you will not have this
inconvenience to contend with. At the
Lentos Shoe Store they will not only
sell you a new pair of shoes, but they
will make your old ones like new for
you. They conduct a modern electrical
shoe repairing shop in connection with
the shoe store and they do the work
just like it is done at the factories.
Let your next pair of shoes come from
this store and they will last you much
longer, for when you have worn off
the original soles, just return them
and they will put new ones on at a
small cost. They use the very best
double wear genuine leather soles and
the name and trade mark is stamped
cn them. When you have work done
here, it is well guaranteed, and there
is something back of the guarantee.
Then if it is in the power of these
people to do you a good turn, they
certainly will take pleasure in doing
it. They work for others as well as
themselves. What brand of pure
leather do they use on their soles, and
where is the store located?

. (10) Is milk and cream an important
part of your daily meals? If not, you
are one out of a hundred. Then with
this in view, it is only natural for peo
ple to be sure that their milk and
cream is' absolutely light. And to be
"right" it should contain a certain per
cent of butterfat, as well as be clean
and free from all foreign matter. The
milk, cream, butter and dairy products
you get at the Altomont Creamery are
all that the name implies—sanitary.
They feature pasteurized and guaran
teed dairy products. You can ask for
no better merchandise in this line. So
the next time you need any dairy
products of any sort, whether it be
butter, milk, cream, or cottage cheese,
just go to the Altomont Creamery. It
will be filled with satisfaction.
These people will give you service, as
their business depends upon it. If they
did not give you good service on your
first trip, you would not return again,
and they want your future friendship
and business. What is the location of
this firm's retail store, and what do
they get per quart for their milk. What
does pasteurized mean? and what does
guaranteed milk mean?

(11) When the pioneers blazed a
trail across the continent in '49 there
was also organized a man that blazed
the way in the paint industry, W. T.
Floyd. Since that time, this firm has
been beautifying Palo Alto with its
products. In addition to paints, they
also sell oils, glass, and if you are
looking for a waterproof paint, this is
the place to go. The Hadle Stormtight
Roof Paint firm has a very modern and
up-to-date store, and they are known
for their neatness and complete stock
of goods they carry. This store is a
credit to any city. This store which
this writing is for has the agency for
Acme Quality Paints and Varnishes,
the world's higest standard in paints.
Not only do they retail their products,
but wholesale as well. If you are a
paint man, you will know what firm we
are referring to for they carry one of
the largest stocks in these parts. What

is the name of this firm and what do
they recommend for floor varnish?
Just call at the local store and their
salesmen will gladly assist you. How
many square feet will a gallon of Acme
Quality Paint cover two coats?

(12) Just up the street at Mr. Ethen's
is he liveliest spot in Palo Alto. There is
something doing there most all of the
time and especially so after supper. It
is a place where gentlemen congregate
and exchange experiences of the day
over a friendly game of pocket bil
liards. But, in addition to the billiard
parlor, they also conduct a large bowl
ing alley and soda fountain where they
will make you a creamy milk shake
that will certainly make you return for
another in a short while. They are also
local agents for the United Cigar
Stores and carry a line of cigars that
cannot be had in any other establish
ment in the city. If you are looking for
a friend, you are sure to find him here.
It is a place where practically every
man frequents once in a while just for
the gentlemanly company he is sure to
find. If it is a box of candy you wisn
for your girl, then this is the place for
you to seek. They carry several differ
ent makes and it is kept in a specially
equipped refrigerator which insures
you of freshness at any time. How
many pocket pool tables have they?
What line of pipes do they carry? How
many alleys are there and name what
team is leading in the bowling tourna
ment now being conducted?

(13) Now comes a renowned meat
market which sells fresh meats. In
deed their meats are fresh. They make
it a point to keep them so, which is
responsible for the popularity and
wonderful business gained in the past
months. There are mrny tricks em
ployed by the meat buyers in judging
duality, and the Stanford Meat Com
pany is perfectly willing to share its
secrets with you. They buy only the
best, but they want you to know at
the time of your purchase that you
are getting what you want. Cleanli
ness is the watchword of this market.
The business is so great that their
daily purchases keep their meats
fresh. They seldom carry much over
from one day to another. We enjoy
writing about this market and its
owner for several reasons. One is they
say "never mind about buying, just
come in and look the good things
over." Give exact address. How long
have they been established? What are
their phone numbers? How often do
they get fresu fish at this market?

(14) In buying drugs, you want the
best, including purity and service,
which are two essential things to con
s'der when selecting from which to
buy these needs. Impure drugs are
worse than none at all, and poor ser
vice means aggravation and annoy
ance. Only the best drugs are ever
handled at the Young Drug Company
at the corner of University avenue
and Florence street. The proprietor
is a registered pharmacist and he en
deavors to keep a stock that will
meet with all requirements and cus
tomers do not have to go elsewhere
for anything usually found in an up-to
date drug store. In addition to drugs,
they carry a large stock of perfumery,
toilet articles, safety razors, and if
you happen to have a sweet tooth,
their candies will be appealing to you.
This store has the agency for all of
the Owl products, so you may obtain
these goods right here at home. What
is Ihe proprietor's name? Also what
line of remedies do they handle? What
is "Pom Pom" Luster?

(15) We are now presenting a firm
where fresh staple and fancy groceries
can be secured. It is a concern with
a conscience, and has an aim to please
the hard-to-suit in their lines. In fact,
you can close your eyes and buy here,
and every sale carries a guarantee of
satisfaction, and a little profit is all
they ask. Now just stop a second and
say to yourself, "Where is the best
stock of fruits, vegetables and gro
ceries carried in Palo Alto?" The best
brands of everything are the distin
guishing characteristics of this store,
along with its sanitary aspect. It is a
source of personal satisfaction to the
writer to write about this "quality"
store and the proprietor, Mr. Earle,
Ever since he started, years ago, his
popularity has met with a steady in
crease. He is not only a popular mer
chant. but is an alert business man,
and his idea is to always make the
place home-like when you do business
with him or his clerks, and so far he
has succeeded, and if he can make
Palo Alto a better city you can depend
upon him to take off his coat, roll up
his sleeves and help put it over. He
has for those who need it, a smile,
and has won their business or confi
dence. No merchant in Palo Alto is
more popular with his customers than
the owner of this store. Name the
owner and give his first name in full,
location and phone.

(16) Here is a works that makes a
lot of noise in a legitimate way. It is a
sheet metal establishment. They have
been making a big noise
for some time. They make a
of tin and sheet iron, and a 112

cialties are tanks, and irrigating pipe,
.spouting, skylights, cornice as well as
tin and copper sheet metal specialties.
The expert tinner is a great necessity
i'or those owning homes or business
places, as they look to them for re
l airs and parts. To be efficient, they
must be skilled in their calling and
geniuses as well. And these things are
apparent at the Palo Alto Sheet Metal
Works. There are many ways of tin
ning that will not stand the test. These
people use the right way. The owners
of this shop believe it better to be on
the level with their customers than
to climb upward by a crooked path.
Such a firm as this we surely like to
include in our feature. In fact, we can
not say enough for them, for they de
serve much more than a mere word of
praise. They deserve sure success.
Who is the proprietor of this shop and
Low long have they been established
here. Where are they located? What
size Warm Air Heater does it take to
heat a 7-room house? and give the
price of it.

(17) When a business establish
ment has reached the heights of suc
cess and prominence, it is either cred
ited to the skillful management or to
the quality of merchandise they han
dle. At the enterprising store at 317
University Avenue both of these items
are responsible for their standing in
Palo Alto. The most prominent resi
dents of the city are among their cus
tomer list. Their costumes can always
be depended upon for beiug the latest
styles and the good quality never
varies. "Where there is quality, there
is style." The Style Shop is well
known for both. (The store is attrac
tively decorated and the merchandise
is displayed in such a manner that it
becomes a profound pleasure to shop
with them). Their courteous sales
women also render great assistance
with their timely suggestions of "what
is being worn" and you leave the store
pleased witn your visit, feeling that
you have wasted no time whatever.
What is the slogan of this enterpris
ing store. Tell name of this classy
store's proprietor. A Big Clearance
Sale is now going on at the Smart
Shop. Everything in the store is re
duced for this Sale.

(18) The most widely known and
recognized decorations for any and all
occasions are flowers. They are recog
nized internationally and more can be
said with a small bunch of flowers
than can be said with a dozen tele
grams or any other form of communi
cation. "Say it with flowers" is a fit
ting slogan for their usefulness and
worth. The one flower shop in Palo
Alto that has created a reputation for
having in stock all of the different
(lowers in season is known as the
Palo Alto Flower & Seed Shop. They
carry a complete line of flowers for
the dining room table, to ship to your
friends or pot flowers to decorate your
home and porches. When you desire
to remember yourself to a friend, this
is the one place to come for they will
make up a beautiful boquet for you.
The proprietor here likes flowers him
self, which is symbolic of happiness.
His disposition is also like that of a
flower, bright and full of cheer. Who
is this proprietor? What is the num
ber of the shop? What kind of seeds
does he carry? What are the names
of the jardiners that they are selling
that come from Japan?

(19) Who is there in this city en
gaged in correction and the conserva
tion of eyesight? Many have come to
him and received great relief when
troubled with eye defects. His strict
attention to his business has won for
him a host of friends and patrons. Dr.
Cochran will be found very busy at
his offices at 122 University avenue
and you will make no mistake in con
sulting him about your eyes. He has
passed the State Board of Optometry
examinations and is recognized for his
excellent work, and is also a graduate
Dr. of Optometry. In addition to
working on your eyes, he will replace
broken lenses or make you a complete
pair of glasses. The eyes are the win
dows of the soul and when they are
wrong, the body is handicapped, for,
without clear vision, we can't see the
world as it is. Eye troubles are often
started when young and your chil
dren's eyes should be examined before
it is too late. Make an appointment
•with Dr. Cochran and get his opinion.
His office is completely equipped with
all of the modern instruments used in
this work. What are Dr. Cochran's ini
tials, and what is the range of prices
for his glasses? What is the store
motto?

(20) Most men like to know where
they can find a good barber shop, as
they are very particular about per
sonal appearance. They demand satis
factory work. When I suggest Mar
quee's Barber Shop, I know what I'm
talking about. They have a very sani
tary little shop with all the modern
equipment, also including five modern
chairs. They specialize in all kinds of
shampooing, scalp and facial treat
ments. If you want your hair to have
jompadour cut, or any other kind,
t let Marquee's do it for you. If

you are having trouble with your
scalp, they can help you. Dixol is the
scalp treatment they recommend. They
also bob children's hair, so bring them
in the next time you are down town.
Just ask anyone who has visited Mar
quee's shop, and they will tell you
how well satisfied they were. Where
ic their shop located? What brands of
hair tonic do they use and recom
mend?

(21) A most important institution of
business in any city, town or commun
ity is the reliable drug store. Here it
is that we depend for our health. And
It ere is where we go when we want
toilet articles, kodak supplies, foun
tain pens and a hundred other luxuries
and necessities. The Kenyon & Crow
Store is known for its large and com
plete stock of all of these articles, and
in fact, anything found in a first-class
store. In addition to their general line
of pure drugs, assortments of high
class cosmetics and sundries, they are
tlie Penslar Store in Palo Alto. This
line of household remedies is com
plete. There is one for every possible
need or use. Now is the time to begin
to think about Christmas Gifts. A
large collection of hand-colored Christ
mas Cards have just arrived. They
are wonderful in design and color.
Fountain pens and Pen and Pencil sets
in Christmas Boxes make a very fine
pi esent to your student friends, or a
big box of gift stationery. At this store
they conduct the largest Kodak print
ing and developing business 011 the
Peninsula, handling a full line of East
man Kodaks and Cameras. One of
the big features of this store is their
framed pictures and mirrors. They
have a framing department and are
able to frame for you any size picture
with most any style mounting you
desire. What profit-sharing system do
they practice? Find out the four lead
ing perfumes they handle? In what
line do they excell all other concerns
in this locality? What are the pro
prietors' nicknames?

(22) There is a mail in this town
much wiser than his sires; he ran
into a bramble bush and punctured all
four tires. When he saw his tires
were wrecked, with all his might and
main, he went to this tire shop and
had them fixed again. One of the first
things to learn if you own an auto
mobile is to know what vulcanizing
nrm gives Service that Serves. The
Retread Shop is recognized for their
expert tire repairing. You should con
sult these doctors when your tires get
sick for they surely have the dope
that cures. You cannot help but like
this firm for those connected with it
make every effort possible to please
you. They will always go out of their
way to do a good turn for you, and if
you have tire trouble on the street,
just notify them and they will render
assistance People who do business
here are really proud .of ttie fact and
it is simply because they give what
the customers want and should have
—"Satisfaction." Go to this shop and
meet these tire men and then tell us
what make of tires they sell and what
their price for a Ford-size cord tire in
the make begins with "F." Give two
reasons why this tire is the best on
the market for its size.

(23) Pleasure of motoring is in
creased if your car is in good working
condition. It is, therefore, advisable to
have your car looked over before you
start on this trip and when you have
your car worked on, be sure of* your
garage. The Palo Alto Garage on Em
reson street is indeed a thoroughly
dependable establishment in regard to
their repairing. Mr. J. M. Blackburn
employs only expert mechanics. The
Palo Alto Garage has the agency for
the Durant car and many others such
as the Chandler, Cadillac, and Cleve
land. Have you seen the new 1923
model Durant. Just step in and let
them sTiow you what a wonderful mod
el it is. The proprietor of this garage,
Mr. J. M. Blackburn, personally super
vises the garage at all times, and as
sures you of prompt service whether
you are buying a spark plug or filling
your tank with gas. They have Ever-
Ready Battery service, and they also
carry Associated Gasoline. They want
satisfied customers at the Palo Alto
Garage. That is their motto. Give two
reasons why the Durant car is more
practical. What is Mr. Blackburn's
first jiame? How long have they been
established?

(24) In writing of the leading busi
ness firms and institutions of Palo
Alto, we have come across an inter
esting shop at 367 University Avenue,
that well deserves mentioning. No, it
won't interest you men, particularly—
but has an especial appeal to the wo
men of Palo Alio and vicinity who
are lovers of beautiful things. This at
tractive shop is fairly overflowing with
wonderful creations of Laces, Em
broideries, Frocks, and Sport Skirts,
Reads for the Miss and Mistress —at-
tractively displayed, and just a) at
tractively priced. These are only a
112» w of the many beautiful and useful
articles to be found in this modern,
up-to-date shop—and the proprietor
takes great pleasure in dispensing I
courteous and attentive service to
every patron. We want you to tell us
the name of this worth while shop—
also the proprietor's name and cor
rect address. What are their prices on
their dresses? What price on stamped
pillow cases? Also stamped dresser
scarfs which come in packages.
(25) Look prosperous and save
money at the same time. This is what
so many people are trying to do and |
cannot quite manage it. The reason is
that they do not know where to buy
economically and where to get goods
hat stand wear and look well. It is
not economy to buy a cheap "hand-me
down" suit of clothes. It is a waste of
money. If you have a suit made by
the tailor that this article is about,
you will get a suit of clothes that will
last. This tailor has been sixteen years
in Palo Alto and has the finest trade
on the Peninsula. Specialist on ladies'
tailoring and sport suits. He holds a
gold medal given to him at the Lewis
and Clark Exposition for designing.
You will be surprised at the chicness
as well as the exceedingly low price
he charges for a suit. And another fea
ture of this tailor, all of the tailoring
is done on the premises. He does not
take your order and send it to San
Francisco or New York. Who is this
progressive tailor? His establishment
is upstairs at 123 University avenue.
Better stop in and let him take your
measure and you select your pattern
and style at the same time.
(26) The best friend of womankingis
that which takes the grievous burdens
from her shoulders. No woman likes
to bend over washtubs or ironing
boards, and it is the mission of the
University French Laundry to per
form this highest physical service for
her. This laundry is almost our own
concern. It takes soiled linen and
turns it into attractive wearing ap
parel. It is an extensive industry, em
ploying many people. Wagons are sent
out in every direction in Palo Alto to
collect and deliver laundry and to keep
the various articles separated, so that
you don't get your neighbors' clothes,
is a job of a highly specialized order.
The methods used at this laundry are
thoroughly modern, and the machinery
equipment makes the work most satis
factory. The manager of this laundry
takes an active interest in the welfare
of Palo Alto and his absolute support
can be counted upon when anything
for the betterment of the city is in
progress. Who is this energetic man
ager, and where is the laundry lo
cated? How many employes has he?
What is the phone number?
(27) Well, here we are. Just what
interests all%women in Palo Alto. I
know when you go to that party or
dance you want to look charming. It
just requires a little personal atten
tion. You have often been to some pub
lic place and admired some ladies'
hair of the transparent texture of her
skin. The kind that is clear and
smooth. Well, you can have that charm
just the same as she. You go and see
Mrs. Marie Montgomery who has
charge of this exclusive Beauty Shop.
You will find every kind of modern
equipment desired in this shop, and
their work is very satisfactory. So
many girls have bobbed hair nowa
days, and they find it quite a task to
keep it looking well. Just drop into the
Montgomery Beauty Shop, and they
will marcelle your hair, and give the
ends a round curl which improves it
very much. You will find their egg
shampoo very invigorating. They spe
cialize in scalp and facial treatments.
They do hair waving and curling of
all kinds. What is one of the finest
scalp treatment? All kinds of facial
treatments are given by Mrs. Mont
gomery. Tell us the price of her
I'lactique Facial Treatment?
(28) What is the name of the store
that comes into your mind so clearly
when you speak of Art Goods? It is
Edwin R. Freeman's Art and Photo
Shop. There is no other place in the
city where they have such a large as
sortment of Wonderful Gifts to select
from. The writer cannot begin to tell
you of the hundreds of articles in this
store. The candlestick and framed and
unframed pictures are the best that
Mr Freeman could make and buy.
They have the largest picture fram
ing department on the Peninsula, giv
ing you the largest assortment of
frames to choose from. Christmas sea
son is nearing. Your motto is to do
your shopping early, and if you are
looking for gifts to give your friends
that will make them long remembered
to you, go to Freeman's Art Store. If
you have a picture that you cherish,
bring it here and let them frame it, or
a negative, enlarge it. They have a
complete service for films, kodaks, and
enlarging. How is it that Mr. Freeman
can sell his Foto Art Prints cheaper
than others?
(29) Palo Alto with its amazing
wealth and attractive terms and prices

when you are indebted to the wide
awake firm at 111 Circle. Their long
experience, knowledge of values and
expert advice in such matters have
won for them a large number of satis
fled customers. Through their devotion
to the business of their clients, Mr.
Helm has gained an enviable reputa
tion. Whether it be the buying of a
home or the selection of a lot or acre
age, you can be sure of finding just
what you want at attractive terms and
price when you are dealing with this
firm. This company also has many
ranch lands, both raw and improved.
In fact, their operations along this line
is, indeed, second to none in Palo Alto.
They are authorities on ranch lands
and if you name the location, they can
come pretty close to telling you the
value. Therefore, their advice and per
sonal service in such matters is indeed
important. Just drop in at their office
and they will gladly assist you. They
have just moved to 111 Circle, former
ly at 257 University avenue. What is
the name of this firm and what other
line of business do they follow? What
is Mr. Helm's first name? What is the
name of Mr. Helm's new assistant?
(30) Did you ever notice how you
admire the clothes of others and can
not understand why you never look as
well when you know personally that
you spend more money on your wear
ing apparel than this particular fel
low? The secret can easily be solved
if you do your shopping at the right
place. To test this out, the next time
you need a suit of clothes, a hat, or
anything in the gents' furnishing line,
go to Wideman & Son. This is one
exclusive haberdashery. Their stock is
composed of such well-known makes
as Kuppenheimer Clothes, Knapp Felt
Hats and Caps, handled by only the
best stores, and the fact of the matter
is, their entire stock bears names just
as well-known and highly recommend
ed as these few mentioned. Winter is
here and now is the time to see that
you are equipped for it. You certainly
need a new suit or a new hat. If you
don't think you do, come here and
look at the difference in the style of
your old one and their new stock.
You'll change your mind immediately.
And another thing about this store:
everyone is courteous, even the clerks
greet you with a smile, and are glad
to show you everything. How long has
this firm been established? Give exact
address. What is their business agree
ment with customers?
(31) Here is just the place to visit
for lunches and home-made pastry. It
is known as Kapps lunchroom. They
serve a nice little lunch there, and the
coffee is delicious. It is a very clean,
sanitary shop, and you get quick ser
vice. They have home-made pies,
cakes, and doughnuts. The doughnuts
are those world-wide known "Bake
Rite." They sell for twenty-five cents
per dozen. When you are down town
drop into this shop. There is nothing
more tasty than hot doughnuts and
coffee. The process- by which these
doughnuts are made makes them light
er and fluffier than the average dough
nut. And those home-made pies such as
pumpkin and mince, certainly are en
joyable at this time of year. They also
serve a noon-day lunch for the busi
ness man that is a dandy. How many
chairs do thew have in this shop? How
many meat pies do they make a day
and what do they sell for? Give the
exact location of this shop?
(32) There is at least one cigar
store in Palo Alto that caters to
smokers and men who want the best
merchandise for their money. The
Franklin Smoke House makes a spe
cialty of fine cigars, all kinds of cigar
ettes and they carry a large stock of
tobaccos, pipes and smokers' acces
sories. The proprietors believe in giv
ing the people what they want and if
you happen to want something that is
not ordinarily carried in stock, just
let him know and he will order it for
you. If it is in the world, he will come
near gettng it for you. A Soda Foun
tain in connection with the Cigar Store
gives you a cold drink at any time.
Malted milks a specialty. You could
not think of a more suitable present
for a man than a box of cigars and
when you buy them, they should be
chosen by a man who knows you. The
proprietor will assist you. What are
the initials of this energetic proprietor
and what make of candy does he sell?
The Franklin Smoke House is the
most popular place in town for card
games. Bring your friends and play a
friendly game of "rummy." How many
card tables in this establishment?
(33) Where is the bakery where you
can get fresh bread —any and all kinds
of it? Where can you get "bread that
is light, doughnuts that delight, and
pies just right." This is the tale of a
bakery whose products bring to mind
mother's baking day. They are so good
that people come for blocks just to
buy right out of the oven. Their prod
ucts are baked under the most strin
gent sanitary conditions. It is entirely
fitting that the "Who's Who" should
call your attention to this bakery, for
in patronizing the Golden Poppy
Bakery, you not only get the best baked

goods, but you save money as well.
The mention of this name In Palo Alto !
tells a tale of quality goods in this line |
and every housewife is familiar with |
the name and the goods. The big fea
ture with this shop is the making of
whole wheat bread, made from the
finest of wheats, The manager meets
his trade personally and his own per
sonality is responsible to a large de
gree for the patronage which they
have. Who is the manager of this
local bakery and what system do they
use in baking? What are the best
sellers in French Pastry?
(34) A man is as old as he feels, but
a woman is as old as she looks. I won
der how many women in Palo Alto
know the value of personal appear
ance. It is one of the many things
women neglect. If you will just drop
in and see Madame Musy in the Wil
son building, 132 University avenue,
you will receive the personal atten
tion you have so long desired. Madame
Musy is there to please her patrons
and she desires satisfied customers.
It is every woman's idea to be beauti
ful and Madame Musy wishes to help
you. She has a wonderful shop and
does the finest work. Madame Musy is
known for the wonderful marcels she
known for the wonderful marcells she
will say that this is the nearest to
a natural wave that you ever have
had. Years of experience in this busi
ness is the answer for her excellent
work. If you will just give her a trial
I am sure you will be one of her
steady customers. How much does she
charge for a marcell? What is her
phone number? What does Madame
Musy recommend for falling hair?
(35) It tickles everybody's vanity to
a certain degree to have his friends
say how well his home is furnished,
and perhaps many of these friends
secretly wish they knew where they
could buy furniture of equal looks.
There is no secret in obtaining the
right kind of furniture if one knows
the place to shop. The Warren Furni
ture Company is such a place. They
not only handle high-class furniture
for the parlor, bedroom and dining
room, but their kitchen department is
well stocked with ranges and cooking
utensils, and for the floor they have
the Congoleum. This is recognized for
its qualities of not bulging and crack
ing. It's easily cleaned and always
sanitary. Just go to this store once
and let them show you their collection
of home furnishings. They are sure to
suit your individual taste, no matter
how exacting. They are featuring at
this time their Occidental Ranges and
Stoves. Where is this large furniture
store located, and what make of mat
tress do they recommend for its com
fort? They also sell them. W T hat make
of beds do they carry?
(36) Think of something good to eat
and then think of the Stanford Cafe.
They are synonymous. Not only do
they conduct a counter service that is
most appealing to the man who is in a
hurry but they have attractive tables
for those who have time to sit and
enjoy the meal from all angles. The
food at this cafe is prepared just as it
is at home. They would not think
about serving anything to their pat
rons that they would not eat them
selves and this is proof enough of its
purity. Sanitation is one of the chief
objectives of the proprietors of this
restaurant and is everywhere evident.
The service is rendered in a prompt
manner and you are not left studying
the menu all day. They take your or
der when you first sit down. This is
one thing the proprietors find that ap
peals to their customers. They want im
mediate service and they get it. They
also serve the finest of ice cream and
home-made pastry. Who is the pro
gressive proprietor of this cafe and
how many stools have they at the
gressive proprietors of this cafe and
cated? What brand of coffee do they
use?
(37) The most conveniently and cen
trally located market in Palo Alto to
do your shopping is the Palo Alto
Market. This market caters to the dis
criminating buyers of fresh and cured
meats. To the people that are careful
of the meats they eat, these people
are their friends. They handle nothing
but the very best inspected meats, and
the proprietor does not depend upon
the Federal and State authorities al
together. He makes a personal inspec
tion of them when they enter his
store. If they are not right, bingo!
they are sent back. When you enter
this establishment you are confronted
with an air of absolute cleanliness and
sanitation. Clean sawdust protects the
floor and the glass show cases and
marble counters make it impossible
for bits of meat to "hide" from the
scrutinizing eye of the butchers. The
market on a whole is kept in a state
of cleanliness that will meet the ap
proval of anyone. In fact, sanitation is
their main objective. What is the
exact location of this modern market
and what is their,phone number? How
long have they been established? What
line of hams do they carry? Also what
is their buying rule?

a holiday. It is a gentlemen's billiard I
parlor, conducted for gentlemen by gen
tlemen. Mr. Mahaney sees that these
principles are carried out in detail. At
Mahaney's they have live pool tables,
one snooker table and two billiard
tables, which gives every one a chance
to play the game they like. When you
get thirsty they have a soda fountain in
connection serving the finest of cold
drinks. All the standard brands of
cigars are carried here, and, believe me,
they are fresh. At their store No. 2,
next to the Stanford Theater, you will
find Mr. Krebs in charge, who is asso
ciated with Mr. Mahaney. A full line
of smokers' needs are carried here and
a big supply of cigars in boxes of 10,
25 and 50 in Christmas boxes will be
featured. Ladies' patronage is socilited
at this store. Get your Christmas Gifts
here for the men folks. What is Mr.
Mahaney's first name? Give the location
of store No. 1. What is Mr. Kreb's first
name?
(43) A famous banker once gave a
young man this advice: "Save your
money and look prosperous." We have
known young men to fail because they
did not realize the importance of being
well dressed. A good suit is a dis
tinctive asset to any man. If he is well
dressed, he immediately commands at
tention. If you want the right suit at
the right price, patronize Frazer & Co.
They are the home of good clothes in
Palo Alto, and in addition to these high
grade clothes, they carry such standard
lines of furnishings as Manhattan shirts
and Everwear hosiery. In fact, their
stock borders along high-class lines, and
it is the store in which to do your fall
shopping. They have many new styles,
cuts and materials awaiting your in
spection and their prices are very low,
consistent with the quality. The whole
store commands a high position in the
mercantile establishments of Palo Alto
because of the quality of merchandise
they handle. Meet these people and you
have met twentieth century merchants.
What make of clothing do they sell, and
what is the slogan of these clothes? Give
location, of the store.
(44) Just say "His Master's Voice"
and you have immediately spoken of the
best-known phonograph on the market.
The Victrola is made by pioneer manu
facturers in the business. It is the choice
of the greatest artists who indorse its
unerring register of the original voice
or instrument. Ralph C. Dodson's Music
Store, 340 University avenue, has Vic-,
trolas in many styles and prices. In
addition to the Victrolas this shop also
carries a large line of Victor records,
and new ones are added as soon as they
are released from the factory. A good
tip to the student is to have a "portable"
Victrola with you. If you want to dance
it is always handy and will give you
the music you like the best whenever
you want it. Go in and let them show
you their selection of Victrolas. They
will be glad to play for you any record
you would like to hear. You will ap
preciate meeting these people and they
will appreciate your patronage. Where
are the machines manufactured and how
long has this music shop been established?
What is the price of the style 100 Vic
trola? Have you heard the best seller
in records this month, "I Found a Four-
Leaf Clover," and what is the price of
this record ?
(45) Let's go to the movies. This
expression often shakes away gloom and
dullness and you gladly join the happy
ries a complete stock of crockery ware,
see a regular show. By "movies" the
people of Palo Alto mean the Varsity
and Stanford theaters. They know that
at these playhouses they will see the
best of screen offerings at prices con
sistent with conditions. These two cozy
theaters give the patrons day in and day
out the best in film plays that money
can buy. To those few in Palo Alto
that have not had the pleasure of at
tending these two modern playhouses,
they are missing one of the great joys
of life. The products of the most gifted
imaginations of the world are beautifully
and artistically portrayed with an ac
companiment of the finest of organ
music. You should get their regular
weekly program, which gives you the
names of the shows and the nights upon
which they will be exhibited. Tell us
the manager's name of the Varsity The
ater and how many seats have they?
Give us the exact location of the Stan
ford Theater. What is the Big Special
picture coming there next Monday?
(46) You may say what you want,
but say "Hardware" and the minds of
the people of Palo Alto will revert
automatically to the Palo Alto Hard
ware Company, "The Winchester Store."
This firm carries a complete line of
hardware, consisting of carpenters' and
mechanics' tools of every description;
cutlery as well as builders' hardware,
sporting goods, Bass Hcuter Paints,
Pennsylvania Vacuum Cup Tires—in
fact, everything you would expcct to find
in a modern up-to-date hardware store.
The Palo Alto Hardware Company is
known as the "Winchester Store," carry
ing a full line of Winchester products.
The Winchester Company puts out one
article each month at a special price—
the public are looking forward each
month for these big specials. The special
for November is a Winchester Flash

(3S) Time is money. Save time and
money. Spend the ten minutes allowed
on your street car transfer, buying
Christmas Cards or forgotten station
ery supplies at llyde's, 370 University
avenue, right at the transfer point.
There are but two transfer points, the
depot and opposite Hyde's new store.
Tou can get a basket for your many
packages here or a beautifully decor
ated one to send as a Christmas gift.
If you want a Fountain Pen, which one
does Hyde's guarantee? If you want to
give stationery to your sister, which
of Hyde's brands would you choose?
Which will have the bigger sale at
Hyde's for the kiddies, "Kritters of the
Kitchen Kingdom," or "The Chickens
Eating Corn"? What line of goods is
being especially featured at Hyde's
besides sttftionery, school supplies,
fountain pens, pictures, picture frames,
baskets, candles, beads, games, toys,
favors, memory books, and albums?
Call at Hyde's at the transfer point,
and they can answer the above ques
tions and also give you many sugges
tions for charming and inexpensive
Christmas presets. Their new store is
one of the finest of its kind in P. A.
(39) It is every man's wish to own
his own home. It makes for family
contentment and happiness. It saves
paying rent.
The University Realty Company sp&-
j cializes in providing people with
homes. Consult them as you would any
specialist.
Years of experience in this com
munity stands back of the University
Realty Company.
This Company can serve you in the
purchase or sale of real estate, in writ
ing all kinds of insurance, in renting
and leasing, in fact, in all matters per
taining to real estate and insurance.
How long has this Company been in
business in Palo Alto? Name one in
surance company that it represents.
(40) If you want to make your
friends happy, present them with a
good photograph of yourself. A photo
graph is a token of real friendship,
and is highly appreciated by everyone.
And when you are in Palo Alto and
desire a portrait of yourself and are
not satisfied with just ordinary work,
go to the Shattuck Studio and you will
be pleased. This is one man who is
"behind the camera, but not behind
the times." His portrait work is indic
ative of this. In his little studio on
University avenue he will be found
very busy most every day snapping
and developing and then touching up,
putting the finishing touches on, which
removes all blemishes. The art of fin
ishing portraits is not possessed by
everyone, but this photographer is in
deed an expert. Then, too, his prices
are exceedingly moderate, considering
the beauty and quality of work turned
out. You are always sure of a success
ful picture here. Do you know that
your picture is the only present your
friends cannot buy? Where is the
exact location of this studio? What
other photographic work do they do?
(41) Everyone knows Wagner, "The
Meat Man." He is a master in the meat
business. He came to Palo Alto eight
years ago and started business in a
small market in a small way on High
street. Today his business has ex
panded to such an extent that it has
outgrown the old market.
Mr. Wagner says he doesn't take the
credit for making his business what it
is in Palo Alto, but owes it to Mr. N.
Benson who has been with him ever
since he has located in this vicinity
and who will continue to manage the
local market. Mr. Benson has a great
many friends here in Palo Alto.
Mr. Wagnor owns the block of four
stores on the corner of University and
Florence streets, his new market being
the main Corner Store Room. This
wonder market is a palace of marble.
The counters are of marble and glass
and the latest word in modern sanita
tion. The woodwork is finished in
French gray and the walls in gray
with green trimmings. Cold storage
plant is of the latest modern auto
matic control and the best that money
can buy.
There is not a question in tlie
writer's mind but what this is one of
the most modern and finest equipped
markets in the state of California.
Mr. Wagner owns a chain of mar
kets extending to San Jose and Hol
lister and most of his time is con
fined to the purchasing end of the bus
iness. He has been in the meat bus
iness so long that he doesn't guess at
the quality of meat when he buys. He
knows that they are the best, so, when
purchasing the meat from him you
don't have to worry about its not being
of the best quality.
He is still going to be known as
"The Meat Man" in his new market
and will give the same service and
high quality meats that has made him
such a success.
It will pay you to watch for his ad
vertisements appearing in the daily
papers.
(42) This article is about one of the
liveliest spots in Palo Alto. There is
something doing here most all of the
time, and especially after dinner or on

Light, complete with battery for 89 cents.
The Palo Alto Hardware Company Car
rie sa complete stock of crockery ware,
dishes in plain and open sets and the
finest aluminum and enameled ware in
the city. How long has this store been
established? What is tie special price
on the 50-piece set of Gold Band Potter
Chinaware? What make of electric
washer do they sell?
(47) Fitting feet is a matter of no
little importance, for there .ire a very
few people that enjoy the fitting of a
n<iw pair of shoes, even when they fit
perfectly. However, Thoit's Shoe Store
is a firm that is noted all over the Coast
for its ability to produce shoes that
"feel just like the old ones." They are
the local distributors of Hanan Shoes
and other reputable makes of more mod
erate price. This store is a home store.
Its management is a good example to
follow, for courtesy and personal ser
vice is its aim. It is needless to speak
of the quality of their shoes, as this is
too well known, but we will say that they
carefully select as to quality, workman
ship and style. Their wearing qualities,
as well as looks, are second to none.
When you have met the proprietor of
the local firm you will have met a man
that is all for Stanford and Palo Alto.
Where is their modern shoe store lo
cated? How many members of the fam
ily can they fit in shoes? When was
this business established?
(48) There is one photographer in.
Palo Alto, "An Artistic Photographer,"'
who has gained a national reputation
and holds first prize in America for ex
cellency of work. He now has por
traits on exhibition in the National Salon.
Has also been awarded highest honors
in the states of New York, Ohio and
Michigan. He has probably photo
graphed more prominent and profes
sional people than any photographer in
America. Was with Hartsook Studios
for the past eleven years, specializing
principally in photographing moving pic
ture stars and theatricals in general. A
visit to his studio, 126 University ave
nue, which was formerly the Davey
Studio, will convince the most skeptical
of the superiority of his work. Who is
this artist who has made it possible for
the Palo Alto people to get something
different, something highly artistic*
without having to go to the larger
cities? And what makes a successful
artistic portrait? Remember Friend
ship's Perfect Gift—Your Photo.
(49) There is a wonderful industry
in this city that 1 belit*vo many do not
know about. Why is it so many people
go to San Francisco to purchase their
gifts when right here in Palo Alto there
is a shop that is known by exclusive
shops all over the United States and
whose goods have gone to England..
Australia, and Honolulu? Miss Herrick
conducts a shop the year round to servj;
you. When you are thinking of gifts,
go first to Miss Herrick's and you will
be surprised at the exclusive articles
you will find there and more reasonably
priced than elsewhere. This Studio must,
be seen to be appreciated. Give us the
names of two articles just received from
India. Tell us three articles made ex
clusively in Herrick Studios and sold
all over the United States.
(50) Here is one of the busiest stores
in Palo Alto. Segar Service Shop. Be
lieve me, the proprietor sure is popular
with the young fellows. There never is
a time but what you will see a bunch in
his store. The reason for that is his
service to every one, no matter if you
only buy a package of cigarette papers*
or if it is a brier pipe, you get the same
courteous treatment. A large assortment
of pipes have just arrived for the Christ
mas trade. Also jars of smoking to
bacco. A complete line of magazines
are carried here. In connection with this
modern Cigar Store we have a real Ser
vice Barber Shop, operated by Mr. Par
vin. They are all union barbers and ex
pert haircutters. This shop is the oldest
in town. If you only want a shave, don't
be afraid to come here. These barbers
don't bother the life out of you selling
you something else in the shop. Try
these boys the first chance you get. Get
an Almond Meal and Peroxide Steam
Facial Massage. Tell us Mr. Parvin's
first name. Tell us how many maga
zines Mr. Corns has for sale at the
Cigar Counter. Give us the exact loca
tion of these two establishments.
(1) Think of the countless obstacles
the pioneers of old had to overcome
as they journeyed forth to lay the
foundation for a future that might
hold some promise' for them. Some
achieved their goal, others failed. Then
consider your own environment and
chances for the future. Your lot is a
path of roses compared with that of
tho pioneers. jfist lay aside a small
amount each week and start an ac
count with the First National Bank of
Palo Alto. They have a capital of
$100,000.00, and $24,000 surplus, and
are members of the Federal Reserve
System of Banking. The officers and
everyone connected with this bank
have always practiced service and
courtesy to their patrons. You are
treated with consideration whether
you are a large or small depositor or
whether you are a temporary visitor in
this favored locality. A man putting
his money in a bank should always
make sure that the institution is finan
cially solid and this is just such a
bank. They pay 4 per cent interest on
Term Deposits. Name the directors of
this banking institution. What is the
margin of security including stock
holders' liability?

(2) In purchasing jewelry, the buyer
puts more faith in the seller than any
other commodity that men buy and
sell. This article is about a jewelry
store that has been in business in
Palo Alto for a number of years, and
their reputation for being dependable
is second to none. In addition to their
exceptional stock of watches, jewelry,
rings, SILVERWARE, cut glass, etc.,
they do expert watch and jewelry re
pairing. This is the store to select your
•"Gifts That Last." Nielsen and Culver
are the kind of fellows we like to men
tion in our columns, because they have
a sociable and intelligent personality
—ones who know how to make friends
and keep them. Go see this store and
look over their high class line of jew
elry and you are sure to make all of
your purchases in this line from them.
Every article they sell not only bears
the guarantee of the manufacturers,
but their personal guarantee goes with
it as well. If you have a broken piece
of jewelry, no matter how fine it is,
they will repair it for you. What are
Mr. Culver'? initials, and where is
their store located. Also what other
department do they conduct? What is
their leading line of Silverware?

(3) It ticV les everybody's vanity to
a certain dc pre e to have his friends
say how we ! his homo is furnished,
and perhaps many of these friends se
cretly wish they knew where they
could buy furniture of equal looks.
There is no secret of obtaining the
right kind cf furniture if one knows
the place to shop. The Palo Alto Fur
niture Company is such a place. They
not only hf nd!e high-class furniture
for the parlor, bofl-roora and dining
room, but their kitchen department is
well stocked with ranges and
utensils and for the floor they have
Linoleum of the latest designs and
patterns. It is easily cleaned and al-

Introducing to You the Live Progressive Firms and People Who Make
up the Business Interests of Palo Alto
First Prize —$10.00 Theatre Tickets contributed by
* VARSITY AND STANFORD THEATRES
Second Prize —One Dozen Photographs contributed by
SHATTUCK STUDIOS
Third Prize —One Hand Painted Oil Picture of Chapel
contributed by FREEMAN'S ART STORE
Fourth Prize —One Box of Chancellor (after dinner) Cigars
contributed by FRANKLIN'S SMOKE HOUSE

ways sanitary. Just go to this store !
once and let them show you their col
lection of home furnishings. They are
sure to suit your individual taste, no
matter how exacting. They are featur
ing a complete line of stoves and
ranges. The best in the world is
Wedgewood. Where is this large fur
niture store located? and what make
of water heaters do, they recommend?
How many square feet of Inlaid Lin
oleum are they now laying in the Rus
sel Cafeteria?

(4) No matter who you are and what
your life is, it can be made happier
and better through the influence of
music. This up-to-date store that we
are writing about is the home of the
best there is in music, and they are
representatives for Brunswick and
Columbia phonographs. The Music
Shop at 273 University Avenue is the
music house of Palo Alto, for they not
only carry and sell phonographs and
pianos, but they carry all kinds of
musical instruments, sheet music,
player rolls and records. If you are
fond of string instruments, they have
anything from the ukelele to the cello.
They are exclusive representatives in
Palo Alto for two well-known phono
graphs which are recognized for their ;
many exceptional qualities. These ma
chines play disc records of any make.
If you like a lot of noise moulded into
music, then they have drums for your
choice. The proprietor here is a music
loving man, himself, and he delights in
showing his line to patrons. A visit
from you will be appreciated. What
make of Band Instruments does he
carry? Who are the manufacturers of
the Victor and Brunswick? What is
the price of the Gretsch Sac., Melody
C, Finish No. 2?

(5) Two of the best places to eat in j
Palo Alto are home and here. That is
what the editor thought after trying
one of this restaurant home-cooked
meals. All of you people do not know
of this restaurant or you would be
Johnny on the spot every time Old
Man Hunger gripped your frame. They
not only cater to the man who is in a
hurry with counter service but they
have linen-covered tables for the
ladies. However, the same service is
had at both places and at the same
prices. If you have lots of time to sit
and enjoy your meal, then sit at the
tables, but if you are a business man
with only a few minutes to "grab"
your lunch, the counter service will be
most ideal. The location of this home
like place is 105 Alma Street. The
proprietor of this restaurant has a
most affable manner and he does all
in his power to please his patrons.;
Anything that you want is not too
much trouble for him to get. He uses
the best grade of meats and come
fresh from the meat market when he
needs them and not a week before, j
Who is the energetic proprietor of the
"Popular" restaurant? What is the
price of their noon lunch? What brand
of coffee do they use? How much are
their meal tickets?

(6) Clothes cost too much money to
be carelessly cleaned and pressed, i
Your tailor should be picked just as
your doctor or your grocer. It is just
as important. If you send your clothes
to first one cleaner and then anothf r,
in the ert'd your clothes will be ruined,
and with none to blame but yourself.
The Stanford Dyeing and Cleaning
Works commands a high position in
the cleaning and pressing business of
Palo Alto, and they always guarantee
their work. These people know how to
press a suit. They press it to its
natural form and not "against the
srain." They also use an odorless pro
cess in their cleaning and every meth
od of handling clothes that is modern
is used by them. They have a call and
delivery system and for them to keep
your wardrobe in prefect trim at all
times is no trouble for you. They will
call at your home at regular intervals
tor your clothes and return them
promptly. This prompt service is a
great item in their business. They also
do repairing. What does this firm
charge for cleaning and pressing a
suit, and where is their plant located?
What does 444 mean?

(7) Chiropractic was born 27 years
•,'Ko. The suspicion, distrust and re
sentful criticism aimed at it in the

beginning has been dispelled. Chiro
practors have proven their worth in
healing the sick and lame with their
chiropractic adjustments. With all of
this human service in California they
were held under the yoke of the med
ical board. But thanks to the fair
minded people of this state, that is
over.
Dr. Minor and Dr. Hall wish to thank
all Iheir friends for the support they
gave them. These two doctors are
graduates of the Palmer School of
Chiropractic in Davenport, lowa. They
have practiced Chiropractic for years.
People come for miles around to Doc
tors Minor and Hall.
They are located at 153 University
Avenue. Give both the 'doctors' first
names and give two reasons why Chi
ropractic is beneficial to one's health.

(8) Don't junk your old tires. Take
them to a reliable tire shop and get
their opinion on their condition. They
may be vulcanized and run for several
thcHtsand miles more. And if you want
an honest opinion as to this, take your
tires to Palo Alto Vulcanizing Works.
Tires are this man's sole business,
and we make no mistake when we say
that he knows his business thoroughly.
Vhen he has patched a tube or vul
canized a "shoe" for you, then he has
made a friend. A guarantee goes with
evefy job he does and this is a guar
antee of absolute satisfaction. There
is no money value set on it, but it is a
personal guarantee that you get what
you want and no matter what it cost
him, he'll see that you get it. In addi
tion to the vulcanizing and repair de
partment, this man also carries a stock
of Goodyear tires and he has y ur size.
You don't want to meet a more con
genial man than Mr. Bogges with a
smile for you. Where is the shop lo
cated? What is his price for a Good
year Ford all-weather fabric tire?
What is the price of the 40x10 solid
truck tire that Mr. Bogges has in his
window?

(9) It is a source of discomfort and
worry for some people to buy a new
pair of shoes, but if you are careful in
selecting the correct size in the right
grade of shoes, you will not have this
inconvenience to contend with. At the
Lentos Shoe Store they will not only
sell you a new pair of shoes, but they
will make your old ones like new for
you. They conduct a modern electrical
shoe repairing shop in connection with
the shoe store and they do the work
just like it is done at the factories.
Let your next pair of shoes come from
this store and they will last you much
longer, for when you have worn off
the original soles, just return them
and they will put new ones on at a
small cost. They use the very best
double wear genuine leather soles and
the name and trade mark is stamped
cn them. When you have work done
here, it is well guaranteed, and there
is something back of the guarantee.
Then if it is in the power of these
people to do you a good turn, they
certainly will take pleasure in doing
it. They work for others as well as
themselves. What brand of pure
leather do they use on their soles, and
where is the store located?

. (10) Is milk and cream an important
part of your daily meals? If not, you
are one out of a hundred. Then with
this in view, it is only natural for peo
ple to be sure that their milk and
cream is' absolutely light. And to be
"right" it should contain a certain per
cent of butterfat, as well as be clean
and free from all foreign matter. The
milk, cream, butter and dairy products
you get at the Altomont Creamery are
all that the name implies—sanitary.
They feature pasteurized and guaran
teed dairy products. You can ask for
no better merchandise in this line. So
the next time you need any dairy
products of any sort, whether it be
butter, milk, cream, or cottage cheese,
just go to the Altomont Creamery. It
will be filled with satisfaction.
These people will give you service, as
their business depends upon it. If they
did not give you good service on your
first trip, you would not return again,
and they want your future friendship
and business. What is the location of
this firm's retail store, and what do
they get per quart for their milk. What
does pasteurized mean? and what does
guaranteed milk mean?

(11) When the pioneers blazed a
trail across the continent in '49 there
was also organized a man that blazed
the way in the paint industry, W. T.
Floyd. Since that time, this firm has
been beautifying Palo Alto with its
products. In addition to paints, they
also sell oils, glass, and if you are
looking for a waterproof paint, this is
the place to go. The Hadle Stormtight
Roof Paint firm has a very modern and
up-to-date store, and they are known
for their neatness and complete stock
of goods they carry. This store is a
credit to any city. This store which
this writing is for has the agency for
Acme Quality Paints and Varnishes,
the world's higest standard in paints.
Not only do they retail their products,
but wholesale as well. If you are a
paint man, you will know what firm we
are referring to for they carry one of
the largest stocks in these parts. What

is the name of this firm and what do
they recommend for floor varnish?
Just call at the local store and their
salesmen will gladly assist you. How
many square feet will a gallon of Acme
Quality Paint cover two coats?

(12) Just up the street at Mr. Ethen's
is he liveliest spot in Palo Alto. There is
something doing there most all of the
time and especially so after supper. It
is a place where gentlemen congregate
and exchange experiences of the day
over a friendly game of pocket bil
liards. But, in addition to the billiard
parlor, they also conduct a large bowl
ing alley and soda fountain where they
will make you a creamy milk shake
that will certainly make you return for
another in a short while. They are also
local agents for the United Cigar
Stores and carry a line of cigars that
cannot be had in any other establish
ment in the city. If you are looking for
a friend, you are sure to find him here.
It is a place where practically every
man frequents once in a while just for
the gentlemanly company he is sure to
find. If it is a box of candy you wisn
for your girl, then this is the place for
you to seek. They carry several differ
ent makes and it is kept in a specially
equipped refrigerator which insures
you of freshness at any time. How
many pocket pool tables have they?
What line of pipes do they carry? How
many alleys are there and name what
team is leading in the bowling tourna
ment now being conducted?

(13) Now comes a renowned meat
market which sells fresh meats. In
deed their meats are fresh. They make
it a point to keep them so, which is
responsible for the popularity and
wonderful business gained in the past
months. There are mrny tricks em
ployed by the meat buyers in judging
duality, and the Stanford Meat Com
pany is perfectly willing to share its
secrets with you. They buy only the
best, but they want you to know at
the time of your purchase that you
are getting what you want. Cleanli
ness is the watchword of this market.
The business is so great that their
daily purchases keep their meats
fresh. They seldom carry much over
from one day to another. We enjoy
writing about this market and its
owner for several reasons. One is they
say "never mind about buying, just
come in and look the good things
over." Give exact address. How long
have they been established? What are
their phone numbers? How often do
they get fresu fish at this market?

(14) In buying drugs, you want the
best, including purity and service,
which are two essential things to con
s'der when selecting from which to
buy these needs. Impure drugs are
worse than none at all, and poor ser
vice means aggravation and annoy
ance. Only the best drugs are ever
handled at the Young Drug Company
at the corner of University avenue
and Florence street. The proprietor
is a registered pharmacist and he en
deavors to keep a stock that will
meet with all requirements and cus
tomers do not have to go elsewhere
for anything usually found in an up-to
date drug store. In addition to drugs,
they carry a large stock of perfumery,
toilet articles, safety razors, and if
you happen to have a sweet tooth,
their candies will be appealing to you.
This store has the agency for all of
the Owl products, so you may obtain
these goods right here at home. What
is Ihe proprietor's name? Also what
line of remedies do they handle? What
is "Pom Pom" Luster?

(15) We are now presenting a firm
where fresh staple and fancy groceries
can be secured. It is a concern with
a conscience, and has an aim to please
the hard-to-suit in their lines. In fact,
you can close your eyes and buy here,
and every sale carries a guarantee of
satisfaction, and a little profit is all
they ask. Now just stop a second and
say to yourself, "Where is the best
stock of fruits, vegetables and gro
ceries carried in Palo Alto?" The best
brands of everything are the distin
guishing characteristics of this store,
along with its sanitary aspect. It is a
source of personal satisfaction to the
writer to write about this "quality"
store and the proprietor, Mr. Earle,
Ever since he started, years ago, his
popularity has met with a steady in
crease. He is not only a popular mer
chant. but is an alert business man,
and his idea is to always make the
place home-like when you do business
with him or his clerks, and so far he
has succeeded, and if he can make
Palo Alto a better city you can depend
upon him to take off his coat, roll up
his sleeves and help put it over. He
has for those who need it, a smile,
and has won their business or confi
dence. No merchant in Palo Alto is
more popular with his customers than
the owner of this store. Name the
owner and give his first name in full,
location and phone.

(16) Here is a works that makes a
lot of noise in a legitimate way. It is a
sheet metal establishment. They have
been making a big noise
for some time. They make a
of tin and sheet iron, and a 112

cialties are tanks, and irrigating pipe,
.spouting, skylights, cornice as well as
tin and copper sheet metal specialties.
The expert tinner is a great necessity
i'or those owning homes or business
places, as they look to them for re
l airs and parts. To be efficient, they
must be skilled in their calling and
geniuses as well. And these things are
apparent at the Palo Alto Sheet Metal
Works. There are many ways of tin
ning that will not stand the test. These
people use the right way. The owners
of this shop believe it better to be on
the level with their customers than
to climb upward by a crooked path.
Such a firm as this we surely like to
include in our feature. In fact, we can
not say enough for them, for they de
serve much more than a mere word of
praise. They deserve sure success.
Who is the proprietor of this shop and
Low long have they been established
here. Where are they located? What
size Warm Air Heater does it take to
heat a 7-room house? and give the
price of it.

(17) When a business establish
ment has reached the heights of suc
cess and prominence, it is either cred
ited to the skillful management or to
the quality of merchandise they han
dle. At the enterprising store at 317
University Avenue both of these items
are responsible for their standing in
Palo Alto. The most prominent resi
dents of the city are among their cus
tomer list. Their costumes can always
be depended upon for beiug the latest
styles and the good quality never
varies. "Where there is quality, there
is style." The Style Shop is well
known for both. (The store is attrac
tively decorated and the merchandise
is displayed in such a manner that it
becomes a profound pleasure to shop
with them). Their courteous sales
women also render great assistance
with their timely suggestions of "what
is being worn" and you leave the store
pleased witn your visit, feeling that
you have wasted no time whatever.
What is the slogan of this enterpris
ing store. Tell name of this classy
store's proprietor. A Big Clearance
Sale is now going on at the Smart
Shop. Everything in the store is re
duced for this Sale.

(18) The most widely known and
recognized decorations for any and all
occasions are flowers. They are recog
nized internationally and more can be
said with a small bunch of flowers
than can be said with a dozen tele
grams or any other form of communi
cation. "Say it with flowers" is a fit
ting slogan for their usefulness and
worth. The one flower shop in Palo
Alto that has created a reputation for
having in stock all of the different
(lowers in season is known as the
Palo Alto Flower & Seed Shop. They
carry a complete line of flowers for
the dining room table, to ship to your
friends or pot flowers to decorate your
home and porches. When you desire
to remember yourself to a friend, this
is the one place to come for they will
make up a beautiful boquet for you.
The proprietor here likes flowers him
self, which is symbolic of happiness.
His disposition is also like that of a
flower, bright and full of cheer. Who
is this proprietor? What is the num
ber of the shop? What kind of seeds
does he carry? What are the names
of the jardiners that they are selling
that come from Japan?

(19) Who is there in this city en
gaged in correction and the conserva
tion of eyesight? Many have come to
him and received great relief when
troubled with eye defects. His strict
attention to his business has won for
him a host of friends and patrons. Dr.
Cochran will be found very busy at
his offices at 122 University avenue
and you will make no mistake in con
sulting him about your eyes. He has
passed the State Board of Optometry
examinations and is recognized for his
excellent work, and is also a graduate
Dr. of Optometry. In addition to
working on your eyes, he will replace
broken lenses or make you a complete
pair of glasses. The eyes are the win
dows of the soul and when they are
wrong, the body is handicapped, for,
without clear vision, we can't see the
world as it is. Eye troubles are often
started when young and your chil
dren's eyes should be examined before
it is too late. Make an appointment
•with Dr. Cochran and get his opinion.
His office is completely equipped with
all of the modern instruments used in
this work. What are Dr. Cochran's ini
tials, and what is the range of prices
for his glasses? What is the store
motto?

(20) Most men like to know where
they can find a good barber shop, as
they are very particular about per
sonal appearance. They demand satis
factory work. When I suggest Mar
quee's Barber Shop, I know what I'm
talking about. They have a very sani
tary little shop with all the modern
equipment, also including five modern
chairs. They specialize in all kinds of
shampooing, scalp and facial treat
ments. If you want your hair to have
jompadour cut, or any other kind,
t let Marquee's do it for you. If

you are having trouble with your
scalp, they can help you. Dixol is the
scalp treatment they recommend. They
also bob children's hair, so bring them
in the next time you are down town.
Just ask anyone who has visited Mar
quee's shop, and they will tell you
how well satisfied they were. Where
ic their shop located? What brands of
hair tonic do they use and recom
mend?

(21) A most important institution of
business in any city, town or commun
ity is the reliable drug store. Here it
is that we depend for our health. And
It ere is where we go when we want
toilet articles, kodak supplies, foun
tain pens and a hundred other luxuries
and necessities. The Kenyon & Crow
Store is known for its large and com
plete stock of all of these articles, and
in fact, anything found in a first-class
store. In addition to their general line
of pure drugs, assortments of high
class cosmetics and sundries, they are
tlie Penslar Store in Palo Alto. This
line of household remedies is com
plete. There is one for every possible
need or use. Now is the time to begin
to think about Christmas Gifts. A
large collection of hand-colored Christ
mas Cards have just arrived. They
are wonderful in design and color.
Fountain pens and Pen and Pencil sets
in Christmas Boxes make a very fine
pi esent to your student friends, or a
big box of gift stationery. At this store
they conduct the largest Kodak print
ing and developing business 011 the
Peninsula, handling a full line of East
man Kodaks and Cameras. One of
the big features of this store is their
framed pictures and mirrors. They
have a framing department and are
able to frame for you any size picture
with most any style mounting you
desire. What profit-sharing system do
they practice? Find out the four lead
ing perfumes they handle? In what
line do they excell all other concerns
in this locality? What are the pro
prietors' nicknames?

(22) There is a mail in this town
much wiser than his sires; he ran
into a bramble bush and punctured all
four tires. When he saw his tires
were wrecked, with all his might and
main, he went to this tire shop and
had them fixed again. One of the first
things to learn if you own an auto
mobile is to know what vulcanizing
nrm gives Service that Serves. The
Retread Shop is recognized for their
expert tire repairing. You should con
sult these doctors when your tires get
sick for they surely have the dope
that cures. You cannot help but like
this firm for those connected with it
make every effort possible to please
you. They will always go out of their
way to do a good turn for you, and if
you have tire trouble on the street,
just notify them and they will render
assistance People who do business
here are really proud .of ttie fact and
it is simply because they give what
the customers want and should have
—"Satisfaction." Go to this shop and
meet these tire men and then tell us
what make of tires they sell and what
their price for a Ford-size cord tire in
the make begins with "F." Give two
reasons why this tire is the best on
the market for its size.

(23) Pleasure of motoring is in
creased if your car is in good working
condition. It is, therefore, advisable to
have your car looked over before you
start on this trip and when you have
your car worked on, be sure of* your
garage. The Palo Alto Garage on Em
reson street is indeed a thoroughly
dependable establishment in regard to
their repairing. Mr. J. M. Blackburn
employs only expert mechanics. The
Palo Alto Garage has the agency for
the Durant car and many others such
as the Chandler, Cadillac, and Cleve
land. Have you seen the new 1923
model Durant. Just step in and let
them sTiow you what a wonderful mod
el it is. The proprietor of this garage,
Mr. J. M. Blackburn, personally super
vises the garage at all times, and as
sures you of prompt service whether
you are buying a spark plug or filling
your tank with gas. They have Ever-
Ready Battery service, and they also
carry Associated Gasoline. They want
satisfied customers at the Palo Alto
Garage. That is their motto. Give two
reasons why the Durant car is more
practical. What is Mr. Blackburn's
first jiame? How long have they been
established?

(24) In writing of the leading busi
ness firms and institutions of Palo
Alto, we have come across an inter
esting shop at 367 University Avenue,
that well deserves mentioning. No, it
won't interest you men, particularly—
but has an especial appeal to the wo
men of Palo Alio and vicinity who
are lovers of beautiful things. This at
tractive shop is fairly overflowing with
wonderful creations of Laces, Em
broideries, Frocks, and Sport Skirts,
Reads for the Miss and Mistress —at-
tractively displayed, and just a) at
tractively priced. These are only a
112» w of the many beautiful and useful
articles to be found in this modern,
up-to-date shop—and the proprietor
takes great pleasure in dispensing I
courteous and attentive service to
every patron. We want you to tell us
the name of this worth while shop—
also the proprietor's name and cor
rect address. What are their prices on
their dresses? What price on stamped
pillow cases? Also stamped dresser
scarfs which come in packages.
(25) Look prosperous and save
money at the same time. This is what
so many people are trying to do and |
cannot quite manage it. The reason is
that they do not know where to buy
economically and where to get goods
hat stand wear and look well. It is
not economy to buy a cheap "hand-me
down" suit of clothes. It is a waste of
money. If you have a suit made by
the tailor that this article is about,
you will get a suit of clothes that will
last. This tailor has been sixteen years
in Palo Alto and has the finest trade
on the Peninsula. Specialist on ladies'
tailoring and sport suits. He holds a
gold medal given to him at the Lewis
and Clark Exposition for designing.
You will be surprised at the chicness
as well as the exceedingly low price
he charges for a suit. And another fea
ture of this tailor, all of the tailoring
is done on the premises. He does not
take your order and send it to San
Francisco or New York. Who is this
progressive tailor? His establishment
is upstairs at 123 University avenue.
Better stop in and let him take your
measure and you select your pattern
and style at the same time.
(26) The best friend of womankingis
that which takes the grievous burdens
from her shoulders. No woman likes
to bend over washtubs or ironing
boards, and it is the mission of the
University French Laundry to per
form this highest physical service for
her. This laundry is almost our own
concern. It takes soiled linen and
turns it into attractive wearing ap
parel. It is an extensive industry, em
ploying many people. Wagons are sent
out in every direction in Palo Alto to
collect and deliver laundry and to keep
the various articles separated, so that
you don't get your neighbors' clothes,
is a job of a highly specialized order.
The methods used at this laundry are
thoroughly modern, and the machinery
equipment makes the work most satis
factory. The manager of this laundry
takes an active interest in the welfare
of Palo Alto and his absolute support
can be counted upon when anything
for the betterment of the city is in
progress. Who is this energetic man
ager, and where is the laundry lo
cated? How many employes has he?
What is the phone number?
(27) Well, here we are. Just what
interests all%women in Palo Alto. I
know when you go to that party or
dance you want to look charming. It
just requires a little personal atten
tion. You have often been to some pub
lic place and admired some ladies'
hair of the transparent texture of her
skin. The kind that is clear and
smooth. Well, you can have that charm
just the same as she. You go and see
Mrs. Marie Montgomery who has
charge of this exclusive Beauty Shop.
You will find every kind of modern
equipment desired in this shop, and
their work is very satisfactory. So
many girls have bobbed hair nowa
days, and they find it quite a task to
keep it looking well. Just drop into the
Montgomery Beauty Shop, and they
will marcelle your hair, and give the
ends a round curl which improves it
very much. You will find their egg
shampoo very invigorating. They spe
cialize in scalp and facial treatments.
They do hair waving and curling of
all kinds. What is one of the finest
scalp treatment? All kinds of facial
treatments are given by Mrs. Mont
gomery. Tell us the price of her
I'lactique Facial Treatment?
(28) What is the name of the store
that comes into your mind so clearly
when you speak of Art Goods? It is
Edwin R. Freeman's Art and Photo
Shop. There is no other place in the
city where they have such a large as
sortment of Wonderful Gifts to select
from. The writer cannot begin to tell
you of the hundreds of articles in this
store. The candlestick and framed and
unframed pictures are the best that
Mr Freeman could make and buy.
They have the largest picture fram
ing department on the Peninsula, giv
ing you the largest assortment of
frames to choose from. Christmas sea
son is nearing. Your motto is to do
your shopping early, and if you are
looking for gifts to give your friends
that will make them long remembered
to you, go to Freeman's Art Store. If
you have a picture that you cherish,
bring it here and let them frame it, or
a negative, enlarge it. They have a
complete service for films, kodaks, and
enlarging. How is it that Mr. Freeman
can sell his Foto Art Prints cheaper
than others?
(29) Palo Alto with its amazing
wealth and attractive terms and prices

when you are indebted to the wide
awake firm at 111 Circle. Their long
experience, knowledge of values and
expert advice in such matters have
won for them a large number of satis
fled customers. Through their devotion
to the business of their clients, Mr.
Helm has gained an enviable reputa
tion. Whether it be the buying of a
home or the selection of a lot or acre
age, you can be sure of finding just
what you want at attractive terms and
price when you are dealing with this
firm. This company also has many
ranch lands, both raw and improved.
In fact, their operations along this line
is, indeed, second to none in Palo Alto.
They are authorities on ranch lands
and if you name the location, they can
come pretty close to telling you the
value. Therefore, their advice and per
sonal service in such matters is indeed
important. Just drop in at their office
and they will gladly assist you. They
have just moved to 111 Circle, former
ly at 257 University avenue. What is
the name of this firm and what other
line of business do they follow? What
is Mr. Helm's first name? What is the
name of Mr. Helm's new assistant?
(30) Did you ever notice how you
admire the clothes of others and can
not understand why you never look as
well when you know personally that
you spend more money on your wear
ing apparel than this particular fel
low? The secret can easily be solved
if you do your shopping at the right
place. To test this out, the next time
you need a suit of clothes, a hat, or
anything in the gents' furnishing line,
go to Wideman & Son. This is one
exclusive haberdashery. Their stock is
composed of such well-known makes
as Kuppenheimer Clothes, Knapp Felt
Hats and Caps, handled by only the
best stores, and the fact of the matter
is, their entire stock bears names just
as well-known and highly recommend
ed as these few mentioned. Winter is
here and now is the time to see that
you are equipped for it. You certainly
need a new suit or a new hat. If you
don't think you do, come here and
look at the difference in the style of
your old one and their new stock.
You'll change your mind immediately.
And another thing about this store:
everyone is courteous, even the clerks
greet you with a smile, and are glad
to show you everything. How long has
this firm been established? Give exact
address. What is their business agree
ment with customers?
(31) Here is just the place to visit
for lunches and home-made pastry. It
is known as Kapps lunchroom. They
serve a nice little lunch there, and the
coffee is delicious. It is a very clean,
sanitary shop, and you get quick ser
vice. They have home-made pies,
cakes, and doughnuts. The doughnuts
are those world-wide known "Bake
Rite." They sell for twenty-five cents
per dozen. When you are down town
drop into this shop. There is nothing
more tasty than hot doughnuts and
coffee. The process- by which these
doughnuts are made makes them light
er and fluffier than the average dough
nut. And those home-made pies such as
pumpkin and mince, certainly are en
joyable at this time of year. They also
serve a noon-day lunch for the busi
ness man that is a dandy. How many
chairs do thew have in this shop? How
many meat pies do they make a day
and what do they sell for? Give the
exact location of this shop?
(32) There is at least one cigar
store in Palo Alto that caters to
smokers and men who want the best
merchandise for their money. The
Franklin Smoke House makes a spe
cialty of fine cigars, all kinds of cigar
ettes and they carry a large stock of
tobaccos, pipes and smokers' acces
sories. The proprietors believe in giv
ing the people what they want and if
you happen to want something that is
not ordinarily carried in stock, just
let him know and he will order it for
you. If it is in the world, he will come
near gettng it for you. A Soda Foun
tain in connection with the Cigar Store
gives you a cold drink at any time.
Malted milks a specialty. You could
not think of a more suitable present
for a man than a box of cigars and
when you buy them, they should be
chosen by a man who knows you. The
proprietor will assist you. What are
the initials of this energetic proprietor
and what make of candy does he sell?
The Franklin Smoke House is the
most popular place in town for card
games. Bring your friends and play a
friendly game of "rummy." How many
card tables in this establishment?
(33) Where is the bakery where you
can get fresh bread —any and all kinds
of it? Where can you get "bread that
is light, doughnuts that delight, and
pies just right." This is the tale of a
bakery whose products bring to mind
mother's baking day. They are so good
that people come for blocks just to
buy right out of the oven. Their prod
ucts are baked under the most strin
gent sanitary conditions. It is entirely
fitting that the "Who's Who" should
call your attention to this bakery, for
in patronizing the Golden Poppy
Bakery, you not only get the best baked

goods, but you save money as well.
The mention of this name In Palo Alto !
tells a tale of quality goods in this line |
and every housewife is familiar with |
the name and the goods. The big fea
ture with this shop is the making of
whole wheat bread, made from the
finest of wheats, The manager meets
his trade personally and his own per
sonality is responsible to a large de
gree for the patronage which they
have. Who is the manager of this
local bakery and what system do they
use in baking? What are the best
sellers in French Pastry?
(34) A man is as old as he feels, but
a woman is as old as she looks. I won
der how many women in Palo Alto
know the value of personal appear
ance. It is one of the many things
women neglect. If you will just drop
in and see Madame Musy in the Wil
son building, 132 University avenue,
you will receive the personal atten
tion you have so long desired. Madame
Musy is there to please her patrons
and she desires satisfied customers.
It is every woman's idea to be beauti
ful and Madame Musy wishes to help
you. She has a wonderful shop and
does the finest work. Madame Musy is
known for the wonderful marcels she
known for the wonderful marcells she
will say that this is the nearest to
a natural wave that you ever have
had. Years of experience in this busi
ness is the answer for her excellent
work. If you will just give her a trial
I am sure you will be one of her
steady customers. How much does she
charge for a marcell? What is her
phone number? What does Madame
Musy recommend for falling hair?
(35) It tickles everybody's vanity to
a certain degree to have his friends
say how well his home is furnished,
and perhaps many of these friends
secretly wish they knew where they
could buy furniture of equal looks.
There is no secret in obtaining the
right kind of furniture if one knows
the place to shop. The Warren Furni
ture Company is such a place. They
not only handle high-class furniture
for the parlor, bedroom and dining
room, but their kitchen department is
well stocked with ranges and cooking
utensils, and for the floor they have
the Congoleum. This is recognized for
its qualities of not bulging and crack
ing. It's easily cleaned and always
sanitary. Just go to this store once
and let them show you their collection
of home furnishings. They are sure to
suit your individual taste, no matter
how exacting. They are featuring at
this time their Occidental Ranges and
Stoves. Where is this large furniture
store located, and what make of mat
tress do they recommend for its com
fort? They also sell them. W T hat make
of beds do they carry?
(36) Think of something good to eat
and then think of the Stanford Cafe.
They are synonymous. Not only do
they conduct a counter service that is
most appealing to the man who is in a
hurry but they have attractive tables
for those who have time to sit and
enjoy the meal from all angles. The
food at this cafe is prepared just as it
is at home. They would not think
about serving anything to their pat
rons that they would not eat them
selves and this is proof enough of its
purity. Sanitation is one of the chief
objectives of the proprietors of this
restaurant and is everywhere evident.
The service is rendered in a prompt
manner and you are not left studying
the menu all day. They take your or
der when you first sit down. This is
one thing the proprietors find that ap
peals to their customers. They want im
mediate service and they get it. They
also serve the finest of ice cream and
home-made pastry. Who is the pro
gressive proprietor of this cafe and
how many stools have they at the
gressive proprietors of this cafe and
cated? What brand of coffee do they
use?
(37) The most conveniently and cen
trally located market in Palo Alto to
do your shopping is the Palo Alto
Market. This market caters to the dis
criminating buyers of fresh and cured
meats. To the people that are careful
of the meats they eat, these people
are their friends. They handle nothing
but the very best inspected meats, and
the proprietor does not depend upon
the Federal and State authorities al
together. He makes a personal inspec
tion of them when they enter his
store. If they are not right, bingo!
they are sent back. When you enter
this establishment you are confronted
with an air of absolute cleanliness and
sanitation. Clean sawdust protects the
floor and the glass show cases and
marble counters make it impossible
for bits of meat to "hide" from the
scrutinizing eye of the butchers. The
market on a whole is kept in a state
of cleanliness that will meet the ap
proval of anyone. In fact, sanitation is
their main objective. What is the
exact location of this modern market
and what is their,phone number? How
long have they been established? What
line of hams do they carry? Also what
is their buying rule?

a holiday. It is a gentlemen's billiard I
parlor, conducted for gentlemen by gen
tlemen. Mr. Mahaney sees that these
principles are carried out in detail. At
Mahaney's they have live pool tables,
one snooker table and two billiard
tables, which gives every one a chance
to play the game they like. When you
get thirsty they have a soda fountain in
connection serving the finest of cold
drinks. All the standard brands of
cigars are carried here, and, believe me,
they are fresh. At their store No. 2,
next to the Stanford Theater, you will
find Mr. Krebs in charge, who is asso
ciated with Mr. Mahaney. A full line
of smokers' needs are carried here and
a big supply of cigars in boxes of 10,
25 and 50 in Christmas boxes will be
featured. Ladies' patronage is socilited
at this store. Get your Christmas Gifts
here for the men folks. What is Mr.
Mahaney's first name? Give the location
of store No. 1. What is Mr. Kreb's first
name?
(43) A famous banker once gave a
young man this advice: "Save your
money and look prosperous." We have
known young men to fail because they
did not realize the importance of being
well dressed. A good suit is a dis
tinctive asset to any man. If he is well
dressed, he immediately commands at
tention. If you want the right suit at
the right price, patronize Frazer & Co.
They are the home of good clothes in
Palo Alto, and in addition to these high
grade clothes, they carry such standard
lines of furnishings as Manhattan shirts
and Everwear hosiery. In fact, their
stock borders along high-class lines, and
it is the store in which to do your fall
shopping. They have many new styles,
cuts and materials awaiting your in
spection and their prices are very low,
consistent with the quality. The whole
store commands a high position in the
mercantile establishments of Palo Alto
because of the quality of merchandise
they handle. Meet these people and you
have met twentieth century merchants.
What make of clothing do they sell, and
what is the slogan of these clothes? Give
location, of the store.
(44) Just say "His Master's Voice"
and you have immediately spoken of the
best-known phonograph on the market.
The Victrola is made by pioneer manu
facturers in the business. It is the choice
of the greatest artists who indorse its
unerring register of the original voice
or instrument. Ralph C. Dodson's Music
Store, 340 University avenue, has Vic-,
trolas in many styles and prices. In
addition to the Victrolas this shop also
carries a large line of Victor records,
and new ones are added as soon as they
are released from the factory. A good
tip to the student is to have a "portable"
Victrola with you. If you want to dance
it is always handy and will give you
the music you like the best whenever
you want it. Go in and let them show
you their selection of Victrolas. They
will be glad to play for you any record
you would like to hear. You will ap
preciate meeting these people and they
will appreciate your patronage. Where
are the machines manufactured and how
long has this music shop been established?
What is the price of the style 100 Vic
trola? Have you heard the best seller
in records this month, "I Found a Four-
Leaf Clover," and what is the price of
this record ?
(45) Let's go to the movies. This
expression often shakes away gloom and
dullness and you gladly join the happy
ries a complete stock of crockery ware,
see a regular show. By "movies" the
people of Palo Alto mean the Varsity
and Stanford theaters. They know that
at these playhouses they will see the
best of screen offerings at prices con
sistent with conditions. These two cozy
theaters give the patrons day in and day
out the best in film plays that money
can buy. To those few in Palo Alto
that have not had the pleasure of at
tending these two modern playhouses,
they are missing one of the great joys
of life. The products of the most gifted
imaginations of the world are beautifully
and artistically portrayed with an ac
companiment of the finest of organ
music. You should get their regular
weekly program, which gives you the
names of the shows and the nights upon
which they will be exhibited. Tell us
the manager's name of the Varsity The
ater and how many seats have they?
Give us the exact location of the Stan
ford Theater. What is the Big Special
picture coming there next Monday?
(46) You may say what you want,
but say "Hardware" and the minds of
the people of Palo Alto will revert
automatically to the Palo Alto Hard
ware Company, "The Winchester Store."
This firm carries a complete line of
hardware, consisting of carpenters' and
mechanics' tools of every description;
cutlery as well as builders' hardware,
sporting goods, Bass Hcuter Paints,
Pennsylvania Vacuum Cup Tires—in
fact, everything you would expcct to find
in a modern up-to-date hardware store.
The Palo Alto Hardware Company is
known as the "Winchester Store," carry
ing a full line of Winchester products.
The Winchester Company puts out one
article each month at a special price—
the public are looking forward each
month for these big specials. The special
for November is a Winchester Flash

(3S) Time is money. Save time and
money. Spend the ten minutes allowed
on your street car transfer, buying
Christmas Cards or forgotten station
ery supplies at llyde's, 370 University
avenue, right at the transfer point.
There are but two transfer points, the
depot and opposite Hyde's new store.
Tou can get a basket for your many
packages here or a beautifully decor
ated one to send as a Christmas gift.
If you want a Fountain Pen, which one
does Hyde's guarantee? If you want to
give stationery to your sister, which
of Hyde's brands would you choose?
Which will have the bigger sale at
Hyde's for the kiddies, "Kritters of the
Kitchen Kingdom," or "The Chickens
Eating Corn"? What line of goods is
being especially featured at Hyde's
besides sttftionery, school supplies,
fountain pens, pictures, picture frames,
baskets, candles, beads, games, toys,
favors, memory books, and albums?
Call at Hyde's at the transfer point,
and they can answer the above ques
tions and also give you many sugges
tions for charming and inexpensive
Christmas presets. Their new store is
one of the finest of its kind in P. A.
(39) It is every man's wish to own
his own home. It makes for family
contentment and happiness. It saves
paying rent.
The University Realty Company sp&-
j cializes in providing people with
homes. Consult them as you would any
specialist.
Years of experience in this com
munity stands back of the University
Realty Company.
This Company can serve you in the
purchase or sale of real estate, in writ
ing all kinds of insurance, in renting
and leasing, in fact, in all matters per
taining to real estate and insurance.
How long has this Company been in
business in Palo Alto? Name one in
surance company that it represents.
(40) If you want to make your
friends happy, present them with a
good photograph of yourself. A photo
graph is a token of real friendship,
and is highly appreciated by everyone.
And when you are in Palo Alto and
desire a portrait of yourself and are
not satisfied with just ordinary work,
go to the Shattuck Studio and you will
be pleased. This is one man who is
"behind the camera, but not behind
the times." His portrait work is indic
ative of this. In his little studio on
University avenue he will be found
very busy most every day snapping
and developing and then touching up,
putting the finishing touches on, which
removes all blemishes. The art of fin
ishing portraits is not possessed by
everyone, but this photographer is in
deed an expert. Then, too, his prices
are exceedingly moderate, considering
the beauty and quality of work turned
out. You are always sure of a success
ful picture here. Do you know that
your picture is the only present your
friends cannot buy? Where is the
exact location of this studio? What
other photographic work do they do?
(41) Everyone knows Wagner, "The
Meat Man." He is a master in the meat
business. He came to Palo Alto eight
years ago and started business in a
small market in a small way on High
street. Today his business has ex
panded to such an extent that it has
outgrown the old market.
Mr. Wagner says he doesn't take the
credit for making his business what it
is in Palo Alto, but owes it to Mr. N.
Benson who has been with him ever
since he has located in this vicinity
and who will continue to manage the
local market. Mr. Benson has a great
many friends here in Palo Alto.
Mr. Wagnor owns the block of four
stores on the corner of University and
Florence streets, his new market being
the main Corner Store Room. This
wonder market is a palace of marble.
The counters are of marble and glass
and the latest word in modern sanita
tion. The woodwork is finished in
French gray and the walls in gray
with green trimmings. Cold storage
plant is of the latest modern auto
matic control and the best that money
can buy.
There is not a question in tlie
writer's mind but what this is one of
the most modern and finest equipped
markets in the state of California.
Mr. Wagner owns a chain of mar
kets extending to San Jose and Hol
lister and most of his time is con
fined to the purchasing end of the bus
iness. He has been in the meat bus
iness so long that he doesn't guess at
the quality of meat when he buys. He
knows that they are the best, so, when
purchasing the meat from him you
don't have to worry about its not being
of the best quality.
He is still going to be known as
"The Meat Man" in his new market
and will give the same service and
high quality meats that has made him
such a success.
It will pay you to watch for his ad
vertisements appearing in the daily
papers.
(42) This article is about one of the
liveliest spots in Palo Alto. There is
something doing here most all of the
time, and especially after dinner or on

Light, complete with battery for 89 cents.
The Palo Alto Hardware Company Car
rie sa complete stock of crockery ware,
dishes in plain and open sets and the
finest aluminum and enameled ware in
the city. How long has this store been
established? What is tie special price
on the 50-piece set of Gold Band Potter
Chinaware? What make of electric
washer do they sell?
(47) Fitting feet is a matter of no
little importance, for there .ire a very
few people that enjoy the fitting of a
n<iw pair of shoes, even when they fit
perfectly. However, Thoit's Shoe Store
is a firm that is noted all over the Coast
for its ability to produce shoes that
"feel just like the old ones." They are
the local distributors of Hanan Shoes
and other reputable makes of more mod
erate price. This store is a home store.
Its management is a good example to
follow, for courtesy and personal ser
vice is its aim. It is needless to speak
of the quality of their shoes, as this is
too well known, but we will say that they
carefully select as to quality, workman
ship and style. Their wearing qualities,
as well as looks, are second to none.
When you have met the proprietor of
the local firm you will have met a man
that is all for Stanford and Palo Alto.
Where is their modern shoe store lo
cated? How many members of the fam
ily can they fit in shoes? When was
this business established?
(48) There is one photographer in.
Palo Alto, "An Artistic Photographer,"'
who has gained a national reputation
and holds first prize in America for ex
cellency of work. He now has por
traits on exhibition in the National Salon.
Has also been awarded highest honors
in the states of New York, Ohio and
Michigan. He has probably photo
graphed more prominent and profes
sional people than any photographer in
America. Was with Hartsook Studios
for the past eleven years, specializing
principally in photographing moving pic
ture stars and theatricals in general. A
visit to his studio, 126 University ave
nue, which was formerly the Davey
Studio, will convince the most skeptical
of the superiority of his work. Who is
this artist who has made it possible for
the Palo Alto people to get something
different, something highly artistic*
without having to go to the larger
cities? And what makes a successful
artistic portrait? Remember Friend
ship's Perfect Gift—Your Photo.
(49) There is a wonderful industry
in this city that 1 belit*vo many do not
know about. Why is it so many people
go to San Francisco to purchase their
gifts when right here in Palo Alto there
is a shop that is known by exclusive
shops all over the United States and
whose goods have gone to England..
Australia, and Honolulu? Miss Herrick
conducts a shop the year round to servj;
you. When you are thinking of gifts,
go first to Miss Herrick's and you will
be surprised at the exclusive articles
you will find there and more reasonably
priced than elsewhere. This Studio must,
be seen to be appreciated. Give us the
names of two articles just received from
India. Tell us three articles made ex
clusively in Herrick Studios and sold
all over the United States.
(50) Here is one of the busiest stores
in Palo Alto. Segar Service Shop. Be
lieve me, the proprietor sure is popular
with the young fellows. There never is
a time but what you will see a bunch in
his store. The reason for that is his
service to every one, no matter if you
only buy a package of cigarette papers*
or if it is a brier pipe, you get the same
courteous treatment. A large assortment
of pipes have just arrived for the Christ
mas trade. Also jars of smoking to
bacco. A complete line of magazines
are carried here. In connection with this
modern Cigar Store we have a real Ser
vice Barber Shop, operated by Mr. Par
vin. They are all union barbers and ex
pert haircutters. This shop is the oldest
in town. If you only want a shave, don't
be afraid to come here. These barbers
don't bother the life out of you selling
you something else in the shop. Try
these boys the first chance you get. Get
an Almond Meal and Peroxide Steam
Facial Massage. Tell us Mr. Parvin's
first name. Tell us how many maga
zines Mr. Corns has for sale at the
Cigar Counter. Give us the exact loca
tion of these two establishments.
(1) Think of the countless obstacles
the pioneers of old had to overcome
as they journeyed forth to lay the
foundation for a future that might
hold some promise' for them. Some
achieved their goal, others failed. Then
consider your own environment and
chances for the future. Your lot is a
path of roses compared with that of
tho pioneers. jfist lay aside a small
amount each week and start an ac
count with the First National Bank of
Palo Alto. They have a capital of
$100,000.00, and $24,000 surplus, and
are members of the Federal Reserve
System of Banking. The officers and
everyone connected with this bank
have always practiced service and
courtesy to their patrons. You are
treated with consideration whether
you are a large or small depositor or
whether you are a temporary visitor in
this favored locality. A man putting
his money in a bank should always
make sure that the institution is finan
cially solid and this is just such a
bank. They pay 4 per cent interest on
Term Deposits. Name the directors of
this banking institution. What is the
margin of security including stock
holders' liability?

(2) In purchasing jewelry, the buyer
puts more faith in the seller than any
other commodity that men buy and
sell. This article is about a jewelry
store that has been in business in
Palo Alto for a number of years, and
their reputation for being dependable
is second to none. In addition to their
exceptional stock of watches, jewelry,
rings, SILVERWARE, cut glass, etc.,
they do expert watch and jewelry re
pairing. This is the store to select your
•"Gifts That Last." Nielsen and Culver
are the kind of fellows we like to men
tion in our columns, because they have
a sociable and intelligent personality
—ones who know how to make friends
and keep them. Go see this store and
look over their high class line of jew
elry and you are sure to make all of
your purchases in this line from them.
Every article they sell not only bears
the guarantee of the manufacturers,
but their personal guarantee goes with
it as well. If you have a broken piece
of jewelry, no matter how fine it is,
they will repair it for you. What are
Mr. Culver'? initials, and where is
their store located. Also what other
department do they conduct? What is
their leading line of Silverware?

(3) It ticV les everybody's vanity to
a certain dc pre e to have his friends
say how we ! his homo is furnished,
and perhaps many of these friends se
cretly wish they knew where they
could buy furniture of equal looks.
There is no secret of obtaining the
right kind cf furniture if one knows
the place to shop. The Palo Alto Fur
niture Company is such a place. They
not only hf nd!e high-class furniture
for the parlor, bofl-roora and dining
room, but their kitchen department is
well stocked with ranges and
utensils and for the floor they have
Linoleum of the latest designs and
patterns. It is easily cleaned and al-

Introducing to You the Live Progressive Firms and People Who Make
up the Business Interests of Palo Alto
First Prize —$10.00 Theatre Tickets contributed by
* VARSITY AND STANFORD THEATRES
Second Prize —One Dozen Photographs contributed by
SHATTUCK STUDIOS
Third Prize —One Hand Painted Oil Picture of Chapel
contributed by FREEMAN'S ART STORE
Fourth Prize —One Box of Chancellor (after dinner) Cigars
contributed by FRANKLIN'S SMOKE HOUSE

ways sanitary. Just go to this store !
once and let them show you their col
lection of home furnishings. They are
sure to suit your individual taste, no
matter how exacting. They are featur
ing a complete line of stoves and
ranges. The best in the world is
Wedgewood. Where is this large fur
niture store located? and what make
of water heaters do, they recommend?
How many square feet of Inlaid Lin
oleum are they now laying in the Rus
sel Cafeteria?

(4) No matter who you are and what
your life is, it can be made happier
and better through the influence of
music. This up-to-date store that we
are writing about is the home of the
best there is in music, and they are
representatives for Brunswick and
Columbia phonographs. The Music
Shop at 273 University Avenue is the
music house of Palo Alto, for they not
only carry and sell phonographs and
pianos, but they carry all kinds of
musical instruments, sheet music,
player rolls and records. If you are
fond of string instruments, they have
anything from the ukelele to the cello.
They are exclusive representatives in
Palo Alto for two well-known phono
graphs which are recognized for their ;
many exceptional qualities. These ma
chines play disc records of any make.
If you like a lot of noise moulded into
music, then they have drums for your
choice. The proprietor here is a music
loving man, himself, and he delights in
showing his line to patrons. A visit
from you will be appreciated. What
make of Band Instruments does he
carry? Who are the manufacturers of
the Victor and Brunswick? What is
the price of the Gretsch Sac., Melody
C, Finish No. 2?

(5) Two of the best places to eat in j
Palo Alto are home and here. That is
what the editor thought after trying
one of this restaurant home-cooked
meals. All of you people do not know
of this restaurant or you would be
Johnny on the spot every time Old
Man Hunger gripped your frame. They
not only cater to the man who is in a
hurry with counter service but they
have linen-covered tables for the
ladies. However, the same service is
had at both places and at the same
prices. If you have lots of time to sit
and enjoy your meal, then sit at the
tables, but if you are a business man
with only a few minutes to "grab"
your lunch, the counter service will be
most ideal. The location of this home
like place is 105 Alma Street. The
proprietor of this restaurant has a
most affable manner and he does all
in his power to please his patrons.;
Anything that you want is not too
much trouble for him to get. He uses
the best grade of meats and come
fresh from the meat market when he
needs them and not a week before, j
Who is the energetic proprietor of the
"Popular" restaurant? What is the
price of their noon lunch? What brand
of coffee do they use? How much are
their meal tickets?

(6) Clothes cost too much money to
be carelessly cleaned and pressed, i
Your tailor should be picked just as
your doctor or your grocer. It is just
as important. If you send your clothes
to first one cleaner and then anothf r,
in the ert'd your clothes will be ruined,
and with none to blame but yourself.
The Stanford Dyeing and Cleaning
Works commands a high position in
the cleaning and pressing business of
Palo Alto, and they always guarantee
their work. These people know how to
press a suit. They press it to its
natural form and not "against the
srain." They also use an odorless pro
cess in their cleaning and every meth
od of handling clothes that is modern
is used by them. They have a call and
delivery system and for them to keep
your wardrobe in prefect trim at all
times is no trouble for you. They will
call at your home at regular intervals
tor your clothes and return them
promptly. This prompt service is a
great item in their business. They also
do repairing. What does this firm
charge for cleaning and pressing a
suit, and where is their plant located?
What does 444 mean?

(7) Chiropractic was born 27 years
•,'Ko. The suspicion, distrust and re
sentful criticism aimed at it in the

beginning has been dispelled. Chiro
practors have proven their worth in
healing the sick and lame with their
chiropractic adjustments. With all of
this human service in California they
were held under the yoke of the med
ical board. But thanks to the fair
minded people of this state, that is
over.
Dr. Minor and Dr. Hall wish to thank
all Iheir friends for the support they
gave them. These two doctors are
graduates of the Palmer School of
Chiropractic in Davenport, lowa. They
have practiced Chiropractic for years.
People come for miles around to Doc
tors Minor and Hall.
They are located at 153 University
Avenue. Give both the 'doctors' first
names and give two reasons why Chi
ropractic is beneficial to one's health.

(8) Don't junk your old tires. Take
them to a reliable tire shop and get
their opinion on their condition. They
may be vulcanized and run for several
thcHtsand miles more. And if you want
an honest opinion as to this, take your
tires to Palo Alto Vulcanizing Works.
Tires are this man's sole business,
and we make no mistake when we say
that he knows his business thoroughly.
Vhen he has patched a tube or vul
canized a "shoe" for you, then he has
made a friend. A guarantee goes with
evefy job he does and this is a guar
antee of absolute satisfaction. There
is no money value set on it, but it is a
personal guarantee that you get what
you want and no matter what it cost
him, he'll see that you get it. In addi
tion to the vulcanizing and repair de
partment, this man also carries a stock
of Goodyear tires and he has y ur size.
You don't want to meet a more con
genial man than Mr. Bogges with a
smile for you. Where is the shop lo
cated? What is his price for a Good
year Ford all-weather fabric tire?
What is the price of the 40x10 solid
truck tire that Mr. Bogges has in his
window?

(9) It is a source of discomfort and
worry for some people to buy a new
pair of shoes, but if you are careful in
selecting the correct size in the right
grade of shoes, you will not have this
inconvenience to contend with. At the
Lentos Shoe Store they will not only
sell you a new pair of shoes, but they
will make your old ones like new for
you. They conduct a modern electrical
shoe repairing shop in connection with
the shoe store and they do the work
just like it is done at the factories.
Let your next pair of shoes come from
this store and they will last you much
longer, for when you have worn off
the original soles, just return them
and they will put new ones on at a
small cost. They use the very best
double wear genuine leather soles and
the name and trade mark is stamped
cn them. When you have work done
here, it is well guaranteed, and there
is something back of the guarantee.
Then if it is in the power of these
people to do you a good turn, they
certainly will take pleasure in doing
it. They work for others as well as
themselves. What brand of pure
leather do they use on their soles, and
where is the store located?

. (10) Is milk and cream an important
part of your daily meals? If not, you
are one out of a hundred. Then with
this in view, it is only natural for peo
ple to be sure that their milk and
cream is' absolutely light. And to be
"right" it should contain a certain per
cent of butterfat, as well as be clean
and free from all foreign matter. The
milk, cream, butter and dairy products
you get at the Altomont Creamery are
all that the name implies—sanitary.
They feature pasteurized and guaran
teed dairy products. You can ask for
no better merchandise in this line. So
the next time you need any dairy
products of any sort, whether it be
butter, milk, cream, or cottage cheese,
just go to the Altomont Creamery. It
will be filled with satisfaction.
These people will give you service, as
their business depends upon it. If they
did not give you good service on your
first trip, you would not return again,
and they want your future friendship
and business. What is the location of
this firm's retail store, and what do
they get per quart for their milk. What
does pasteurized mean? and what does
guaranteed milk mean?

(11) When the pioneers blazed a
trail across the continent in '49 there
was also organized a man that blazed
the way in the paint industry, W. T.
Floyd. Since that time, this firm has
been beautifying Palo Alto with its
products. In addition to paints, they
also sell oils, glass, and if you are
looking for a waterproof paint, this is
the place to go. The Hadle Stormtight
Roof Paint firm has a very modern and
up-to-date store, and they are known
for their neatness and complete stock
of goods they carry. This store is a
credit to any city. This store which
this writing is for has the agency for
Acme Quality Paints and Varnishes,
the world's higest standard in paints.
Not only do they retail their products,
but wholesale as well. If you are a
paint man, you will know what firm we
are referring to for they carry one of
the largest stocks in these parts. What

is the name of this firm and what do
they recommend for floor varnish?
Just call at the local store and their
salesmen will gladly assist you. How
many square feet will a gallon of Acme
Quality Paint cover two coats?

(12) Just up the street at Mr. Ethen's
is he liveliest spot in Palo Alto. There is
something doing there most all of the
time and especially so after supper. It
is a place where gentlemen congregate
and exchange experiences of the day
over a friendly game of pocket bil
liards. But, in addition to the billiard
parlor, they also conduct a large bowl
ing alley and soda fountain where they
will make you a creamy milk shake
that will certainly make you return for
another in a short while. They are also
local agents for the United Cigar
Stores and carry a line of cigars that
cannot be had in any other establish
ment in the city. If you are looking for
a friend, you are sure to find him here.
It is a place where practically every
man frequents once in a while just for
the gentlemanly company he is sure to
find. If it is a box of candy you wisn
for your girl, then this is the place for
you to seek. They carry several differ
ent makes and it is kept in a specially
equipped refrigerator which insures
you of freshness at any time. How
many pocket pool tables have they?
What line of pipes do they carry? How
many alleys are there and name what
team is leading in the bowling tourna
ment now being conducted?

(13) Now comes a renowned meat
market which sells fresh meats. In
deed their meats are fresh. They make
it a point to keep them so, which is
responsible for the popularity and
wonderful business gained in the past
months. There are mrny tricks em
ployed by the meat buyers in judging
duality, and the Stanford Meat Com
pany is perfectly willing to share its
secrets with you. They buy only the
best, but they want you to know at
the time of your purchase that you
are getting what you want. Cleanli
ness is the watchword of this market.
The business is so great that their
daily purchases keep their meats
fresh. They seldom carry much over
from one day to another. We enjoy
writing about this market and its
owner for several reasons. One is they
say "never mind about buying, just
come in and look the good things
over." Give exact address. How long
have they been established? What are
their phone numbers? How often do
they get fresu fish at this market?

(14) In buying drugs, you want the
best, including purity and service,
which are two essential things to con
s'der when selecting from which to
buy these needs. Impure drugs are
worse than none at all, and poor ser
vice means aggravation and annoy
ance. Only the best drugs are ever
handled at the Young Drug Company
at the corner of University avenue
and Florence street. The proprietor
is a registered pharmacist and he en
deavors to keep a stock that will
meet with all requirements and cus
tomers do not have to go elsewhere
for anything usually found in an up-to
date drug store. In addition to drugs,
they carry a large stock of perfumery,
toilet articles, safety razors, and if
you happen to have a sweet tooth,
their candies will be appealing to you.
This store has the agency for all of
the Owl products, so you may obtain
these goods right here at home. What
is Ihe proprietor's name? Also what
line of remedies do they handle? What
is "Pom Pom" Luster?

(15) We are now presenting a firm
where fresh staple and fancy groceries
can be secured. It is a concern with
a conscience, and has an aim to please
the hard-to-suit in their lines. In fact,
you can close your eyes and buy here,
and every sale carries a guarantee of
satisfaction, and a little profit is all
they ask. Now just stop a second and
say to yourself, "Where is the best
stock of fruits, vegetables and gro
ceries carried in Palo Alto?" The best
brands of everything are the distin
guishing characteristics of this store,
along with its sanitary aspect. It is a
source of personal satisfaction to the
writer to write about this "quality"
store and the proprietor, Mr. Earle,
Ever since he started, years ago, his
popularity has met with a steady in
crease. He is not only a popular mer
chant. but is an alert business man,
and his idea is to always make the
place home-like when you do business
with him or his clerks, and so far he
has succeeded, and if he can make
Palo Alto a better city you can depend
upon him to take off his coat, roll up
his sleeves and help put it over. He
has for those who need it, a smile,
and has won their business or confi
dence. No merchant in Palo Alto is
more popular with his customers than
the owner of this store. Name the
owner and give his first name in full,
location and phone.

(16) Here is a works that makes a
lot of noise in a legitimate way. It is a
sheet metal establishment. They have
been making a big noise
for some time. They make a
of tin and sheet iron, and a 112

cialties are tanks, and irrigating pipe,
.spouting, skylights, cornice as well as
tin and copper sheet metal specialties.
The expert tinner is a great necessity
i'or those owning homes or business
places, as they look to them for re
l airs and parts. To be efficient, they
must be skilled in their calling and
geniuses as well. And these things are
apparent at the Palo Alto Sheet Metal
Works. There are many ways of tin
ning that will not stand the test. These
people use the right way. The owners
of this shop believe it better to be on
the level with their customers than
to climb upward by a crooked path.
Such a firm as this we surely like to
include in our feature. In fact, we can
not say enough for them, for they de
serve much more than a mere word of
praise. They deserve sure success.
Who is the proprietor of this shop and
Low long have they been established
here. Where are they located? What
size Warm Air Heater does it take to
heat a 7-room house? and give the
price of it.

(17) When a business establish
ment has reached the heights of suc
cess and prominence, it is either cred
ited to the skillful management or to
the quality of merchandise they han
dle. At the enterprising store at 317
University Avenue both of these items
are responsible for their standing in
Palo Alto. The most prominent resi
dents of the city are among their cus
tomer list. Their costumes can always
be depended upon for beiug the latest
styles and the good quality never
varies. "Where there is quality, there
is style." The Style Shop is well
known for both. (The store is attrac
tively decorated and the merchandise
is displayed in such a manner that it
becomes a profound pleasure to shop
with them). Their courteous sales
women also render great assistance
with their timely suggestions of "what
is being worn" and you leave the store
pleased witn your visit, feeling that
you have wasted no time whatever.
What is the slogan of this enterpris
ing store. Tell name of this classy
store's proprietor. A Big Clearance
Sale is now going on at the Smart
Shop. Everything in the store is re
duced for this Sale.

(18) The most widely known and
recognized decorations for any and all
occasions are flowers. They are recog
nized internationally and more can be
said with a small bunch of flowers
than can be said with a dozen tele
grams or any other form of communi
cation. "Say it with flowers" is a fit
ting slogan for their usefulness and
worth. The one flower shop in Palo
Alto that has created a reputation for
having in stock all of the different
(lowers in season is known as the
Palo Alto Flower & Seed Shop. They
carry a complete line of flowers for
the dining room table, to ship to your
friends or pot flowers to decorate your
home and porches. When you desire
to remember yourself to a friend, this
is the one place to come for they will
make up a beautiful boquet for you.
The proprietor here likes flowers him
self, which is symbolic of happiness.
His disposition is also like that of a
flower, bright and full of cheer. Who
is this proprietor? What is the num
ber of the shop? What kind of seeds
does he carry? What are the names
of the jardiners that they are selling
that come from Japan?

(19) Who is there in this city en
gaged in correction and the conserva
tion of eyesight? Many have come to
him and received great relief when
troubled with eye defects. His strict
attention to his business has won for
him a host of friends and patrons. Dr.
Cochran will be found very busy at
his offices at 122 University avenue
and you will make no mistake in con
sulting him about your eyes. He has
passed the State Board of Optometry
examinations and is recognized for his
excellent work, and is also a graduate
Dr. of Optometry. In addition to
working on your eyes, he will replace
broken lenses or make you a complete
pair of glasses. The eyes are the win
dows of the soul and when they are
wrong, the body is handicapped, for,
without clear vision, we can't see the
world as it is. Eye troubles are often
started when young and your chil
dren's eyes should be examined before
it is too late. Make an appointment
•with Dr. Cochran and get his opinion.
His office is completely equipped with
all of the modern instruments used in
this work. What are Dr. Cochran's ini
tials, and what is the range of prices
for his glasses? What is the store
motto?

(20) Most men like to know where
they can find a good barber shop, as
they are very particular about per
sonal appearance. They demand satis
factory work. When I suggest Mar
quee's Barber Shop, I know what I'm
talking about. They have a very sani
tary little shop with all the modern
equipment, also including five modern
chairs. They specialize in all kinds of
shampooing, scalp and facial treat
ments. If you want your hair to have
jompadour cut, or any other kind,
t let Marquee's do it for you. If

you are having trouble with your
scalp, they can help you. Dixol is the
scalp treatment they recommend. They
also bob children's hair, so bring them
in the next time you are down town.
Just ask anyone who has visited Mar
quee's shop, and they will tell you
how well satisfied they were. Where
ic their shop located? What brands of
hair tonic do they use and recom
mend?

(21) A most important institution of
business in any city, town or commun
ity is the reliable drug store. Here it
is that we depend for our health. And
It ere is where we go when we want
toilet articles, kodak supplies, foun
tain pens and a hundred other luxuries
and necessities. The Kenyon & Crow
Store is known for its large and com
plete stock of all of these articles, and
in fact, anything found in a first-class
store. In addition to their general line
of pure drugs, assortments of high
class cosmetics and sundries, they are
tlie Penslar Store in Palo Alto. This
line of household remedies is com
plete. There is one for every possible
need or use. Now is the time to begin
to think about Christmas Gifts. A
large collection of hand-colored Christ
mas Cards have just arrived. They
are wonderful in design and color.
Fountain pens and Pen and Pencil sets
in Christmas Boxes make a very fine
pi esent to your student friends, or a
big box of gift stationery. At this store
they conduct the largest Kodak print
ing and developing business 011 the
Peninsula, handling a full line of East
man Kodaks and Cameras. One of
the big features of this store is their
framed pictures and mirrors. They
have a framing department and are
able to frame for you any size picture
with most any style mounting you
desire. What profit-sharing system do
they practice? Find out the four lead
ing perfumes they handle? In what
line do they excell all other concerns
in this locality? What are the pro
prietors' nicknames?

(22) There is a mail in this town
much wiser than his sires; he ran
into a bramble bush and punctured all
four tires. When he saw his tires
were wrecked, with all his might and
main, he went to this tire shop and
had them fixed again. One of the first
things to learn if you own an auto
mobile is to know what vulcanizing
nrm gives Service that Serves. The
Retread Shop is recognized for their
expert tire repairing. You should con
sult these doctors when your tires get
sick for they surely have the dope
that cures. You cannot help but like
this firm for those connected with it
make every effort possible to please
you. They will always go out of their
way to do a good turn for you, and if
you have tire trouble on the street,
just notify them and they will render
assistance People who do business
here are really proud .of ttie fact and
it is simply because they give what
the customers want and should have
—"Satisfaction." Go to this shop and
meet these tire men and then tell us
what make of tires they sell and what
their price for a Ford-size cord tire in
the make begins with "F." Give two
reasons why this tire is the best on
the market for its size.

(23) Pleasure of motoring is in
creased if your car is in good working
condition. It is, therefore, advisable to
have your car looked over before you
start on this trip and when you have
your car worked on, be sure of* your
garage. The Palo Alto Garage on Em
reson street is indeed a thoroughly
dependable establishment in regard to
their repairing. Mr. J. M. Blackburn
employs only expert mechanics. The
Palo Alto Garage has the agency for
the Durant car and many others such
as the Chandler, Cadillac, and Cleve
land. Have you seen the new 1923
model Durant. Just step in and let
them sTiow you what a wonderful mod
el it is. The proprietor of this garage,
Mr. J. M. Blackburn, personally super
vises the garage at all times, and as
sures you of prompt service whether
you are buying a spark plug or filling
your tank with gas. They have Ever-
Ready Battery service, and they also
carry Associated Gasoline. They want
satisfied customers at the Palo Alto
Garage. That is their motto. Give two
reasons why the Durant car is more
practical. What is Mr. Blackburn's
first jiame? How long have they been
established?

(24) In writing of the leading busi
ness firms and institutions of Palo
Alto, we have come across an inter
esting shop at 367 University Avenue,
that well deserves mentioning. No, it
won't interest you men, particularly—
but has an especial appeal to the wo
men of Palo Alio and vicinity who
are lovers of beautiful things. This at
tractive shop is fairly overflowing with
wonderful creations of Laces, Em
broideries, Frocks, and Sport Skirts,
Reads for the Miss and Mistress —at-
tractively displayed, and just a) at
tractively priced. These are only a
112» w of the many beautiful and useful
articles to be found in this modern,
up-to-date shop—and the proprietor
takes great pleasure in dispensing I
courteous and attentive service to
every patron. We want you to tell us
the name of this worth while shop—
also the proprietor's name and cor
rect address. What are their prices on
their dresses? What price on stamped
pillow cases? Also stamped dresser
scarfs which come in packages.
(25) Look prosperous and save
money at the same time. This is what
so many people are trying to do and |
cannot quite manage it. The reason is
that they do not know where to buy
economically and where to get goods
hat stand wear and look well. It is
not economy to buy a cheap "hand-me
down" suit of clothes. It is a waste of
money. If you have a suit made by
the tailor that this article is about,
you will get a suit of clothes that will
last. This tailor has been sixteen years
in Palo Alto and has the finest trade
on the Peninsula. Specialist on ladies'
tailoring and sport suits. He holds a
gold medal given to him at the Lewis
and Clark Exposition for designing.
You will be surprised at the chicness
as well as the exceedingly low price
he charges for a suit. And another fea
ture of this tailor, all of the tailoring
is done on the premises. He does not
take your order and send it to San
Francisco or New York. Who is this
progressive tailor? His establishment
is upstairs at 123 University avenue.
Better stop in and let him take your
measure and you select your pattern
and style at the same time.
(26) The best friend of womankingis
that which takes the grievous burdens
from her shoulders. No woman likes
to bend over washtubs or ironing
boards, and it is the mission of the
University French Laundry to per
form this highest physical service for
her. This laundry is almost our own
concern. It takes soiled linen and
turns it into attractive wearing ap
parel. It is an extensive industry, em
ploying many people. Wagons are sent
out in every direction in Palo Alto to
collect and deliver laundry and to keep
the various articles separated, so that
you don't get your neighbors' clothes,
is a job of a highly specialized order.
The methods used at this laundry are
thoroughly modern, and the machinery
equipment makes the work most satis
factory. The manager of this laundry
takes an active interest in the welfare
of Palo Alto and his absolute support
can be counted upon when anything
for the betterment of the city is in
progress. Who is this energetic man
ager, and where is the laundry lo
cated? How many employes has he?
What is the phone number?
(27) Well, here we are. Just what
interests all%women in Palo Alto. I
know when you go to that party or
dance you want to look charming. It
just requires a little personal atten
tion. You have often been to some pub
lic place and admired some ladies'
hair of the transparent texture of her
skin. The kind that is clear and
smooth. Well, you can have that charm
just the same as she. You go and see
Mrs. Marie Montgomery who has
charge of this exclusive Beauty Shop.
You will find every kind of modern
equipment desired in this shop, and
their work is very satisfactory. So
many girls have bobbed hair nowa
days, and they find it quite a task to
keep it looking well. Just drop into the
Montgomery Beauty Shop, and they
will marcelle your hair, and give the
ends a round curl which improves it
very much. You will find their egg
shampoo very invigorating. They spe
cialize in scalp and facial treatments.
They do hair waving and curling of
all kinds. What is one of the finest
scalp treatment? All kinds of facial
treatments are given by Mrs. Mont
gomery. Tell us the price of her
I'lactique Facial Treatment?
(28) What is the name of the store
that comes into your mind so clearly
when you speak of Art Goods? It is
Edwin R. Freeman's Art and Photo
Shop. There is no other place in the
city where they have such a large as
sortment of Wonderful Gifts to select
from. The writer cannot begin to tell
you of the hundreds of articles in this
store. The candlestick and framed and
unframed pictures are the best that
Mr Freeman could make and buy.
They have the largest picture fram
ing department on the Peninsula, giv
ing you the largest assortment of
frames to choose from. Christmas sea
son is nearing. Your motto is to do
your shopping early, and if you are
looking for gifts to give your friends
that will make them long remembered
to you, go to Freeman's Art Store. If
you have a picture that you cherish,
bring it here and let them frame it, or
a negative, enlarge it. They have a
complete service for films, kodaks, and
enlarging. How is it that Mr. Freeman
can sell his Foto Art Prints cheaper
than others?
(29) Palo Alto with its amazing
wealth and attractive terms and prices

when you are indebted to the wide
awake firm at 111 Circle. Their long
experience, knowledge of values and
expert advice in such matters have
won for them a large number of satis
fled customers. Through their devotion
to the business of their clients, Mr.
Helm has gained an enviable reputa
tion. Whether it be the buying of a
home or the selection of a lot or acre
age, you can be sure of finding just
what you want at attractive terms and
price when you are dealing with this
firm. This company also has many
ranch lands, both raw and improved.
In fact, their operations along this line
is, indeed, second to none in Palo Alto.
They are authorities on ranch lands
and if you name the location, they can
come pretty close to telling you the
value. Therefore, their advice and per
sonal service in such matters is indeed
important. Just drop in at their office
and they will gladly assist you. They
have just moved to 111 Circle, former
ly at 257 University avenue. What is
the name of this firm and what other
line of business do they follow? What
is Mr. Helm's first name? What is the
name of Mr. Helm's new assistant?
(30) Did you ever notice how you
admire the clothes of others and can
not understand why you never look as
well when you know personally that
you spend more money on your wear
ing apparel than this particular fel
low? The secret can easily be solved
if you do your shopping at the right
place. To test this out, the next time
you need a suit of clothes, a hat, or
anything in the gents' furnishing line,
go to Wideman & Son. This is one
exclusive haberdashery. Their stock is
composed of such well-known makes
as Kuppenheimer Clothes, Knapp Felt
Hats and Caps, handled by only the
best stores, and the fact of the matter
is, their entire stock bears names just
as well-known and highly recommend
ed as these few mentioned. Winter is
here and now is the time to see that
you are equipped for it. You certainly
need a new suit or a new hat. If you
don't think you do, come here and
look at the difference in the style of
your old one and their new stock.
You'll change your mind immediately.
And another thing about this store:
everyone is courteous, even the clerks
greet you with a smile, and are glad
to show you everything. How long has
this firm been established? Give exact
address. What is their business agree
ment with customers?
(31) Here is just the place to visit
for lunches and home-made pastry. It
is known as Kapps lunchroom. They
serve a nice little lunch there, and the
coffee is delicious. It is a very clean,
sanitary shop, and you get quick ser
vice. They have home-made pies,
cakes, and doughnuts. The doughnuts
are those world-wide known "Bake
Rite." They sell for twenty-five cents
per dozen. When you are down town
drop into this shop. There is nothing
more tasty than hot doughnuts and
coffee. The process- by which these
doughnuts are made makes them light
er and fluffier than the average dough
nut. And those home-made pies such as
pumpkin and mince, certainly are en
joyable at this time of year. They also
serve a noon-day lunch for the busi
ness man that is a dandy. How many
chairs do thew have in this shop? How
many meat pies do they make a day
and what do they sell for? Give the
exact location of this shop?
(32) There is at least one cigar
store in Palo Alto that caters to
smokers and men who want the best
merchandise for their money. The
Franklin Smoke House makes a spe
cialty of fine cigars, all kinds of cigar
ettes and they carry a large stock of
tobaccos, pipes and smokers' acces
sories. The proprietors believe in giv
ing the people what they want and if
you happen to want something that is
not ordinarily carried in stock, just
let him know and he will order it for
you. If it is in the world, he will come
near gettng it for you. A Soda Foun
tain in connection with the Cigar Store
gives you a cold drink at any time.
Malted milks a specialty. You could
not think of a more suitable present
for a man than a box of cigars and
when you buy them, they should be
chosen by a man who knows you. The
proprietor will assist you. What are
the initials of this energetic proprietor
and what make of candy does he sell?
The Franklin Smoke House is the
most popular place in town for card
games. Bring your friends and play a
friendly game of "rummy." How many
card tables in this establishment?
(33) Where is the bakery where you
can get fresh bread —any and all kinds
of it? Where can you get "bread that
is light, doughnuts that delight, and
pies just right." This is the tale of a
bakery whose products bring to mind
mother's baking day. They are so good
that people come for blocks just to
buy right out of the oven. Their prod
ucts are baked under the most strin
gent sanitary conditions. It is entirely
fitting that the "Who's Who" should
call your attention to this bakery, for
in patronizing the Golden Poppy
Bakery, you not only get the best baked

goods, but you save money as well.
The mention of this name In Palo Alto !
tells a tale of quality goods in this line |
and every housewife is familiar with |
the name and the goods. The big fea
ture with this shop is the making of
whole wheat bread, made from the
finest of wheats, The manager meets
his trade personally and his own per
sonality is responsible to a large de
gree for the patronage which they
have. Who is the manager of this
local bakery and what system do they
use in baking? What are the best
sellers in French Pastry?
(34) A man is as old as he feels, but
a woman is as old as she looks. I won
der how many women in Palo Alto
know the value of personal appear
ance. It is one of the many things
women neglect. If you will just drop
in and see Madame Musy in the Wil
son building, 132 University avenue,
you will receive the personal atten
tion you have so long desired. Madame
Musy is there to please her patrons
and she desires satisfied customers.
It is every woman's idea to be beauti
ful and Madame Musy wishes to help
you. She has a wonderful shop and
does the finest work. Madame Musy is
known for the wonderful marcels she
known for the wonderful marcells she
will say that this is the nearest to
a natural wave that you ever have
had. Years of experience in this busi
ness is the answer for her excellent
work. If you will just give her a trial
I am sure you will be one of her
steady customers. How much does she
charge for a marcell? What is her
phone number? What does Madame
Musy recommend for falling hair?
(35) It tickles everybody's vanity to
a certain degree to have his friends
say how well his home is furnished,
and perhaps many of these friends
secretly wish they knew where they
could buy furniture of equal looks.
There is no secret in obtaining the
right kind of furniture if one knows
the place to shop. The Warren Furni
ture Company is such a place. They
not only handle high-class furniture
for the parlor, bedroom and dining
room, but their kitchen department is
well stocked with ranges and cooking
utensils, and for the floor they have
the Congoleum. This is recognized for
its qualities of not bulging and crack
ing. It's easily cleaned and always
sanitary. Just go to this store once
and let them show you their collection
of home furnishings. They are sure to
suit your individual taste, no matter
how exacting. They are featuring at
this time their Occidental Ranges and
Stoves. Where is this large furniture
store located, and what make of mat
tress do they recommend for its com
fort? They also sell them. W T hat make
of beds do they carry?
(36) Think of something good to eat
and then think of the Stanford Cafe.
They are synonymous. Not only do
they conduct a counter service that is
most appealing to the man who is in a
hurry but they have attractive tables
for those who have time to sit and
enjoy the meal from all angles. The
food at this cafe is prepared just as it
is at home. They would not think
about serving anything to their pat
rons that they would not eat them
selves and this is proof enough of its
purity. Sanitation is one of the chief
objectives of the proprietors of this
restaurant and is everywhere evident.
The service is rendered in a prompt
manner and you are not left studying
the menu all day. They take your or
der when you first sit down. This is
one thing the proprietors find that ap
peals to their customers. They want im
mediate service and they get it. They
also serve the finest of ice cream and
home-made pastry. Who is the pro
gressive proprietor of this cafe and
how many stools have they at the
gressive proprietors of this cafe and
cated? What brand of coffee do they
use?
(37) The most conveniently and cen
trally located market in Palo Alto to
do your shopping is the Palo Alto
Market. This market caters to the dis
criminating buyers of fresh and cured
meats. To the people that are careful
of the meats they eat, these people
are their friends. They handle nothing
but the very best inspected meats, and
the proprietor does not depend upon
the Federal and State authorities al
together. He makes a personal inspec
tion of them when they enter his
store. If they are not right, bingo!
they are sent back. When you enter
this establishment you are confronted
with an air of absolute cleanliness and
sanitation. Clean sawdust protects the
floor and the glass show cases and
marble counters make it impossible
for bits of meat to "hide" from the
scrutinizing eye of the butchers. The
market on a whole is kept in a state
of cleanliness that will meet the ap
proval of anyone. In fact, sanitation is
their main objective. What is the
exact location of this modern market
and what is their,phone number? How
long have they been established? What
line of hams do they carry? Also what
is their buying rule?

a holiday. It is a gentlemen's billiard I
parlor, conducted for gentlemen by gen
tlemen. Mr. Mahaney sees that these
principles are carried out in detail. At
Mahaney's they have live pool tables,
one snooker table and two billiard
tables, which gives every one a chance
to play the game they like. When you
get thirsty they have a soda fountain in
connection serving the finest of cold
drinks. All the standard brands of
cigars are carried here, and, believe me,
they are fresh. At their store No. 2,
next to the Stanford Theater, you will
find Mr. Krebs in charge, who is asso
ciated with Mr. Mahaney. A full line
of smokers' needs are carried here and
a big supply of cigars in boxes of 10,
25 and 50 in Christmas boxes will be
featured. Ladies' patronage is socilited
at this store. Get your Christmas Gifts
here for the men folks. What is Mr.
Mahaney's first name? Give the location
of store No. 1. What is Mr. Kreb's first
name?
(43) A famous banker once gave a
young man this advice: "Save your
money and look prosperous." We have
known young men to fail because they
did not realize the importance of being
well dressed. A good suit is a dis
tinctive asset to any man. If he is well
dressed, he immediately commands at
tention. If you want the right suit at
the right price, patronize Frazer & Co.
They are the home of good clothes in
Palo Alto, and in addition to these high
grade clothes, they carry such standard
lines of furnishings as Manhattan shirts
and Everwear hosiery. In fact, their
stock borders along high-class lines, and
it is the store in which to do your fall
shopping. They have many new styles,
cuts and materials awaiting your in
spection and their prices are very low,
consistent with the quality. The whole
store commands a high position in the
mercantile establishments of Palo Alto
because of the quality of merchandise
they handle. Meet these people and you
have met twentieth century merchants.
What make of clothing do they sell, and
what is the slogan of these clothes? Give
location, of the store.
(44) Just say "His Master's Voice"
and you have immediately spoken of the
best-known phonograph on the market.
The Victrola is made by pioneer manu
facturers in the business. It is the choice
of the greatest artists who indorse its
unerring register of the original voice
or instrument. Ralph C. Dodson's Music
Store, 340 University avenue, has Vic-,
trolas in many styles and prices. In
addition to the Victrolas this shop also
carries a large line of Victor records,
and new ones are added as soon as they
are released from the factory. A good
tip to the student is to have a "portable"
Victrola with you. If you want to dance
it is always handy and will give you
the music you like the best whenever
you want it. Go in and let them show
you their selection of Victrolas. They
will be glad to play for you any record
you would like to hear. You will ap
preciate meeting these people and they
will appreciate your patronage. Where
are the machines manufactured and how
long has this music shop been established?
What is the price of the style 100 Vic
trola? Have you heard the best seller
in records this month, "I Found a Four-
Leaf Clover," and what is the price of
this record ?
(45) Let's go to the movies. This
expression often shakes away gloom and
dullness and you gladly join the happy
ries a complete stock of crockery ware,
see a regular show. By "movies" the
people of Palo Alto mean the Varsity
and Stanford theaters. They know that
at these playhouses they will see the
best of screen offerings at prices con
sistent with conditions. These two cozy
theaters give the patrons day in and day
out the best in film plays that money
can buy. To those few in Palo Alto
that have not had the pleasure of at
tending these two modern playhouses,
they are missing one of the great joys
of life. The products of the most gifted
imaginations of the world are beautifully
and artistically portrayed with an ac
companiment of the finest of organ
music. You should get their regular
weekly program, which gives you the
names of the shows and the nights upon
which they will be exhibited. Tell us
the manager's name of the Varsity The
ater and how many seats have they?
Give us the exact location of the Stan
ford Theater. What is the Big Special
picture coming there next Monday?
(46) You may say what you want,
but say "Hardware" and the minds of
the people of Palo Alto will revert
automatically to the Palo Alto Hard
ware Company, "The Winchester Store."
This firm carries a complete line of
hardware, consisting of carpenters' and
mechanics' tools of every description;
cutlery as well as builders' hardware,
sporting goods, Bass Hcuter Paints,
Pennsylvania Vacuum Cup Tires—in
fact, everything you would expcct to find
in a modern up-to-date hardware store.
The Palo Alto Hardware Company is
known as the "Winchester Store," carry
ing a full line of Winchester products.
The Winchester Company puts out one
article each month at a special price—
the public are looking forward each
month for these big specials. The special
for November is a Winchester Flash

(3S) Time is money. Save time and
money. Spend the ten minutes allowed
on your street car transfer, buying
Christmas Cards or forgotten station
ery supplies at llyde's, 370 University
avenue, right at the transfer point.
There are but two transfer points, the
depot and opposite Hyde's new store.
Tou can get a basket for your many
packages here or a beautifully decor
ated one to send as a Christmas gift.
If you want a Fountain Pen, which one
does Hyde's guarantee? If you want to
give stationery to your sister, which
of Hyde's brands would you choose?
Which will have the bigger sale at
Hyde's for the kiddies, "Kritters of the
Kitchen Kingdom," or "The Chickens
Eating Corn"? What line of goods is
being especially featured at Hyde's
besides sttftionery, school supplies,
fountain pens, pictures, picture frames,
baskets, candles, beads, games, toys,
favors, memory books, and albums?
Call at Hyde's at the transfer point,
and they can answer the above ques
tions and also give you many sugges
tions for charming and inexpensive
Christmas presets. Their new store is
one of the finest of its kind in P. A.
(39) It is every man's wish to own
his own home. It makes for family
contentment and happiness. It saves
paying rent.
The University Realty Company sp&-
j cializes in providing people with
homes. Consult them as you would any
specialist.
Years of experience in this com
munity stands back of the University
Realty Company.
This Company can serve you in the
purchase or sale of real estate, in writ
ing all kinds of insurance, in renting
and leasing, in fact, in all matters per
taining to real estate and insurance.
How long has this Company been in
business in Palo Alto? Name one in
surance company that it represents.
(40) If you want to make your
friends happy, present them with a
good photograph of yourself. A photo
graph is a token of real friendship,
and is highly appreciated by everyone.
And when you are in Palo Alto and
desire a portrait of yourself and are
not satisfied with just ordinary work,
go to the Shattuck Studio and you will
be pleased. This is one man who is
"behind the camera, but not behind
the times." His portrait work is indic
ative of this. In his little studio on
University avenue he will be found
very busy most every day snapping
and developing and then touching up,
putting the finishing touches on, which
removes all blemishes. The art of fin
ishing portraits is not possessed by
everyone, but this photographer is in
deed an expert. Then, too, his prices
are exceedingly moderate, considering
the beauty and quality of work turned
out. You are always sure of a success
ful picture here. Do you know that
your picture is the only present your
friends cannot buy? Where is the
exact location of this studio? What
other photographic work do they do?
(41) Everyone knows Wagner, "The
Meat Man." He is a master in the meat
business. He came to Palo Alto eight
years ago and started business in a
small market in a small way on High
street. Today his business has ex
panded to such an extent that it has
outgrown the old market.
Mr. Wagner says he doesn't take the
credit for making his business what it
is in Palo Alto, but owes it to Mr. N.
Benson who has been with him ever
since he has located in this vicinity
and who will continue to manage the
local market. Mr. Benson has a great
many friends here in Palo Alto.
Mr. Wagnor owns the block of four
stores on the corner of University and
Florence streets, his new market being
the main Corner Store Room. This
wonder market is a palace of marble.
The counters are of marble and glass
and the latest word in modern sanita
tion. The woodwork is finished in
French gray and the walls in gray
with green trimmings. Cold storage
plant is of the latest modern auto
matic control and the best that money
can buy.
There is not a question in tlie
writer's mind but what this is one of
the most modern and finest equipped
markets in the state of California.
Mr. Wagner owns a chain of mar
kets extending to San Jose and Hol
lister and most of his time is con
fined to the purchasing end of the bus
iness. He has been in the meat bus
iness so long that he doesn't guess at
the quality of meat when he buys. He
knows that they are the best, so, when
purchasing the meat from him you
don't have to worry about its not being
of the best quality.
He is still going to be known as
"The Meat Man" in his new market
and will give the same service and
high quality meats that has made him
such a success.
It will pay you to watch for his ad
vertisements appearing in the daily
papers.
(42) This article is about one of the
liveliest spots in Palo Alto. There is
something doing here most all of the
time, and especially after dinner or on

Light, complete with battery for 89 cents.
The Palo Alto Hardware Company Car
rie sa complete stock of crockery ware,
dishes in plain and open sets and the
finest aluminum and enameled ware in
the city. How long has this store been
established? What is tie special price
on the 50-piece set of Gold Band Potter
Chinaware? What make of electric
washer do they sell?
(47) Fitting feet is a matter of no
little importance, for there .ire a very
few people that enjoy the fitting of a
n<iw pair of shoes, even when they fit
perfectly. However, Thoit's Shoe Store
is a firm that is noted all over the Coast
for its ability to produce shoes that
"feel just like the old ones." They are
the local distributors of Hanan Shoes
and other reputable makes of more mod
erate price. This store is a home store.
Its management is a good example to
follow, for courtesy and personal ser
vice is its aim. It is needless to speak
of the quality of their shoes, as this is
too well known, but we will say that they
carefully select as to quality, workman
ship and style. Their wearing qualities,
as well as looks, are second to none.
When you have met the proprietor of
the local firm you will have met a man
that is all for Stanford and Palo Alto.
Where is their modern shoe store lo
cated? How many members of the fam
ily can they fit in shoes? When was
this business established?
(48) There is one photographer in.
Palo Alto, "An Artistic Photographer,"'
who has gained a national reputation
and holds first prize in America for ex
cellency of work. He now has por
traits on exhibition in the National Salon.
Has also been awarded highest honors
in the states of New York, Ohio and
Michigan. He has probably photo
graphed more prominent and profes
sional people than any photographer in
America. Was with Hartsook Studios
for the past eleven years, specializing
principally in photographing moving pic
ture stars and theatricals in general. A
visit to his studio, 126 University ave
nue, which was formerly the Davey
Studio, will convince the most skeptical
of the superiority of his work. Who is
this artist who has made it possible for
the Palo Alto people to get something
different, something highly artistic*
without having to go to the larger
cities? And what makes a successful
artistic portrait? Remember Friend
ship's Perfect Gift—Your Photo.
(49) There is a wonderful industry
in this city that 1 belit*vo many do not
know about. Why is it so many people
go to San Francisco to purchase their
gifts when right here in Palo Alto there
is a shop that is known by exclusive
shops all over the United States and
whose goods have gone to England..
Australia, and Honolulu? Miss Herrick
conducts a shop the year round to servj;
you. When you are thinking of gifts,
go first to Miss Herrick's and you will
be surprised at the exclusive articles
you will find there and more reasonably
priced than elsewhere. This Studio must,
be seen to be appreciated. Give us the
names of two articles just received from
India. Tell us three articles made ex
clusively in Herrick Studios and sold
all over the United States.
(50) Here is one of the busiest stores
in Palo Alto. Segar Service Shop. Be
lieve me, the proprietor sure is popular
with the young fellows. There never is
a time but what you will see a bunch in
his store. The reason for that is his
service to every one, no matter if you
only buy a package of cigarette papers*
or if it is a brier pipe, you get the same
courteous treatment. A large assortment
of pipes have just arrived for the Christ
mas trade. Also jars of smoking to
bacco. A complete line of magazines
are carried here. In connection with this
modern Cigar Store we have a real Ser
vice Barber Shop, operated by Mr. Par
vin. They are all union barbers and ex
pert haircutters. This shop is the oldest
in town. If you only want a shave, don't
be afraid to come here. These barbers
don't bother the life out of you selling
you something else in the shop. Try
these boys the first chance you get. Get
an Almond Meal and Peroxide Steam
Facial Massage. Tell us Mr. Parvin's
first name. Tell us how many maga
zines Mr. Corns has for sale at the
Cigar Counter. Give us the exact loca
tion of these two establishments.
(1) Think of the countless obstacles
the pioneers of old had to overcome
as they journeyed forth to lay the
foundation for a future that might
hold some promise' for them. Some
achieved their goal, others failed. Then
consider your own environment and
chances for the future. Your lot is a
path of roses compared with that of
tho pioneers. jfist lay aside a small
amount each week and start an ac
count with the First National Bank of
Palo Alto. They have a capital of
$100,000.00, and $24,000 surplus, and
are members of the Federal Reserve
System of Banking. The officers and
everyone connected with this bank
have always practiced service and
courtesy to their patrons. You are
treated with consideration whether
you are a large or small depositor or
whether you are a temporary visitor in
this favored locality. A man putting
his money in a bank should always
make sure that the institution is finan
cially solid and this is just such a
bank. They pay 4 per cent interest on
Term Deposits. Name the directors of
this banking institution. What is the
margin of security including stock
holders' liability?

(2) In purchasing jewelry, the buyer
puts more faith in the seller than any
other commodity that men buy and
sell. This article is about a jewelry
store that has been in business in
Palo Alto for a number of years, and
their reputation for being dependable
is second to none. In addition to their
exceptional stock of watches, jewelry,
rings, SILVERWARE, cut glass, etc.,
they do expert watch and jewelry re
pairing. This is the store to select your
•"Gifts That Last." Nielsen and Culver
are the kind of fellows we like to men
tion in our columns, because they have
a sociable and intelligent personality
—ones who know how to make friends
and keep them. Go see this store and
look over their high class line of jew
elry and you are sure to make all of
your purchases in this line from them.
Every article they sell not only bears
the guarantee of the manufacturers,
but their personal guarantee goes with
it as well. If you have a broken piece
of jewelry, no matter how fine it is,
they will repair it for you. What are
Mr. Culver'? initials, and where is
their store located. Also what other
department do they conduct? What is
their leading line of Silverware?

(3) It ticV les everybody's vanity to
a certain dc pre e to have his friends
say how we ! his homo is furnished,
and perhaps many of these friends se
cretly wish they knew where they
could buy furniture of equal looks.
There is no secret of obtaining the
right kind cf furniture if one knows
the place to shop. The Palo Alto Fur
niture Company is such a place. They
not only hf nd!e high-class furniture
for the parlor, bofl-roora and dining
room, but their kitchen department is
well stocked with ranges and
utensils and for the floor they have
Linoleum of the latest designs and
patterns. It is easily cleaned and al-

Introducing to You the Live Progressive Firms and People Who Make
up the Business Interests of Palo Alto
First Prize —$10.00 Theatre Tickets contributed by
* VARSITY AND STANFORD THEATRES
Second Prize —One Dozen Photographs contributed by
SHATTUCK STUDIOS
Third Prize —One Hand Painted Oil Picture of Chapel
contributed by FREEMAN'S ART STORE
Fourth Prize —One Box of Chancellor (after dinner) Cigars
contributed by FRANKLIN'S SMOKE HOUSE

ways sanitary. Just go to this store !
once and let them show you their col
lection of home furnishings. They are
sure to suit your individual taste, no
matter how exacting. They are featur
ing a complete line of stoves and
ranges. The best in the world is
Wedgewood. Where is this large fur
niture store located? and what make
of water heaters do, they recommend?
How many square feet of Inlaid Lin
oleum are they now laying in the Rus
sel Cafeteria?

(4) No matter who you are and what
your life is, it can be made happier
and better through the influence of
music. This up-to-date store that we
are writing about is the home of the
best there is in music, and they are
representatives for Brunswick and
Columbia phonographs. The Music
Shop at 273 University Avenue is the
music house of Palo Alto, for they not
only carry and sell phonographs and
pianos, but they carry all kinds of
musical instruments, sheet music,
player rolls and records. If you are
fond of string instruments, they have
anything from the ukelele to the cello.
They are exclusive representatives in
Palo Alto for two well-known phono
graphs which are recognized for their ;
many exceptional qualities. These ma
chines play disc records of any make.
If you like a lot of noise moulded into
music, then they have drums for your
choice. The proprietor here is a music
loving man, himself, and he delights in
showing his line to patrons. A visit
from you will be appreciated. What
make of Band Instruments does he
carry? Who are the manufacturers of
the Victor and Brunswick? What is
the price of the Gretsch Sac., Melody
C, Finish No. 2?

(5) Two of the best places to eat in j
Palo Alto are home and here. That is
what the editor thought after trying
one of this restaurant home-cooked
meals. All of you people do not know
of this restaurant or you would be
Johnny on the spot every time Old
Man Hunger gripped your frame. They
not only cater to the man who is in a
hurry with counter service but they
have linen-covered tables for the
ladies. However, the same service is
had at both places and at the same
prices. If you have lots of time to sit
and enjoy your meal, then sit at the
tables, but if you are a business man
with only a few minutes to "grab"
your lunch, the counter service will be
most ideal. The location of this home
like place is 105 Alma Street. The
proprietor of this restaurant has a
most affable manner and he does all
in his power to please his patrons.;
Anything that you want is not too
much trouble for him to get. He uses
the best grade of meats and come
fresh from the meat market when he
needs them and not a week before, j
Who is the energetic proprietor of the
"Popular" restaurant? What is the
price of their noon lunch? What brand
of coffee do they use? How much are
their meal tickets?

(6) Clothes cost too much money to
be carelessly cleaned and pressed, i
Your tailor should be picked just as
your doctor or your grocer. It is just
as important. If you send your clothes
to first one cleaner and then anothf r,
in the ert'd your clothes will be ruined,
and with none to blame but yourself.
The Stanford Dyeing and Cleaning
Works commands a high position in
the cleaning and pressing business of
Palo Alto, and they always guarantee
their work. These people know how to
press a suit. They press it to its
natural form and not "against the
srain." They also use an odorless pro
cess in their cleaning and every meth
od of handling clothes that is modern
is used by them. They have a call and
delivery system and for them to keep
your wardrobe in prefect trim at all
times is no trouble for you. They will
call at your home at regular intervals
tor your clothes and return them
promptly. This prompt service is a
great item in their business. They also
do repairing. What does this firm
charge for cleaning and pressing a
suit, and where is their plant located?
What does 444 mean?

(7) Chiropractic was born 27 years
•,'Ko. The suspicion, distrust and re
sentful criticism aimed at it in the

beginning has been dispelled. Chiro
practors have proven their worth in
healing the sick and lame with their
chiropractic adjustments. With all of
this human service in California they
were held under the yoke of the med
ical board. But thanks to the fair
minded people of this state, that is
over.
Dr. Minor and Dr. Hall wish to thank
all Iheir friends for the support they
gave them. These two doctors are
graduates of the Palmer School of
Chiropractic in Davenport, lowa. They
have practiced Chiropractic for years.
People come for miles around to Doc
tors Minor and Hall.
They are located at 153 University
Avenue. Give both the 'doctors' first
names and give two reasons why Chi
ropractic is beneficial to one's health.

(8) Don't junk your old tires. Take
them to a reliable tire shop and get
their opinion on their condition. They
may be vulcanized and run for several
thcHtsand miles more. And if you want
an honest opinion as to this, take your
tires to Palo Alto Vulcanizing Works.
Tires are this man's sole business,
and we make no mistake when we say
that he knows his business thoroughly.
Vhen he has patched a tube or vul
canized a "shoe" for you, then he has
made a friend. A guarantee goes with
evefy job he does and this is a guar
antee of absolute satisfaction. There
is no money value set on it, but it is a
personal guarantee that you get what
you want and no matter what it cost
him, he'll see that you get it. In addi
tion to the vulcanizing and repair de
partment, this man also carries a stock
of Goodyear tires and he has y ur size.
You don't want to meet a more con
genial man than Mr. Bogges with a
smile for you. Where is the shop lo
cated? What is his price for a Good
year Ford all-weather fabric tire?
What is the price of the 40x10 solid
truck tire that Mr. Bogges has in his
window?

(9) It is a source of discomfort and
worry for some people to buy a new
pair of shoes, but if you are careful in
selecting the correct size in the right
grade of shoes, you will not have this
inconvenience to contend with. At the
Lentos Shoe Store they will not only
sell you a new pair of shoes, but they
will make your old ones like new for
you. They conduct a modern electrical
shoe repairing shop in connection with
the shoe store and they do the work
just like it is done at the factories.
Let your next pair of shoes come from
this store and they will last you much
longer, for when you have worn off
the original soles, just return them
and they will put new ones on at a
small cost. They use the very best
double wear genuine leather soles and
the name and trade mark is stamped
cn them. When you have work done
here, it is well guaranteed, and there
is something back of the guarantee.
Then if it is in the power of these
people to do you a good turn, they
certainly will take pleasure in doing
it. They work for others as well as
themselves. What brand of pure
leather do they use on their soles, and
where is the store located?

. (10) Is milk and cream an important
part of your daily meals? If not, you
are one out of a hundred. Then with
this in view, it is only natural for peo
ple to be sure that their milk and
cream is' absolutely light. And to be
"right" it should contain a certain per
cent of butterfat, as well as be clean
and free from all foreign matter. The
milk, cream, butter and dairy products
you get at the Altomont Creamery are
all that the name implies—sanitary.
They feature pasteurized and guaran
teed dairy products. You can ask for
no better merchandise in this line. So
the next time you need any dairy
products of any sort, whether it be
butter, milk, cream, or cottage cheese,
just go to the Altomont Creamery. It
will be filled with satisfaction.
These people will give you service, as
their business depends upon it. If they
did not give you good service on your
first trip, you would not return again,
and they want your future friendship
and business. What is the location of
this firm's retail store, and what do
they get per quart for their milk. What
does pasteurized mean? and what does
guaranteed milk mean?

(11) When the pioneers blazed a
trail across the continent in '49 there
was also organized a man that blazed
the way in the paint industry, W. T.
Floyd. Since that time, this firm has
been beautifying Palo Alto with its
products. In addition to paints, they
also sell oils, glass, and if you are
looking for a waterproof paint, this is
the place to go. The Hadle Stormtight
Roof Paint firm has a very modern and
up-to-date store, and they are known
for their neatness and complete stock
of goods they carry. This store is a
credit to any city. This store which
this writing is for has the agency for
Acme Quality Paints and Varnishes,
the world's higest standard in paints.
Not only do they retail their products,
but wholesale as well. If you are a
paint man, you will know what firm we
are referring to for they carry one of
the largest stocks in these parts. What

is the name of this firm and what do
they recommend for floor varnish?
Just call at the local store and their
salesmen will gladly assist you. How
many square feet will a gallon of Acme
Quality Paint cover two coats?

(12) Just up the street at Mr. Ethen's
is he liveliest spot in Palo Alto. There is
something doing there most all of the
time and especially so after supper. It
is a place where gentlemen congregate
and exchange experiences of the day
over a friendly game of pocket bil
liards. But, in addition to the billiard
parlor, they also conduct a large bowl
ing alley and soda fountain where they
will make you a creamy milk shake
that will certainly make you return for
another in a short while. They are also
local agents for the United Cigar
Stores and carry a line of cigars that
cannot be had in any other establish
ment in the city. If you are looking for
a friend, you are sure to find him here.
It is a place where practically every
man frequents once in a while just for
the gentlemanly company he is sure to
find. If it is a box of candy you wisn
for your girl, then this is the place for
you to seek. They carry several differ
ent makes and it is kept in a specially
equipped refrigerator which insures
you of freshness at any time. How
many pocket pool tables have they?
What line of pipes do they carry? How
many alleys are there and name what
team is leading in the bowling tourna
ment now being conducted?

(13) Now comes a renowned meat
market which sells fresh meats. In
deed their meats are fresh. They make
it a point to keep them so, which is
responsible for the popularity and
wonderful business gained in the past
months. There are mrny tricks em
ployed by the meat buyers in judging
duality, and the Stanford Meat Com
pany is perfectly willing to share its
secrets with you. They buy only the
best, but they want you to know at
the time of your purchase that you
are getting what you want. Cleanli
ness is the watchword of this market.
The business is so great that their
daily purchases keep their meats
fresh. They seldom carry much over
from one day to another. We enjoy
writing about this market and its
owner for several reasons. One is they
say "never mind about buying, just
come in and look the good things
over." Give exact address. How long
have they been established? What are
their phone numbers? How often do
they get fresu fish at this market?

(14) In buying drugs, you want the
best, including purity and service,
which are two essential things to con
s'der when selecting from which to
buy these needs. Impure drugs are
worse than none at all, and poor ser
vice means aggravation and annoy
ance. Only the best drugs are ever
handled at the Young Drug Company
at the corner of University avenue
and Florence street. The proprietor
is a registered pharmacist and he en
deavors to keep a stock that will
meet with all requirements and cus
tomers do not have to go elsewhere
for anything usually found in an up-to
date drug store. In addition to drugs,
they carry a large stock of perfumery,
toilet articles, safety razors, and if
you happen to have a sweet tooth,
their candies will be appealing to you.
This store has the agency for all of
the Owl products, so you may obtain
these goods right here at home. What
is Ihe proprietor's name? Also what
line of remedies do they handle? What
is "Pom Pom" Luster?

(15) We are now presenting a firm
where fresh staple and fancy groceries
can be secured. It is a concern with
a conscience, and has an aim to please
the hard-to-suit in their lines. In fact,
you can close your eyes and buy here,
and every sale carries a guarantee of
satisfaction, and a little profit is all
they ask. Now just stop a second and
say to yourself, "Where is the best
stock of fruits, vegetables and gro
ceries carried in Palo Alto?" The best
brands of everything are the distin
guishing characteristics of this store,
along with its sanitary aspect. It is a
source of personal satisfaction to the
writer to write about this "quality"
store and the proprietor, Mr. Earle,
Ever since he started, years ago, his
popularity has met with a steady in
crease. He is not only a popular mer
chant. but is an alert business man,
and his idea is to always make the
place home-like when you do business
with him or his clerks, and so far he
has succeeded, and if he can make
Palo Alto a better city you can depend
upon him to take off his coat, roll up
his sleeves and help put it over. He
has for those who need it, a smile,
and has won their business or confi
dence. No merchant in Palo Alto is
more popular with his customers than
the owner of this store. Name the
owner and give his first name in full,
location and phone.

(16) Here is a works that makes a
lot of noise in a legitimate way. It is a
sheet metal establishment. They have
been making a big noise
for some time. They make a
of tin and sheet iron, and a 112

cialties are tanks, and irrigating pipe,
.spouting, skylights, cornice as well as
tin and copper sheet metal specialties.
The expert tinner is a great necessity
i'or those owning homes or business
places, as they look to them for re
l airs and parts. To be efficient, they
must be skilled in their calling and
geniuses as well. And these things are
apparent at the Palo Alto Sheet Metal
Works. There are many ways of tin
ning that will not stand the test. These
people use the right way. The owners
of this shop believe it better to be on
the level with their customers than
to climb upward by a crooked path.
Such a firm as this we surely like to
include in our feature. In fact, we can
not say enough for them, for they de
serve much more than a mere word of
praise. They deserve sure success.
Who is the proprietor of this shop and
Low long have they been established
here. Where are they located? What
size Warm Air Heater does it take to
heat a 7-room house? and give the
price of it.

(17) When a business establish
ment has reached the heights of suc
cess and prominence, it is either cred
ited to the skillful management or to
the quality of merchandise they han
dle. At the enterprising store at 317
University Avenue both of these items
are responsible for their standing in
Palo Alto. The most prominent resi
dents of the city are among their cus
tomer list. Their costumes can always
be depended upon for beiug the latest
styles and the good quality never
varies. "Where there is quality, there
is style." The Style Shop is well
known for both. (The store is attrac
tively decorated and the merchandise
is displayed in such a manner that it
becomes a profound pleasure to shop
with them). Their courteous sales
women also render great assistance
with their timely suggestions of "what
is being worn" and you leave the store
pleased witn your visit, feeling that
you have wasted no time whatever.
What is the slogan of this enterpris
ing store. Tell name of this classy
store's proprietor. A Big Clearance
Sale is now going on at the Smart
Shop. Everything in the store is re
duced for this Sale.

(18) The most widely known and
recognized decorations for any and all
occasions are flowers. They are recog
nized internationally and more can be
said with a small bunch of flowers
than can be said with a dozen tele
grams or any other form of communi
cation. "Say it with flowers" is a fit
ting slogan for their usefulness and
worth. The one flower shop in Palo
Alto that has created a reputation for
having in stock all of the different
(lowers in season is known as the
Palo Alto Flower & Seed Shop. They
carry a complete line of flowers for
the dining room table, to ship to your
friends or pot flowers to decorate your
home and porches. When you desire
to remember yourself to a friend, this
is the one place to come for they will
make up a beautiful boquet for you.
The proprietor here likes flowers him
self, which is symbolic of happiness.
His disposition is also like that of a
flower, bright and full of cheer. Who
is this proprietor? What is the num
ber of the shop? What kind of seeds
does he carry? What are the names
of the jardiners that they are selling
that come from Japan?

(19) Who is there in this city en
gaged in correction and the conserva
tion of eyesight? Many have come to
him and received great relief when
troubled with eye defects. His strict
attention to his business has won for
him a host of friends and patrons. Dr.
Cochran will be found very busy at
his offices at 122 University avenue
and you will make no mistake in con
sulting him about your eyes. He has
passed the State Board of Optometry
examinations and is recognized for his
excellent work, and is also a graduate
Dr. of Optometry. In addition to
working on your eyes, he will replace
broken lenses or make you a complete
pair of glasses. The eyes are the win
dows of the soul and when they are
wrong, the body is handicapped, for,
without clear vision, we can't see the
world as it is. Eye troubles are often
started when young and your chil
dren's eyes should be examined before
it is too late. Make an appointment
•with Dr. Cochran and get his opinion.
His office is completely equipped with
all of the modern instruments used in
this work. What are Dr. Cochran's ini
tials, and what is the range of prices
for his glasses? What is the store
motto?

(20) Most men like to know where
they can find a good barber shop, as
they are very particular about per
sonal appearance. They demand satis
factory work. When I suggest Mar
quee's Barber Shop, I know what I'm
talking about. They have a very sani
tary little shop with all the modern
equipment, also including five modern
chairs. They specialize in all kinds of
shampooing, scalp and facial treat
ments. If you want your hair to have
jompadour cut, or any other kind,
t let Marquee's do it for you. If

you are having trouble with your
scalp, they can help you. Dixol is the
scalp treatment they recommend. They
also bob children's hair, so bring them
in the next time you are down town.
Just ask anyone who has visited Mar
quee's shop, and they will tell you
how well satisfied they were. Where
ic their shop located? What brands of
hair tonic do they use and recom
mend?

(21) A most important institution of
business in any city, town or commun
ity is the reliable drug store. Here it
is that we depend for our health. And
It ere is where we go when we want
toilet articles, kodak supplies, foun
tain pens and a hundred other luxuries
and necessities. The Kenyon & Crow
Store is known for its large and com
plete stock of all of these articles, and
in fact, anything found in a first-class
store. In addition to their general line
of pure drugs, assortments of high
class cosmetics and sundries, they are
tlie Penslar Store in Palo Alto. This
line of household remedies is com
plete. There is one for every possible
need or use. Now is the time to begin
to think about Christmas Gifts. A
large collection of hand-colored Christ
mas Cards have just arrived. They
are wonderful in design and color.
Fountain pens and Pen and Pencil sets
in Christmas Boxes make a very fine
pi esent to your student friends, or a
big box of gift stationery. At this store
they conduct the largest Kodak print
ing and developing business 011 the
Peninsula, handling a full line of East
man Kodaks and Cameras. One of
the big features of this store is their
framed pictures and mirrors. They
have a framing department and are
able to frame for you any size picture
with most any style mounting you
desire. What profit-sharing system do
they practice? Find out the four lead
ing perfumes they handle? In what
line do they excell all other concerns
in this locality? What are the pro
prietors' nicknames?

(22) There is a mail in this town
much wiser than his sires; he ran
into a bramble bush and punctured all
four tires. When he saw his tires
were wrecked, with all his might and
main, he went to this tire shop and
had them fixed again. One of the first
things to learn if you own an auto
mobile is to know what vulcanizing
nrm gives Service that Serves. The
Retread Shop is recognized for their
expert tire repairing. You should con
sult these doctors when your tires get
sick for they surely have the dope
that cures. You cannot help but like
this firm for those connected with it
make every effort possible to please
you. They will always go out of their
way to do a good turn for you, and if
you have tire trouble on the street,
just notify them and they will render
assistance People who do business
here are really proud .of ttie fact and
it is simply because they give what
the customers want and should have
—"Satisfaction." Go to this shop and
meet these tire men and then tell us
what make of tires they sell and what
their price for a Ford-size cord tire in
the make begins with "F." Give two
reasons why this tire is the best on
the market for its size.

(23) Pleasure of motoring is in
creased if your car is in good working
condition. It is, therefore, advisable to
have your car looked over before you
start on this trip and when you have
your car worked on, be sure of* your
garage. The Palo Alto Garage on Em
reson street is indeed a thoroughly
dependable establishment in regard to
their repairing. Mr. J. M. Blackburn
employs only expert mechanics. The
Palo Alto Garage has the agency for
the Durant car and many others such
as the Chandler, Cadillac, and Cleve
land. Have you seen the new 1923
model Durant. Just step in and let
them sTiow you what a wonderful mod
el it is. The proprietor of this garage,
Mr. J. M. Blackburn, personally super
vises the garage at all times, and as
sures you of prompt service whether
you are buying a spark plug or filling
your tank with gas. They have Ever-
Ready Battery service, and they also
carry Associated Gasoline. They want
satisfied customers at the Palo Alto
Garage. That is their motto. Give two
reasons why the Durant car is more
practical. What is Mr. Blackburn's
first jiame? How long have they been
established?

(24) In writing of the leading busi
ness firms and institutions of Palo
Alto, we have come across an inter
esting shop at 367 University Avenue,
that well deserves mentioning. No, it
won't interest you men, particularly—
but has an especial appeal to the wo
men of Palo Alio and vicinity who
are lovers of beautiful things. This at
tractive shop is fairly overflowing with
wonderful creations of Laces, Em
broideries, Frocks, and Sport Skirts,
Reads for the Miss and Mistress —at-
tractively displayed, and just a) at
tractively priced. These are only a
112» w of the many beautiful and useful
articles to be found in this modern,
up-to-date shop—and the proprietor
takes great pleasure in dispensing I
courteous and attentive service to
every patron. We want you to tell us
the name of this worth while shop—
also the proprietor's name and cor
rect address. What are their prices on
their dresses? What price on stamped
pillow cases? Also stamped dresser
scarfs which come in packages.
(25) Look prosperous and save
money at the same time. This is what
so many people are trying to do and |
cannot quite manage it. The reason is
that they do not know where to buy
economically and where to get goods
hat stand wear and look well. It is
not economy to buy a cheap "hand-me
down" suit of clothes. It is a waste of
money. If you have a suit made by
the tailor that this article is about,
you will get a suit of clothes that will
last. This tailor has been sixteen years
in Palo Alto and has the finest trade
on the Peninsula. Specialist on ladies'
tailoring and sport suits. He holds a
gold medal given to him at the Lewis
and Clark Exposition for designing.
You will be surprised at the chicness
as well as the exceedingly low price
he charges for a suit. And another fea
ture of this tailor, all of the tailoring
is done on the premises. He does not
take your order and send it to San
Francisco or New York. Who is this
progressive tailor? His establishment
is upstairs at 123 University avenue.
Better stop in and let him take your
measure and you select your pattern
and style at the same time.
(26) The best friend of womankingis
that which takes the grievous burdens
from her shoulders. No woman likes
to bend over washtubs or ironing
boards, and it is the mission of the
University French Laundry to per
form this highest physical service for
her. This laundry is almost our own
concern. It takes soiled linen and
turns it into attractive wearing ap
parel. It is an extensive industry, em
ploying many people. Wagons are sent
out in every direction in Palo Alto to
collect and deliver laundry and to keep
the various articles separated, so that
you don't get your neighbors' clothes,
is a job of a highly specialized order.
The methods used at this laundry are
thoroughly modern, and the machinery
equipment makes the work most satis
factory. The manager of this laundry
takes an active interest in the welfare
of Palo Alto and his absolute support
can be counted upon when anything
for the betterment of the city is in
progress. Who is this energetic man
ager, and where is the laundry lo
cated? How many employes has he?
What is the phone number?
(27) Well, here we are. Just what
interests all%women in Palo Alto. I
know when you go to that party or
dance you want to look charming. It
just requires a little personal atten
tion. You have often been to some pub
lic place and admired some ladies'
hair of the transparent texture of her
skin. The kind that is clear and
smooth. Well, you can have that charm
just the same as she. You go and see
Mrs. Marie Montgomery who has
charge of this exclusive Beauty Shop.
You will find every kind of modern
equipment desired in this shop, and
their work is very satisfactory. So
many girls have bobbed hair nowa
days, and they find it quite a task to
keep it looking well. Just drop into the
Montgomery Beauty Shop, and they
will marcelle your hair, and give the
ends a round curl which improves it
very much. You will find their egg
shampoo very invigorating. They spe
cialize in scalp and facial treatments.
They do hair waving and curling of
all kinds. What is one of the finest
scalp treatment? All kinds of facial
treatments are given by Mrs. Mont
gomery. Tell us the price of her
I'lactique Facial Treatment?
(28) What is the name of the store
that comes into your mind so clearly
when you speak of Art Goods? It is
Edwin R. Freeman's Art and Photo
Shop. There is no other place in the
city where they have such a large as
sortment of Wonderful Gifts to select
from. The writer cannot begin to tell
you of the hundreds of articles in this
store. The candlestick and framed and
unframed pictures are the best that
Mr Freeman could make and buy.
They have the largest picture fram
ing department on the Peninsula, giv
ing you the largest assortment of
frames to choose from. Christmas sea
son is nearing. Your motto is to do
your shopping early, and if you are
looking for gifts to give your friends
that will make them long remembered
to you, go to Freeman's Art Store. If
you have a picture that you cherish,
bring it here and let them frame it, or
a negative, enlarge it. They have a
complete service for films, kodaks, and
enlarging. How is it that Mr. Freeman
can sell his Foto Art Prints cheaper
than others?
(29) Palo Alto with its amazing
wealth and attractive terms and prices

when you are indebted to the wide
awake firm at 111 Circle. Their long
experience, knowledge of values and
expert advice in such matters have
won for them a large number of satis
fled customers. Through their devotion
to the business of their clients, Mr.
Helm has gained an enviable reputa
tion. Whether it be the buying of a
home or the selection of a lot or acre
age, you can be sure of finding just
what you want at attractive terms and
price when you are dealing with this
firm. This company also has many
ranch lands, both raw and improved.
In fact, their operations along this line
is, indeed, second to none in Palo Alto.
They are authorities on ranch lands
and if you name the location, they can
come pretty close to telling you the
value. Therefore, their advice and per
sonal service in such matters is indeed
important. Just drop in at their office
and they will gladly assist you. They
have just moved to 111 Circle, former
ly at 257 University avenue. What is
the name of this firm and what other
line of business do they follow? What
is Mr. Helm's first name? What is the
name of Mr. Helm's new assistant?
(30) Did you ever notice how you
admire the clothes of others and can
not understand why you never look as
well when you know personally that
you spend more money on your wear
ing apparel than this particular fel
low? The secret can easily be solved
if you do your shopping at the right
place. To test this out, the next time
you need a suit of clothes, a hat, or
anything in the gents' furnishing line,
go to Wideman & Son. This is one
exclusive haberdashery. Their stock is
composed of such well-known makes
as Kuppenheimer Clothes, Knapp Felt
Hats and Caps, handled by only the
best stores, and the fact of the matter
is, their entire stock bears names just
as well-known and highly recommend
ed as these few mentioned. Winter is
here and now is the time to see that
you are equipped for it. You certainly
need a new suit or a new hat. If you
don't think you do, come here and
look at the difference in the style of
your old one and their new stock.
You'll change your mind immediately.
And another thing about this store:
everyone is courteous, even the clerks
greet you with a smile, and are glad
to show you everything. How long has
this firm been established? Give exact
address. What is their business agree
ment with customers?
(31) Here is just the place to visit
for lunches and home-made pastry. It
is known as Kapps lunchroom. They
serve a nice little lunch there, and the
coffee is delicious. It is a very clean,
sanitary shop, and you get quick ser
vice. They have home-made pies,
cakes, and doughnuts. The doughnuts
are those world-wide known "Bake
Rite." They sell for twenty-five cents
per dozen. When you are down town
drop into this shop. There is nothing
more tasty than hot doughnuts and
coffee. The process- by which these
doughnuts are made makes them light
er and fluffier than the average dough
nut. And those home-made pies such as
pumpkin and mince, certainly are en
joyable at this time of year. They also
serve a noon-day lunch for the busi
ness man that is a dandy. How many
chairs do thew have in this shop? How
many meat pies do they make a day
and what do they sell for? Give the
exact location of this shop?
(32) There is at least one cigar
store in Palo Alto that caters to
smokers and men who want the best
merchandise for their money. The
Franklin Smoke House makes a spe
cialty of fine cigars, all kinds of cigar
ettes and they carry a large stock of
tobaccos, pipes and smokers' acces
sories. The proprietors believe in giv
ing the people what they want and if
you happen to want something that is
not ordinarily carried in stock, just
let him know and he will order it for
you. If it is in the world, he will come
near gettng it for you. A Soda Foun
tain in connection with the Cigar Store
gives you a cold drink at any time.
Malted milks a specialty. You could
not think of a more suitable present
for a man than a box of cigars and
when you buy them, they should be
chosen by a man who knows you. The
proprietor will assist you. What are
the initials of this energetic proprietor
and what make of candy does he sell?
The Franklin Smoke House is the
most popular place in town for card
games. Bring your friends and play a
friendly game of "rummy." How many
card tables in this establishment?
(33) Where is the bakery where you
can get fresh bread —any and all kinds
of it? Where can you get "bread that
is light, doughnuts that delight, and
pies just right." This is the tale of a
bakery whose products bring to mind
mother's baking day. They are so good
that people come for blocks just to
buy right out of the oven. Their prod
ucts are baked under the most strin
gent sanitary conditions. It is entirely
fitting that the "Who's Who" should
call your attention to this bakery, for
in patronizing the Golden Poppy
Bakery, you not only get the best baked

goods, but you save money as well.
The mention of this name In Palo Alto !
tells a tale of quality goods in this line |
and every housewife is familiar with |
the name and the goods. The big fea
ture with this shop is the making of
whole wheat bread, made from the
finest of wheats, The manager meets
his trade personally and his own per
sonality is responsible to a large de
gree for the patronage which they
have. Who is the manager of this
local bakery and what system do they
use in baking? What are the best
sellers in French Pastry?
(34) A man is as old as he feels, but
a woman is as old as she looks. I won
der how many women in Palo Alto
know the value of personal appear
ance. It is one of the many things
women neglect. If you will just drop
in and see Madame Musy in the Wil
son building, 132 University avenue,
you will receive the personal atten
tion you have so long desired. Madame
Musy is there to please her patrons
and she desires satisfied customers.
It is every woman's idea to be beauti
ful and Madame Musy wishes to help
you. She has a wonderful shop and
does the finest work. Madame Musy is
known for the wonderful marcels she
known for the wonderful marcells she
will say that this is the nearest to
a natural wave that you ever have
had. Years of experience in this busi
ness is the answer for her excellent
work. If you will just give her a trial
I am sure you will be one of her
steady customers. How much does she
charge for a marcell? What is her
phone number? What does Madame
Musy recommend for falling hair?
(35) It tickles everybody's vanity to
a certain degree to have his friends
say how well his home is furnished,
and perhaps many of these friends
secretly wish they knew where they
could buy furniture of equal looks.
There is no secret in obtaining the
right kind of furniture if one knows
the place to shop. The Warren Furni
ture Company is such a place. They
not only handle high-class furniture
for the parlor, bedroom and dining
room, but their kitchen department is
well stocked with ranges and cooking
utensils, and for the floor they have
the Congoleum. This is recognized for
its qualities of not bulging and crack
ing. It's easily cleaned and always
sanitary. Just go to this store once
and let them show you their collection
of home furnishings. They are sure to
suit your individual taste, no matter
how exacting. They are featuring at
this time their Occidental Ranges and
Stoves. Where is this large furniture
store located, and what make of mat
tress do they recommend for its com
fort? They also sell them. W T hat make
of beds do they carry?
(36) Think of something good to eat
and then think of the Stanford Cafe.
They are synonymous. Not only do
they conduct a counter service that is
most appealing to the man who is in a
hurry but they have attractive tables
for those who have time to sit and
enjoy the meal from all angles. The
food at this cafe is prepared just as it
is at home. They would not think
about serving anything to their pat
rons that they would not eat them
selves and this is proof enough of its
purity. Sanitation is one of the chief
objectives of the proprietors of this
restaurant and is everywhere evident.
The service is rendered in a prompt
manner and you are not left studying
the menu all day. They take your or
der when you first sit down. This is
one thing the proprietors find that ap
peals to their customers. They want im
mediate service and they get it. They
also serve the finest of ice cream and
home-made pastry. Who is the pro
gressive proprietor of this cafe and
how many stools have they at the
gressive proprietors of this cafe and
cated? What brand of coffee do they
use?
(37) The most conveniently and cen
trally located market in Palo Alto to
do your shopping is the Palo Alto
Market. This market caters to the dis
criminating buyers of fresh and cured
meats. To the people that are careful
of the meats they eat, these people
are their friends. They handle nothing
but the very best inspected meats, and
the proprietor does not depend upon
the Federal and State authorities al
together. He makes a personal inspec
tion of them when they enter his
store. If they are not right, bingo!
they are sent back. When you enter
this establishment you are confronted
with an air of absolute cleanliness and
sanitation. Clean sawdust protects the
floor and the glass show cases and
marble counters make it impossible
for bits of meat to "hide" from the
scrutinizing eye of the butchers. The
market on a whole is kept in a state
of cleanliness that will meet the ap
proval of anyone. In fact, sanitation is
their main objective. What is the
exact location of this modern market
and what is their,phone number? How
long have they been established? What
line of hams do they carry? Also what
is their buying rule?

a holiday. It is a gentlemen's billiard I
parlor, conducted for gentlemen by gen
tlemen. Mr. Mahaney sees that these
principles are carried out in detail. At
Mahaney's they have live pool tables,
one snooker table and two billiard
tables, which gives every one a chance
to play the game they like. When you
get thirsty they have a soda fountain in
connection serving the finest of cold
drinks. All the standard brands of
cigars are carried here, and, believe me,
they are fresh. At their store No. 2,
next to the Stanford Theater, you will
find Mr. Krebs in charge, who is asso
ciated with Mr. Mahaney. A full line
of smokers' needs are carried here and
a big supply of cigars in boxes of 10,
25 and 50 in Christmas boxes will be
featured. Ladies' patronage is socilited
at this store. Get your Christmas Gifts
here for the men folks. What is Mr.
Mahaney's first name? Give the location
of store No. 1. What is Mr. Kreb's first
name?
(43) A famous banker once gave a
young man this advice: "Save your
money and look prosperous." We have
known young men to fail because they
did not realize the importance of being
well dressed. A good suit is a dis
tinctive asset to any man. If he is well
dressed, he immediately commands at
tention. If you want the right suit at
the right price, patronize Frazer & Co.
They are the home of good clothes in
Palo Alto, and in addition to these high
grade clothes, they carry such standard
lines of furnishings as Manhattan shirts
and Everwear hosiery. In fact, their
stock borders along high-class lines, and
it is the store in which to do your fall
shopping. They have many new styles,
cuts and materials awaiting your in
spection and their prices are very low,
consistent with the quality. The whole
store commands a high position in the
mercantile establishments of Palo Alto
because of the quality of merchandise
they handle. Meet these people and you
have met twentieth century merchants.
What make of clothing do they sell, and
what is the slogan of these clothes? Give
location, of the store.
(44) Just say "His Master's Voice"
and you have immediately spoken of the
best-known phonograph on the market.
The Victrola is made by pioneer manu
facturers in the business. It is the choice
of the greatest artists who indorse its
unerring register of the original voice
or instrument. Ralph C. Dodson's Music
Store, 340 University avenue, has Vic-,
trolas in many styles and prices. In
addition to the Victrolas this shop also
carries a large line of Victor records,
and new ones are added as soon as they
are released from the factory. A good
tip to the student is to have a "portable"
Victrola with you. If you want to dance
it is always handy and will give you
the music you like the best whenever
you want it. Go in and let them show
you their selection of Victrolas. They
will be glad to play for you any record
you would like to hear. You will ap
preciate meeting these people and they
will appreciate your patronage. Where
are the machines manufactured and how
long has this music shop been established?
What is the price of the style 100 Vic
trola? Have you heard the best seller
in records this month, "I Found a Four-
Leaf Clover," and what is the price of
this record ?
(45) Let's go to the movies. This
expression often shakes away gloom and
dullness and you gladly join the happy
ries a complete stock of crockery ware,
see a regular show. By "movies" the
people of Palo Alto mean the Varsity
and Stanford theaters. They know that
at these playhouses they will see the
best of screen offerings at prices con
sistent with conditions. These two cozy
theaters give the patrons day in and day
out the best in film plays that money
can buy. To those few in Palo Alto
that have not had the pleasure of at
tending these two modern playhouses,
they are missing one of the great joys
of life. The products of the most gifted
imaginations of the world are beautifully
and artistically portrayed with an ac
companiment of the finest of organ
music. You should get their regular
weekly program, which gives you the
names of the shows and the nights upon
which they will be exhibited. Tell us
the manager's name of the Varsity The
ater and how many seats have they?
Give us the exact location of the Stan
ford Theater. What is the Big Special
picture coming there next Monday?
(46) You may say what you want,
but say "Hardware" and the minds of
the people of Palo Alto will revert
automatically to the Palo Alto Hard
ware Company, "The Winchester Store."
This firm carries a complete line of
hardware, consisting of carpenters' and
mechanics' tools of every description;
cutlery as well as builders' hardware,
sporting goods, Bass Hcuter Paints,
Pennsylvania Vacuum Cup Tires—in
fact, everything you would expcct to find
in a modern up-to-date hardware store.
The Palo Alto Hardware Company is
known as the "Winchester Store," carry
ing a full line of Winchester products.
The Winchester Company puts out one
article each month at a special price—
the public are looking forward each
month for these big specials. The special
for November is a Winchester Flash

(3S) Time is money. Save time and
money. Spend the ten minutes allowed
on your street car transfer, buying
Christmas Cards or forgotten station
ery supplies at llyde's, 370 University
avenue, right at the transfer point.
There are but two transfer points, the
depot and opposite Hyde's new store.
Tou can get a basket for your many
packages here or a beautifully decor
ated one to send as a Christmas gift.
If you want a Fountain Pen, which one
does Hyde's guarantee? If you want to
give stationery to your sister, which
of Hyde's brands would you choose?
Which will have the bigger sale at
Hyde's for the kiddies, "Kritters of the
Kitchen Kingdom," or "The Chickens
Eating Corn"? What line of goods is
being especially featured at Hyde's
besides sttftionery, school supplies,
fountain pens, pictures, picture frames,
baskets, candles, beads, games, toys,
favors, memory books, and albums?
Call at Hyde's at the transfer point,
and they can answer the above ques
tions and also give you many sugges
tions for charming and inexpensive
Christmas presets. Their new store is
one of the finest of its kind in P. A.
(39) It is every man's wish to own
his own home. It makes for family
contentment and happiness. It saves
paying rent.
The University Realty Company sp&-
j cializes in providing people with
homes. Consult them as you would any
specialist.
Years of experience in this com
munity stands back of the University
Realty Company.
This Company can serve you in the
purchase or sale of real estate, in writ
ing all kinds of insurance, in renting
and leasing, in fact, in all matters per
taining to real estate and insurance.
How long has this Company been in
business in Palo Alto? Name one in
surance company that it represents.
(40) If you want to make your
friends happy, present them with a
good photograph of yourself. A photo
graph is a token of real friendship,
and is highly appreciated by everyone.
And when you are in Palo Alto and
desire a portrait of yourself and are
not satisfied with just ordinary work,
go to the Shattuck Studio and you will
be pleased. This is one man who is
"behind the camera, but not behind
the times." His portrait work is indic
ative of this. In his little studio on
University avenue he will be found
very busy most every day snapping
and developing and then touching up,
putting the finishing touches on, which
removes all blemishes. The art of fin
ishing portraits is not possessed by
everyone, but this photographer is in
deed an expert. Then, too, his prices
are exceedingly moderate, considering
the beauty and quality of work turned
out. You are always sure of a success
ful picture here. Do you know that
your picture is the only present your
friends cannot buy? Where is the
exact location of this studio? What
other photographic work do they do?
(41) Everyone knows Wagner, "The
Meat Man." He is a master in the meat
business. He came to Palo Alto eight
years ago and started business in a
small market in a small way on High
street. Today his business has ex
panded to such an extent that it has
outgrown the old market.
Mr. Wagner says he doesn't take the
credit for making his business what it
is in Palo Alto, but owes it to Mr. N.
Benson who has been with him ever
since he has located in this vicinity
and who will continue to manage the
local market. Mr. Benson has a great
many friends here in Palo Alto.
Mr. Wagnor owns the block of four
stores on the corner of University and
Florence streets, his new market being
the main Corner Store Room. This
wonder market is a palace of marble.
The counters are of marble and glass
and the latest word in modern sanita
tion. The woodwork is finished in
French gray and the walls in gray
with green trimmings. Cold storage
plant is of the latest modern auto
matic control and the best that money
can buy.
There is not a question in tlie
writer's mind but what this is one of
the most modern and finest equipped
markets in the state of California.
Mr. Wagner owns a chain of mar
kets extending to San Jose and Hol
lister and most of his time is con
fined to the purchasing end of the bus
iness. He has been in the meat bus
iness so long that he doesn't guess at
the quality of meat when he buys. He
knows that they are the best, so, when
purchasing the meat from him you
don't have to worry about its not being
of the best quality.
He is still going to be known as
"The Meat Man" in his new market
and will give the same service and
high quality meats that has made him
such a success.
It will pay you to watch for his ad
vertisements appearing in the daily
papers.
(42) This article is about one of the
liveliest spots in Palo Alto. There is
something doing here most all of the
time, and especially after dinner or on

Light, complete with battery for 89 cents.
The Palo Alto Hardware Company Car
rie sa complete stock of crockery ware,
dishes in plain and open sets and the
finest aluminum and enameled ware in
the city. How long has this store been
established? What is tie special price
on the 50-piece set of Gold Band Potter
Chinaware? What make of electric
washer do they sell?
(47) Fitting feet is a matter of no
little importance, for there .ire a very
few people that enjoy the fitting of a
n<iw pair of shoes, even when they fit
perfectly. However, Thoit's Shoe Store
is a firm that is noted all over the Coast
for its ability to produce shoes that
"feel just like the old ones." They are
the local distributors of Hanan Shoes
and other reputable makes of more mod
erate price. This store is a home store.
Its management is a good example to
follow, for courtesy and personal ser
vice is its aim. It is needless to speak
of the quality of their shoes, as this is
too well known, but we will say that they
carefully select as to quality, workman
ship and style. Their wearing qualities,
as well as looks, are second to none.
When you have met the proprietor of
the local firm you will have met a man
that is all for Stanford and Palo Alto.
Where is their modern shoe store lo
cated? How many members of the fam
ily can they fit in shoes? When was
this business established?
(48) There is one photographer in.
Palo Alto, "An Artistic Photographer,"'
who has gained a national reputation
and holds first prize in America for ex
cellency of work. He now has por
traits on exhibition in the National Salon.
Has also been awarded highest honors
in the states of New York, Ohio and
Michigan. He has probably photo
graphed more prominent and profes
sional people than any photographer in
America. Was with Hartsook Studios
for the past eleven years, specializing
principally in photographing moving pic
ture stars and theatricals in general. A
visit to his studio, 126 University ave
nue, which was formerly the Davey
Studio, will convince the most skeptical
of the superiority of his work. Who is
this artist who has made it possible for
the Palo Alto people to get something
different, something highly artistic*
without having to go to the larger
cities? And what makes a successful
artistic portrait? Remember Friend
ship's Perfect Gift—Your Photo.
(49) There is a wonderful industry
in this city that 1 belit*vo many do not
know about. Why is it so many people
go to San Francisco to purchase their
gifts when right here in Palo Alto there
is a shop that is known by exclusive
shops all over the United States and
whose goods have gone to England..
Australia, and Honolulu? Miss Herrick
conducts a shop the year round to servj;
you. When you are thinking of gifts,
go first to Miss Herrick's and you will
be surprised at the exclusive articles
you will find there and more reasonably
priced than elsewhere. This Studio must,
be seen to be appreciated. Give us the
names of two articles just received from
India. Tell us three articles made ex
clusively in Herrick Studios and sold
all over the United States.
(50) Here is one of the busiest stores
in Palo Alto. Segar Service Shop. Be
lieve me, the proprietor sure is popular
with the young fellows. There never is
a time but what you will see a bunch in
his store. The reason for that is his
service to every one, no matter if you
only buy a package of cigarette papers*
or if it is a brier pipe, you get the same
courteous treatment. A large assortment
of pipes have just arrived for the Christ
mas trade. Also jars of smoking to
bacco. A complete line of magazines
are carried here. In connection with this
modern Cigar Store we have a real Ser
vice Barber Shop, operated by Mr. Par
vin. They are all union barbers and ex
pert haircutters. This shop is the oldest
in town. If you only want a shave, don't
be afraid to come here. These barbers
don't bother the life out of you selling
you something else in the shop. Try
these boys the first chance you get. Get
an Almond Meal and Peroxide Steam
Facial Massage. Tell us Mr. Parvin's
first name. Tell us how many maga
zines Mr. Corns has for sale at the
Cigar Counter. Give us the exact loca
tion of these two establishments.
(1) Think of the countless obstacles
the pioneers of old had to overcome
as they journeyed forth to lay the
foundation for a future that might
hold some promise' for them. Some
achieved their goal, others failed. Then
consider your own environment and
chances for the future. Your lot is a
path of roses compared with that of
tho pioneers. jfist lay aside a small
amount each week and start an ac
count with the First National Bank of
Palo Alto. They have a capital of
$100,000.00, and $24,000 surplus, and
are members of the Federal Reserve
System of Banking. The officers and
everyone connected with this bank
have always practiced service and
courtesy to their patrons. You are
treated with consideration whether
you are a large or small depositor or
whether you are a temporary visitor in
this favored locality. A man putting
his money in a bank should always
make sure that the institution is finan
cially solid and this is just such a
bank. They pay 4 per cent interest on
Term Deposits. Name the directors of
this banking institution. What is the
margin of security including stock
holders' liability?

(2) In purchasing jewelry, the buyer
puts more faith in the seller than any
other commodity that men buy and
sell. This article is about a jewelry
store that has been in business in
Palo Alto for a number of years, and
their reputation for being dependable
is second to none. In addition to their
exceptional stock of watches, jewelry,
rings, SILVERWARE, cut glass, etc.,
they do expert watch and jewelry re
pairing. This is the store to select your
•"Gifts That Last." Nielsen and Culver
are the kind of fellows we like to men
tion in our columns, because they have
a sociable and intelligent personality
—ones who know how to make friends
and keep them. Go see this store and
look over their high class line of jew
elry and you are sure to make all of
your purchases in this line from them.
Every article they sell not only bears
the guarantee of the manufacturers,
but their personal guarantee goes with
it as well. If you have a broken piece
of jewelry, no matter how fine it is,
they will repair it for you. What are
Mr. Culver'? initials, and where is
their store located. Also what other
department do they conduct? What is
their leading line of Silverware?

(3) It ticV les everybody's vanity to
a certain dc pre e to have his friends
say how we ! his homo is furnished,
and perhaps many of these friends se
cretly wish they knew where they
could buy furniture of equal looks.
There is no secret of obtaining the
right kind cf furniture if one knows
the place to shop. The Palo Alto Fur
niture Company is such a place. They
not only hf nd!e high-class furniture
for the parlor, bofl-roora and dining
room, but their kitchen department is
well stocked with ranges and
utensils and for the floor they have
Linoleum of the latest designs and
patterns. It is easily cleaned and al-

Introducing to You the Live Progressive Firms and People Who Make
up the Business Interests of Palo Alto
First Prize —$10.00 Theatre Tickets contributed by
* VARSITY AND STANFORD THEATRES
Second Prize —One Dozen Photographs contributed by
SHATTUCK STUDIOS
Third Prize —One Hand Painted Oil Picture of Chapel
contributed by FREEMAN'S ART STORE
Fourth Prize —One Box of Chancellor (after dinner) Cigars
contributed by FRANKLIN'S SMOKE HOUSE

ways sanitary. Just go to this store !
once and let them show you their col
lection of home furnishings. They are
sure to suit your individual taste, no
matter how exacting. They are featur
ing a complete line of stoves and
ranges. The best in the world is
Wedgewood. Where is this large fur
niture store located? and what make
of water heaters do, they recommend?
How many square feet of Inlaid Lin
oleum are they now laying in the Rus
sel Cafeteria?

(4) No matter who you are and what
your life is, it can be made happier
and better through the influence of
music. This up-to-date store that we
are writing about is the home of the
best there is in music, and they are
representatives for Brunswick and
Columbia phonographs. The Music
Shop at 273 University Avenue is the
music house of Palo Alto, for they not
only carry and sell phonographs and
pianos, but they carry all kinds of
musical instruments, sheet music,
player rolls and records. If you are
fond of string instruments, they have
anything from the ukelele to the cello.
They are exclusive representatives in
Palo Alto for two well-known phono
graphs which are recognized for their ;
many exceptional qualities. These ma
chines play disc records of any make.
If you like a lot of noise moulded into
music, then they have drums for your
choice. The proprietor here is a music
loving man, himself, and he delights in
showing his line to patrons. A visit
from you will be appreciated. What
make of Band Instruments does he
carry? Who are the manufacturers of
the Victor and Brunswick? What is
the price of the Gretsch Sac., Melody
C, Finish No. 2?

(5) Two of the best places to eat in j
Palo Alto are home and here. That is
what the editor thought after trying
one of this restaurant home-cooked
meals. All of you people do not know
of this restaurant or you would be
Johnny on the spot every time Old
Man Hunger gripped your frame. They
not only cater to the man who is in a
hurry with counter service but they
have linen-covered tables for the
ladies. However, the same service is
had at both places and at the same
prices. If you have lots of time to sit
and enjoy your meal, then sit at the
tables, but if you are a business man
with only a few minutes to "grab"
your lunch, the counter service will be
most ideal. The location of this home
like place is 105 Alma Street. The
proprietor of this restaurant has a
most affable manner and he does all
in his power to please his patrons.;
Anything that you want is not too
much trouble for him to get. He uses
the best grade of meats and come
fresh from the meat market when he
needs them and not a week before, j
Who is the energetic proprietor of the
"Popular" restaurant? What is the
price of their noon lunch? What brand
of coffee do they use? How much are
their meal tickets?

(6) Clothes cost too much money to
be carelessly cleaned and pressed, i
Your tailor should be picked just as
your doctor or your grocer. It is just
as important. If you send your clothes
to first one cleaner and then anothf r,
in the ert'd your clothes will be ruined,
and with none to blame but yourself.
The Stanford Dyeing and Cleaning
Works commands a high position in
the cleaning and pressing business of
Palo Alto, and they always guarantee
their work. These people know how to
press a suit. They press it to its
natural form and not "against the
srain." They also use an odorless pro
cess in their cleaning and every meth
od of handling clothes that is modern
is used by them. They have a call and
delivery system and for them to keep
your wardrobe in prefect trim at all
times is no trouble for you. They will
call at your home at regular intervals
tor your clothes and return them
promptly. This prompt service is a
great item in their business. They also
do repairing. What does this firm
charge for cleaning and pressing a
suit, and where is their plant located?
What does 444 mean?

(7) Chiropractic was born 27 years
•,'Ko. The suspicion, distrust and re
sentful criticism aimed at it in the

beginning has been dispelled. Chiro
practors have proven their worth in
healing the sick and lame with their
chiropractic adjustments. With all of
this human service in California they
were held under the yoke of the med
ical board. But thanks to the fair
minded people of this state, that is
over.
Dr. Minor and Dr. Hall wish to thank
all Iheir friends for the support they
gave them. These two doctors are
graduates of the Palmer School of
Chiropractic in Davenport, lowa. They
have practiced Chiropractic for years.
People come for miles around to Doc
tors Minor and Hall.
They are located at 153 University
Avenue. Give both the 'doctors' first
names and give two reasons why Chi
ropractic is beneficial to one's health.

(8) Don't junk your old tires. Take
them to a reliable tire shop and get
their opinion on their condition. They
may be vulcanized and run for several
thcHtsand miles more. And if you want
an honest opinion as to this, take your
tires to Palo Alto Vulcanizing Works.
Tires are this man's sole business,
and we make no mistake when we say
that he knows his business thoroughly.
Vhen he has patched a tube or vul
canized a "shoe" for you, then he has
made a friend. A guarantee goes with
evefy job he does and this is a guar
antee of absolute satisfaction. There
is no money value set on it, but it is a
personal guarantee that you get what
you want and no matter what it cost
him, he'll see that you get it. In addi
tion to the vulcanizing and repair de
partment, this man also carries a stock
of Goodyear tires and he has y ur size.
You don't want to meet a more con
genial man than Mr. Bogges with a
smile for you. Where is the shop lo
cated? What is his price for a Good
year Ford all-weather fabric tire?
What is the price of the 40x10 solid
truck tire that Mr. Bogges has in his
window?

(9) It is a source of discomfort and
worry for some people to buy a new
pair of shoes, but if you are careful in
selecting the correct size in the right
grade of shoes, you will not have this
inconvenience to contend with. At the
Lentos Shoe Store they will not only
sell you a new pair of shoes, but they
will make your old ones like new for
you. They conduct a modern electrical
shoe repairing shop in connection with
the shoe store and they do the work
just like it is done at the factories.
Let your next pair of shoes come from
this store and they will last you much
longer, for when you have worn off
the original soles, just return them
and they will put new ones on at a
small cost. They use the very best
double wear genuine leather soles and
the name and trade mark is stamped
cn them. When you have work done
here, it is well guaranteed, and there
is something back of the guarantee.
Then if it is in the power of these
people to do you a good turn, they
certainly will take pleasure in doing
it. They work for others as well as
themselves. What brand of pure
leather do they use on their soles, and
where is the store located?

. (10) Is milk and cream an important
part of your daily meals? If not, you
are one out of a hundred. Then with
this in view, it is only natural for peo
ple to be sure that their milk and
cream is' absolutely light. And to be
"right" it should contain a certain per
cent of butterfat, as well as be clean
and free from all foreign matter. The
milk, cream, butter and dairy products
you get at the Altomont Creamery are
all that the name implies—sanitary.
They feature pasteurized and guaran
teed dairy products. You can ask for
no better merchandise in this line. So
the next time you need any dairy
products of any sort, whether it be
butter, milk, cream, or cottage cheese,
just go to the Altomont Creamery. It
will be filled with satisfaction.
These people will give you service, as
their business depends upon it. If they
did not give you good service on your
first trip, you would not return again,
and they want your future friendship
and business. What is the location of
this firm's retail store, and what do
they get per quart for their milk. What
does pasteurized mean? and what does
guaranteed milk mean?

(11) When the pioneers blazed a
trail across the continent in '49 there
was also organized a man that blazed
the way in the paint industry, W. T.
Floyd. Since that time, this firm has
been beautifying Palo Alto with its
products. In addition to paints, they
also sell oils, glass, and if you are
looking for a waterproof paint, this is
the place to go. The Hadle Stormtight
Roof Paint firm has a very modern and
up-to-date store, and they are known
for their neatness and complete stock
of goods they carry. This store is a
credit to any city. This store which
this writing is for has the agency for
Acme Quality Paints and Varnishes,
the world's higest standard in paints.
Not only do they retail their products,
but wholesale as well. If you are a
paint man, you will know what firm we
are referring to for they carry one of
the largest stocks in these parts. What

is the name of this firm and what do
they recommend for floor varnish?
Just call at the local store and their
salesmen will gladly assist you. How
many square feet will a gallon of Acme
Quality Paint cover two coats?

(12) Just up the street at Mr. Ethen's
is he liveliest spot in Palo Alto. There is
something doing there most all of the
time and especially so after supper. It
is a place where gentlemen congregate
and exchange experiences of the day
over a friendly game of pocket bil
liards. But, in addition to the billiard
parlor, they also conduct a large bowl
ing alley and soda fountain where they
will make you a creamy milk shake
that will certainly make you return for
another in a short while. They are also
local agents for the United Cigar
Stores and carry a line of cigars that
cannot be had in any other establish
ment in the city. If you are looking for
a friend, you are sure to find him here.
It is a place where practically every
man frequents once in a while just for
the gentlemanly company he is sure to
find. If it is a box of candy you wisn
for your girl, then this is the place for
you to seek. They carry several differ
ent makes and it is kept in a specially
equipped refrigerator which insures
you of freshness at any time. How
many pocket pool tables have they?
What line of pipes do they carry? How
many alleys are there and name what
team is leading in the bowling tourna
ment now being conducted?

(13) Now comes a renowned meat
market which sells fresh meats. In
deed their meats are fresh. They make
it a point to keep them so, which is
responsible for the popularity and
wonderful business gained in the past
months. There are mrny tricks em
ployed by the meat buyers in judging
duality, and the Stanford Meat Com
pany is perfectly willing to share its
secrets with you. They buy only the
best, but they want you to know at
the time of your purchase that you
are getting what you want. Cleanli
ness is the watchword of this market.
The business is so great that their
daily purchases keep their meats
fresh. They seldom carry much over
from one day to another. We enjoy
writing about this market and its
owner for several reasons. One is they
say "never mind about buying, just
come in and look the good things
over." Give exact address. How long
have they been established? What are
their phone numbers? How often do
they get fresu fish at this market?

(14) In buying drugs, you want the
best, including purity and service,
which are two essential things to con
s'der when selecting from which to
buy these needs. Impure drugs are
worse than none at all, and poor ser
vice means aggravation and annoy
ance. Only the best drugs are ever
handled at the Young Drug Company
at the corner of University avenue
and Florence street. The proprietor
is a registered pharmacist and he en
deavors to keep a stock that will
meet with all requirements and cus
tomers do not have to go elsewhere
for anything usually found in an up-to
date drug store. In addition to drugs,
they carry a large stock of perfumery,
toilet articles, safety razors, and if
you happen to have a sweet tooth,
their candies will be appealing to you.
This store has the agency for all of
the Owl products, so you may obtain
these goods right here at home. What
is Ihe proprietor's name? Also what
line of remedies do they handle? What
is "Pom Pom" Luster?

(15) We are now presenting a firm
where fresh staple and fancy groceries
can be secured. It is a concern with
a conscience, and has an aim to please
the hard-to-suit in their lines. In fact,
you can close your eyes and buy here,
and every sale carries a guarantee of
satisfaction, and a little profit is all
they ask. Now just stop a second and
say to yourself, "Where is the best
stock of fruits, vegetables and gro
ceries carried in Palo Alto?" The best
brands of everything are the distin
guishing characteristics of this store,
along with its sanitary aspect. It is a
source of personal satisfaction to the
writer to write about this "quality"
store and the proprietor, Mr. Earle,
Ever since he started, years ago, his
popularity has met with a steady in
crease. He is not only a popular mer
chant. but is an alert business man,
and his idea is to always make the
place home-like when you do business
with him or his clerks, and so far he
has succeeded, and if he can make
Palo Alto a better city you can depend
upon him to take off his coat, roll up
his sleeves and help put it over. He
has for those who need it, a smile,
and has won their business or confi
dence. No merchant in Palo Alto is
more popular with his customers than
the owner of this store. Name the
owner and give his first name in full,
location and phone.

(16) Here is a works that makes a
lot of noise in a legitimate way. It is a
sheet metal establishment. They have
been making a big noise
for some time. They make a
of tin and sheet iron, and a 112

cialties are tanks, and irrigating pipe,
.spouting, skylights, cornice as well as
tin and copper sheet metal specialties.
The expert tinner is a great necessity
i'or those owning homes or business
places, as they look to them for re
l airs and parts. To be efficient, they
must be skilled in their calling and
geniuses as well. And these things are
apparent at the Palo Alto Sheet Metal
Works. There are many ways of tin
ning that will not stand the test. These
people use the right way. The owners
of this shop believe it better to be on
the level with their customers than
to climb upward by a crooked path.
Such a firm as this we surely like to
include in our feature. In fact, we can
not say enough for them, for they de
serve much more than a mere word of
praise. They deserve sure success.
Who is the proprietor of this shop and
Low long have they been established
here. Where are they located? What
size Warm Air Heater does it take to
heat a 7-room house? and give the
price of it.

(17) When a business establish
ment has reached the heights of suc
cess and prominence, it is either cred
ited to the skillful management or to
the quality of merchandise they han
dle. At the enterprising store at 317
University Avenue both of these items
are responsible for their standing in
Palo Alto. The most prominent resi
dents of the city are among their cus
tomer list. Their costumes can always
be depended upon for beiug the latest
styles and the good quality never
varies. "Where there is quality, there
is style." The Style Shop is well
known for both. (The store is attrac
tively decorated and the merchandise
is displayed in such a manner that it
becomes a profound pleasure to shop
with them). Their courteous sales
women also render great assistance
with their timely suggestions of "what
is being worn" and you leave the store
pleased witn your visit, feeling that
you have wasted no time whatever.
What is the slogan of this enterpris
ing store. Tell name of this classy
store's proprietor. A Big Clearance
Sale is now going on at the Smart
Shop. Everything in the store is re
duced for this Sale.

(18) The most widely known and
recognized decorations for any and all
occasions are flowers. They are recog
nized internationally and more can be
said with a small bunch of flowers
than can be said with a dozen tele
grams or any other form of communi
cation. "Say it with flowers" is a fit
ting slogan for their usefulness and
worth. The one flower shop in Palo
Alto that has created a reputation for
having in stock all of the different
(lowers in season is known as the
Palo Alto Flower & Seed Shop. They
carry a complete line of flowers for
the dining room table, to ship to your
friends or pot flowers to decorate your
home and porches. When you desire
to remember yourself to a friend, this
is the one place to come for they will
make up a beautiful boquet for you.
The proprietor here likes flowers him
self, which is symbolic of happiness.
His disposition is also like that of a
flower, bright and full of cheer. Who
is this proprietor? What is the num
ber of the shop? What kind of seeds
does he carry? What are the names
of the jardiners that they are selling
that come from Japan?

(19) Who is there in this city en
gaged in correction and the conserva
tion of eyesight? Many have come to
him and received great relief when
troubled with eye defects. His strict
attention to his business has won for
him a host of friends and patrons. Dr.
Cochran will be found very busy at
his offices at 122 University avenue
and you will make no mistake in con
sulting him about your eyes. He has
passed the State Board of Optometry
examinations and is recognized for his
excellent work, and is also a graduate
Dr. of Optometry. In addition to
working on your eyes, he will replace
broken lenses or make you a complete
pair of glasses. The eyes are the win
dows of the soul and when they are
wrong, the body is handicapped, for,
without clear vision, we can't see the
world as it is. Eye troubles are often
started when young and your chil
dren's eyes should be examined before
it is too late. Make an appointment
•with Dr. Cochran and get his opinion.
His office is completely equipped with
all of the modern instruments used in
this work. What are Dr. Cochran's ini
tials, and what is the range of prices
for his glasses? What is the store
motto?

(20) Most men like to know where
they can find a good barber shop, as
they are very particular about per
sonal appearance. They demand satis
factory work. When I suggest Mar
quee's Barber Shop, I know what I'm
talking about. They have a very sani
tary little shop with all the modern
equipment, also including five modern
chairs. They specialize in all kinds of
shampooing, scalp and facial treat
ments. If you want your hair to have
jompadour cut, or any other kind,
t let Marquee's do it for you. If

you are having trouble with your
scalp, they can help you. Dixol is the
scalp treatment they recommend. They
also bob children's hair, so bring them
in the next time you are down town.
Just ask anyone who has visited Mar
quee's shop, and they will tell you
how well satisfied they were. Where
ic their shop located? What brands of
hair tonic do they use and recom
mend?

(21) A most important institution of
business in any city, town or commun
ity is the reliable drug store. Here it
is that we depend for our health. And
It ere is where we go when we want
toilet articles, kodak supplies, foun
tain pens and a hundred other luxuries
and necessities. The Kenyon & Crow
Store is known for its large and com
plete stock of all of these articles, and
in fact, anything found in a first-class
store. In addition to their general line
of pure drugs, assortments of high
class cosmetics and sundries, they are
tlie Penslar Store in Palo Alto. This
line of household remedies is com
plete. There is one for every possible
need or use. Now is the time to begin
to think about Christmas Gifts. A
large collection of hand-colored Christ
mas Cards have just arrived. They
are wonderful in design and color.
Fountain pens and Pen and Pencil sets
in Christmas Boxes make a very fine
pi esent to your student friends, or a
big box of gift stationery. At this store
they conduct the largest Kodak print
ing and developing business 011 the
Peninsula, handling a full line of East
man Kodaks and Cameras. One of
the big features of this store is their
framed pictures and mirrors. They
have a framing department and are
able to frame for you any size picture
with most any style mounting you
desire. What profit-sharing system do
they practice? Find out the four lead
ing perfumes they handle? In what
line do they excell all other concerns
in this locality? What are the pro
prietors' nicknames?

(22) There is a mail in this town
much wiser than his sires; he ran
into a bramble bush and punctured all
four tires. When he saw his tires
were wrecked, with all his might and
main, he went to this tire shop and
had them fixed again. One of the first
things to learn if you own an auto
mobile is to know what vulcanizing
nrm gives Service that Serves. The
Retread Shop is recognized for their
expert tire repairing. You should con
sult these doctors when your tires get
sick for they surely have the dope
that cures. You cannot help but like
this firm for those connected with it
make every effort possible to please
you. They will always go out of their
way to do a good turn for you, and if
you have tire trouble on the street,
just notify them and they will render
assistance People who do business
here are really proud .of ttie fact and
it is simply because they give what
the customers want and should have
—"Satisfaction." Go to this shop and
meet these tire men and then tell us
what make of tires they sell and what
their price for a Ford-size cord tire in
the make begins with "F." Give two
reasons why this tire is the best on
the market for its size.

(23) Pleasure of motoring is in
creased if your car is in good working
condition. It is, therefore, advisable to
have your car looked over before you
start on this trip and when you have
your car worked on, be sure of* your
garage. The Palo Alto Garage on Em
reson street is indeed a thoroughly
dependable establishment in regard to
their repairing. Mr. J. M. Blackburn
employs only expert mechanics. The
Palo Alto Garage has the agency for
the Durant car and many others such
as the Chandler, Cadillac, and Cleve
land. Have you seen the new 1923
model Durant. Just step in and let
them sTiow you what a wonderful mod
el it is. The proprietor of this garage,
Mr. J. M. Blackburn, personally super
vises the garage at all times, and as
sures you of prompt service whether
you are buying a spark plug or filling
your tank with gas. They have Ever-
Ready Battery service, and they also
carry Associated Gasoline. They want
satisfied customers at the Palo Alto
Garage. That is their motto. Give two
reasons why the Durant car is more
practical. What is Mr. Blackburn's
first jiame? How long have they been
established?

(24) In writing of the leading busi
ness firms and institutions of Palo
Alto, we have come across an inter
esting shop at 367 University Avenue,
that well deserves mentioning. No, it
won't interest you men, particularly—
but has an especial appeal to the wo
men of Palo Alio and vicinity who
are lovers of beautiful things. This at
tractive shop is fairly overflowing with
wonderful creations of Laces, Em
broideries, Frocks, and Sport Skirts,
Reads for the Miss and Mistress —at-
tractively displayed, and just a) at
tractively priced. These are only a
112» w of the many beautiful and useful
articles to be found in this modern,
up-to-date shop—and the proprietor
takes great pleasure in dispensing I
courteous and attentive service to
every patron. We want you to tell us
the name of this worth while shop—
also the proprietor's name and cor
rect address. What are their prices on
their dresses? What price on stamped
pillow cases? Also stamped dresser
scarfs which come in packages.
(25) Look prosperous and save
money at the same time. This is what
so many people are trying to do and |
cannot quite manage it. The reason is
that they do not know where to buy
economically and where to get goods
hat stand wear and look well. It is
not economy to buy a cheap "hand-me
down" suit of clothes. It is a waste of
money. If you have a suit made by
the tailor that this article is about,
you will get a suit of clothes that will
last. This tailor has been sixteen years
in Palo Alto and has the finest trade
on the Peninsula. Specialist on ladies'
tailoring and sport suits. He holds a
gold medal given to him at the Lewis
and Clark Exposition for designing.
You will be surprised at the chicness
as well as the exceedingly low price
he charges for a suit. And another fea
ture of this tailor, all of the tailoring
is done on the premises. He does not
take your order and send it to San
Francisco or New York. Who is this
progressive tailor? His establishment
is upstairs at 123 University avenue.
Better stop in and let him take your
measure and you select your pattern
and style at the same time.
(26) The best friend of womankingis
that which takes the grievous burdens
from her shoulders. No woman likes
to bend over washtubs or ironing
boards, and it is the mission of the
University French Laundry to per
form this highest physical service for
her. This laundry is almost our own
concern. It takes soiled linen and
turns it into attractive wearing ap
parel. It is an extensive industry, em
ploying many people. Wagons are sent
out in every direction in Palo Alto to
collect and deliver laundry and to keep
the various articles separated, so that
you don't get your neighbors' clothes,
is a job of a highly specialized order.
The methods used at this laundry are
thoroughly modern, and the machinery
equipment makes the work most satis
factory. The manager of this laundry
takes an active interest in the welfare
of Palo Alto and his absolute support
can be counted upon when anything
for the betterment of the city is in
progress. Who is this energetic man
ager, and where is the laundry lo
cated? How many employes has he?
What is the phone number?
(27) Well, here we are. Just what
interests all%women in Palo Alto. I
know when you go to that party or
dance you want to look charming. It
just requires a little personal atten
tion. You have often been to some pub
lic place and admired some ladies'
hair of the transparent texture of her
skin. The kind that is clear and
smooth. Well, you can have that charm
just the same as she. You go and see
Mrs. Marie Montgomery who has
charge of this exclusive Beauty Shop.
You will find every kind of modern
equipment desired in this shop, and
their work is very satisfactory. So
many girls have bobbed hair nowa
days, and they find it quite a task to
keep it looking well. Just drop into the
Montgomery Beauty Shop, and they
will marcelle your hair, and give the
ends a round curl which improves it
very much. You will find their egg
shampoo very invigorating. They spe
cialize in scalp and facial treatments.
They do hair waving and curling of
all kinds. What is one of the finest
scalp treatment? All kinds of facial
treatments are given by Mrs. Mont
gomery. Tell us the price of her
I'lactique Facial Treatment?
(28) What is the name of the store
that comes into your mind so clearly
when you speak of Art Goods? It is
Edwin R. Freeman's Art and Photo
Shop. There is no other place in the
city where they have such a large as
sortment of Wonderful Gifts to select
from. The writer cannot begin to tell
you of the hundreds of articles in this
store. The candlestick and framed and
unframed pictures are the best that
Mr Freeman could make and buy.
They have the largest picture fram
ing department on the Peninsula, giv
ing you the largest assortment of
frames to choose from. Christmas sea
son is nearing. Your motto is to do
your shopping early, and if you are
looking for gifts to give your friends
that will make them long remembered
to you, go to Freeman's Art Store. If
you have a picture that you cherish,
bring it here and let them frame it, or
a negative, enlarge it. They have a
complete service for films, kodaks, and
enlarging. How is it that Mr. Freeman
can sell his Foto Art Prints cheaper
than others?
(29) Palo Alto with its amazing
wealth and attractive terms and prices

when you are indebted to the wide
awake firm at 111 Circle. Their long
experience, knowledge of values and
expert advice in such matters have
won for them a large number of satis
fled customers. Through their devotion
to the business of their clients, Mr.
Helm has gained an enviable reputa
tion. Whether it be the buying of a
home or the selection of a lot or acre
age, you can be sure of finding just
what you want at attractive terms and
price when you are dealing with this
firm. This company also has many
ranch lands, both raw and improved.
In fact, their operations along this line
is, indeed, second to none in Palo Alto.
They are authorities on ranch lands
and if you name the location, they can
come pretty close to telling you the
value. Therefore, their advice and per
sonal service in such matters is indeed
important. Just drop in at their office
and they will gladly assist you. They
have just moved to 111 Circle, former
ly at 257 University avenue. What is
the name of this firm and what other
line of business do they follow? What
is Mr. Helm's first name? What is the
name of Mr. Helm's new assistant?
(30) Did you ever notice how you
admire the clothes of others and can
not understand why you never look as
well when you know personally that
you spend more money on your wear
ing apparel than this particular fel
low? The secret can easily be solved
if you do your shopping at the right
place. To test this out, the next time
you need a suit of clothes, a hat, or
anything in the gents' furnishing line,
go to Wideman & Son. This is one
exclusive haberdashery. Their stock is
composed of such well-known makes
as Kuppenheimer Clothes, Knapp Felt
Hats and Caps, handled by only the
best stores, and the fact of the matter
is, their entire stock bears names just
as well-known and highly recommend
ed as these few mentioned. Winter is
here and now is the time to see that
you are equipped for it. You certainly
need a new suit or a new hat. If you
don't think you do, come here and
look at the difference in the style of
your old one and their new stock.
You'll change your mind immediately.
And another thing about this store:
everyone is courteous, even the clerks
greet you with a smile, and are glad
to show you everything. How long has
this firm been established? Give exact
address. What is their business agree
ment with customers?
(31) Here is just the place to visit
for lunches and home-made pastry. It
is known as Kapps lunchroom. They
serve a nice little lunch there, and the
coffee is delicious. It is a very clean,
sanitary shop, and you get quick ser
vice. They have home-made pies,
cakes, and doughnuts. The doughnuts
are those world-wide known "Bake
Rite." They sell for twenty-five cents
per dozen. When you are down town
drop into this shop. There is nothing
more tasty than hot doughnuts and
coffee. The process- by which these
doughnuts are made makes them light
er and fluffier than the average dough
nut. And those home-made pies such as
pumpkin and mince, certainly are en
joyable at this time of year. They also
serve a noon-day lunch for the busi
ness man that is a dandy. How many
chairs do thew have in this shop? How
many meat pies do they make a day
and what do they sell for? Give the
exact location of this shop?
(32) There is at least one cigar
store in Palo Alto that caters to
smokers and men who want the best
merchandise for their money. The
Franklin Smoke House makes a spe
cialty of fine cigars, all kinds of cigar
ettes and they carry a large stock of
tobaccos, pipes and smokers' acces
sories. The proprietors believe in giv
ing the people what they want and if
you happen to want something that is
not ordinarily carried in stock, just
let him know and he will order it for
you. If it is in the world, he will come
near gettng it for you. A Soda Foun
tain in connection with the Cigar Store
gives you a cold drink at any time.
Malted milks a specialty. You could
not think of a more suitable present
for a man than a box of cigars and
when you buy them, they should be
chosen by a man who knows you. The
proprietor will assist you. What are
the initials of this energetic proprietor
and what make of candy does he sell?
The Franklin Smoke House is the
most popular place in town for card
games. Bring your friends and play a
friendly game of "rummy." How many
card tables in this establishment?
(33) Where is the bakery where you
can get fresh bread —any and all kinds
of it? Where can you get "bread that
is light, doughnuts that delight, and
pies just right." This is the tale of a
bakery whose products bring to mind
mother's baking day. They are so good
that people come for blocks just to
buy right out of the oven. Their prod
ucts are baked under the most strin
gent sanitary conditions. It is entirely
fitting that the "Who's Who" should
call your attention to this bakery, for
in patronizing the Golden Poppy
Bakery, you not only get the best baked

goods, but you save money as well.
The mention of this name In Palo Alto !
tells a tale of quality goods in this line |
and every housewife is familiar with |
the name and the goods. The big fea
ture with this shop is the making of
whole wheat bread, made from the
finest of wheats, The manager meets
his trade personally and his own per
sonality is responsible to a large de
gree for the patronage which they
have. Who is the manager of this
local bakery and what system do they
use in baking? What are the best
sellers in French Pastry?
(34) A man is as old as he feels, but
a woman is as old as she looks. I won
der how many women in Palo Alto
know the value of personal appear
ance. It is one of the many things
women neglect. If you will just drop
in and see Madame Musy in the Wil
son building, 132 University avenue,
you will receive the personal atten
tion you have so long desired. Madame
Musy is there to please her patrons
and she desires satisfied customers.
It is every woman's idea to be beauti
ful and Madame Musy wishes to help
you. She has a wonderful shop and
does the finest work. Madame Musy is
known for the wonderful marcels she
known for the wonderful marcells she
will say that this is the nearest to
a natural wave that you ever have
had. Years of experience in this busi
ness is the answer for her excellent
work. If you will just give her a trial
I am sure you will be one of her
steady customers. How much does she
charge for a marcell? What is her
phone number? What does Madame
Musy recommend for falling hair?
(35) It tickles everybody's vanity to
a certain degree to have his friends
say how well his home is furnished,
and perhaps many of these friends
secretly wish they knew where they
could buy furniture of equal looks.
There is no secret in obtaining the
right kind of furniture if one knows
the place to shop. The Warren Furni
ture Company is such a place. They
not only handle high-class furniture
for the parlor, bedroom and dining
room, but their kitchen department is
well stocked with ranges and cooking
utensils, and for the floor they have
the Congoleum. This is recognized for
its qualities of not bulging and crack
ing. It's easily cleaned and always
sanitary. Just go to this store once
and let them show you their collection
of home furnishings. They are sure to
suit your individual taste, no matter
how exacting. They are featuring at
this time their Occidental Ranges and
Stoves. Where is this large furniture
store located, and what make of mat
tress do they recommend for its com
fort? They also sell them. W T hat make
of beds do they carry?
(36) Think of something good to eat
and then think of the Stanford Cafe.
They are synonymous. Not only do
they conduct a counter service that is
most appealing to the man who is in a
hurry but they have attractive tables
for those who have time to sit and
enjoy the meal from all angles. The
food at this cafe is prepared just as it
is at home. They would not think
about serving anything to their pat
rons that they would not eat them
selves and this is proof enough of its
purity. Sanitation is one of the chief
objectives of the proprietors of this
restaurant and is everywhere evident.
The service is rendered in a prompt
manner and you are not left studying
the menu all day. They take your or
der when you first sit down. This is
one thing the proprietors find that ap
peals to their customers. They want im
mediate service and they get it. They
also serve the finest of ice cream and
home-made pastry. Who is the pro
gressive proprietor of this cafe and
how many stools have they at the
gressive proprietors of this cafe and
cated? What brand of coffee do they
use?
(37) The most conveniently and cen
trally located market in Palo Alto to
do your shopping is the Palo Alto
Market. This market caters to the dis
criminating buyers of fresh and cured
meats. To the people that are careful
of the meats they eat, these people
are their friends. They handle nothing
but the very best inspected meats, and
the proprietor does not depend upon
the Federal and State authorities al
together. He makes a personal inspec
tion of them when they enter his
store. If they are not right, bingo!
they are sent back. When you enter
this establishment you are confronted
with an air of absolute cleanliness and
sanitation. Clean sawdust protects the
floor and the glass show cases and
marble counters make it impossible
for bits of meat to "hide" from the
scrutinizing eye of the butchers. The
market on a whole is kept in a state
of cleanliness that will meet the ap
proval of anyone. In fact, sanitation is
their main objective. What is the
exact location of this modern market
and what is their,phone number? How
long have they been established? What
line of hams do they carry? Also what
is their buying rule?

a holiday. It is a gentlemen's billiard I
parlor, conducted for gentlemen by gen
tlemen. Mr. Mahaney sees that these
principles are carried out in detail. At
Mahaney's they have live pool tables,
one snooker table and two billiard
tables, which gives every one a chance
to play the game they like. When you
get thirsty they have a soda fountain in
connection serving the finest of cold
drinks. All the standard brands of
cigars are carried here, and, believe me,
they are fresh. At their store No. 2,
next to the Stanford Theater, you will
find Mr. Krebs in charge, who is asso
ciated with Mr. Mahaney. A full line
of smokers' needs are carried here and
a big supply of cigars in boxes of 10,
25 and 50 in Christmas boxes will be
featured. Ladies' patronage is socilited
at this store. Get your Christmas Gifts
here for the men folks. What is Mr.
Mahaney's first name? Give the location
of store No. 1. What is Mr. Kreb's first
name?
(43) A famous banker once gave a
young man this advice: "Save your
money and look prosperous." We have
known young men to fail because they
did not realize the importance of being
well dressed. A good suit is a dis
tinctive asset to any man. If he is well
dressed, he immediately commands at
tention. If you want the right suit at
the right price, patronize Frazer & Co.
They are the home of good clothes in
Palo Alto, and in addition to these high
grade clothes, they carry such standard
lines of furnishings as Manhattan shirts
and Everwear hosiery. In fact, their
stock borders along high-class lines, and
it is the store in which to do your fall
shopping. They have many new styles,
cuts and materials awaiting your in
spection and their prices are very low,
consistent with the quality. The whole
store commands a high position in the
mercantile establishments of Palo Alto
because of the quality of merchandise
they handle. Meet these people and you
have met twentieth century merchants.
What make of clothing do they sell, and
what is the slogan of these clothes? Give
location, of the store.
(44) Just say "His Master's Voice"
and you have immediately spoken of the
best-known phonograph on the market.
The Victrola is made by pioneer manu
facturers in the business. It is the choice
of the greatest artists who indorse its
unerring register of the original voice
or instrument. Ralph C. Dodson's Music
Store, 340 University avenue, has Vic-,
trolas in many styles and prices. In
addition to the Victrolas this shop also
carries a large line of Victor records,
and new ones are added as soon as they
are released from the factory. A good
tip to the student is to have a "portable"
Victrola with you. If you want to dance
it is always handy and will give you
the music you like the best whenever
you want it. Go in and let them show
you their selection of Victrolas. They
will be glad to play for you any record
you would like to hear. You will ap
preciate meeting these people and they
will appreciate your patronage. Where
are the machines manufactured and how
long has this music shop been established?
What is the price of the style 100 Vic
trola? Have you heard the best seller
in records this month, "I Found a Four-
Leaf Clover," and what is the price of
this record ?
(45) Let's go to the movies. This
expression often shakes away gloom and
dullness and you gladly join the happy
ries a complete stock of crockery ware,
see a regular show. By "movies" the
people of Palo Alto mean the Varsity
and Stanford theaters. They know that
at these playhouses they will see the
best of screen offerings at prices con
sistent with conditions. These two cozy
theaters give the patrons day in and day
out the best in film plays that money
can buy. To those few in Palo Alto
that have not had the pleasure of at
tending these two modern playhouses,
they are missing one of the great joys
of life. The products of the most gifted
imaginations of the world are beautifully
and artistically portrayed with an ac
companiment of the finest of organ
music. You should get their regular
weekly program, which gives you the
names of the shows and the nights upon
which they will be exhibited. Tell us
the manager's name of the Varsity The
ater and how many seats have they?
Give us the exact location of the Stan
ford Theater. What is the Big Special
picture coming there next Monday?
(46) You may say what you want,
but say "Hardware" and the minds of
the people of Palo Alto will revert
automatically to the Palo Alto Hard
ware Company, "The Winchester Store."
This firm carries a complete line of
hardware, consisting of carpenters' and
mechanics' tools of every description;
cutlery as well as builders' hardware,
sporting goods, Bass Hcuter Paints,
Pennsylvania Vacuum Cup Tires—in
fact, everything you would expcct to find
in a modern up-to-date hardware store.
The Palo Alto Hardware Company is
known as the "Winchester Store," carry
ing a full line of Winchester products.
The Winchester Company puts out one
article each month at a special price—
the public are looking forward each
month for these big specials. The special
for November is a Winchester Flash

(3S) Time is money. Save time and
money. Spend the ten minutes allowed
on your street car transfer, buying
Christmas Cards or forgotten station
ery supplies at llyde's, 370 University
avenue, right at the transfer point.
There are but two transfer points, the
depot and opposite Hyde's new store.
Tou can get a basket for your many
packages here or a beautifully decor
ated one to send as a Christmas gift.
If you want a Fountain Pen, which one
does Hyde's guarantee? If you want to
give stationery to your sister, which
of Hyde's brands would you choose?
Which will have the bigger sale at
Hyde's for the kiddies, "Kritters of the
Kitchen Kingdom," or "The Chickens
Eating Corn"? What line of goods is
being especially featured at Hyde's
besides sttftionery, school supplies,
fountain pens, pictures, picture frames,
baskets, candles, beads, games, toys,
favors, memory books, and albums?
Call at Hyde's at the transfer point,
and they can answer the above ques
tions and also give you many sugges
tions for charming and inexpensive
Christmas presets. Their new store is
one of the finest of its kind in P. A.
(39) It is every man's wish to own
his own home. It makes for family
contentment and happiness. It saves
paying rent.
The University Realty Company sp&-
j cializes in providing people with
homes. Consult them as you would any
specialist.
Years of experience in this com
munity stands back of the University
Realty Company.
This Company can serve you in the
purchase or sale of real estate, in writ
ing all kinds of insurance, in renting
and leasing, in fact, in all matters per
taining to real estate and insurance.
How long has this Company been in
business in Palo Alto? Name one in
surance company that it represents.
(40) If you want to make your
friends happy, present them with a
good photograph of yourself. A photo
graph is a token of real friendship,
and is highly appreciated by everyone.
And when you are in Palo Alto and
desire a portrait of yourself and are
not satisfied with just ordinary work,
go to the Shattuck Studio and you will
be pleased. This is one man who is
"behind the camera, but not behind
the times." His portrait work is indic
ative of this. In his little studio on
University avenue he will be found
very busy most every day snapping
and developing and then touching up,
putting the finishing touches on, which
removes all blemishes. The art of fin
ishing portraits is not possessed by
everyone, but this photographer is in
deed an expert. Then, too, his prices
are exceedingly moderate, considering
the beauty and quality of work turned
out. You are always sure of a success
ful picture here. Do you know that
your picture is the only present your
friends cannot buy? Where is the
exact location of this studio? What
other photographic work do they do?
(41) Everyone knows Wagner, "The
Meat Man." He is a master in the meat
business. He came to Palo Alto eight
years ago and started business in a
small market in a small way on High
street. Today his business has ex
panded to such an extent that it has
outgrown the old market.
Mr. Wagner says he doesn't take the
credit for making his business what it
is in Palo Alto, but owes it to Mr. N.
Benson who has been with him ever
since he has located in this vicinity
and who will continue to manage the
local market. Mr. Benson has a great
many friends here in Palo Alto.
Mr. Wagnor owns the block of four
stores on the corner of University and
Florence streets, his new market being
the main Corner Store Room. This
wonder market is a palace of marble.
The counters are of marble and glass
and the latest word in modern sanita
tion. The woodwork is finished in
French gray and the walls in gray
with green trimmings. Cold storage
plant is of the latest modern auto
matic control and the best that money
can buy.
There is not a question in tlie
writer's mind but what this is one of
the most modern and finest equipped
markets in the state of California.
Mr. Wagner owns a chain of mar
kets extending to San Jose and Hol
lister and most of his time is con
fined to the purchasing end of the bus
iness. He has been in the meat bus
iness so long that he doesn't guess at
the quality of meat when he buys. He
knows that they are the best, so, when
purchasing the meat from him you
don't have to worry about its not being
of the best quality.
He is still going to be known as
"The Meat Man" in his new market
and will give the same service and
high quality meats that has made him
such a success.
It will pay you to watch for his ad
vertisements appearing in the daily
papers.
(42) This article is about one of the
liveliest spots in Palo Alto. There is
something doing here most all of the
time, and especially after dinner or on

Light, complete with battery for 89 cents.
The Palo Alto Hardware Company Car
rie sa complete stock of crockery ware,
dishes in plain and open sets and the
finest aluminum and enameled ware in
the city. How long has this store been
established? What is tie special price
on the 50-piece set of Gold Band Potter
Chinaware? What make of electric
washer do they sell?
(47) Fitting feet is a matter of no
little importance, for there .ire a very
few people that enjoy the fitting of a
n<iw pair of shoes, even when they fit
perfectly. However, Thoit's Shoe Store
is a firm that is noted all over the Coast
for its ability to produce shoes that
"feel just like the old ones." They are
the local distributors of Hanan Shoes
and other reputable makes of more mod
erate price. This store is a home store.
Its management is a good example to
follow, for courtesy and personal ser
vice is its aim. It is needless to speak
of the quality of their shoes, as this is
too well known, but we will say that they
carefully select as to quality, workman
ship and style. Their wearing qualities,
as well as looks, are second to none.
When you have met the proprietor of
the local firm you will have met a man
that is all for Stanford and Palo Alto.
Where is their modern shoe store lo
cated? How many members of the fam
ily can they fit in shoes? When was
this business established?
(48) There is one photographer in.
Palo Alto, "An Artistic Photographer,"'
who has gained a national reputation
and holds first prize in America for ex
cellency of work. He now has por
traits on exhibition in the National Salon.
Has also been awarded highest honors
in the states of New York, Ohio and
Michigan. He has probably photo
graphed more prominent and profes
sional people than any photographer in
America. Was with Hartsook Studios
for the past eleven years, specializing
principally in photographing moving pic
ture stars and theatricals in general. A
visit to his studio, 126 University ave
nue, which was formerly the Davey
Studio, will convince the most skeptical
of the superiority of his work. Who is
this artist who has made it possible for
the Palo Alto people to get something
different, something highly artistic*
without having to go to the larger
cities? And what makes a successful
artistic portrait? Remember Friend
ship's Perfect Gift—Your Photo.
(49) There is a wonderful industry
in this city that 1 belit*vo many do not
know about. Why is it so many people
go to San Francisco to purchase their
gifts when right here in Palo Alto there
is a shop that is known by exclusive
shops all over the United States and
whose goods have gone to England..
Australia, and Honolulu? Miss Herrick
conducts a shop the year round to servj;
you. When you are thinking of gifts,
go first to Miss Herrick's and you will
be surprised at the exclusive articles
you will find there and more reasonably
priced than elsewhere. This Studio must,
be seen to be appreciated. Give us the
names of two articles just received from
India. Tell us three articles made ex
clusively in Herrick Studios and sold
all over the United States.
(50) Here is one of the busiest stores
in Palo Alto. Segar Service Shop. Be
lieve me, the proprietor sure is popular
with the young fellows. There never is
a time but what you will see a bunch in
his store. The reason for that is his
service to every one, no matter if you
only buy a package of cigarette papers*
or if it is a brier pipe, you get the same
courteous treatment. A large assortment
of pipes have just arrived for the Christ
mas trade. Also jars of smoking to
bacco. A complete line of magazines
are carried here. In connection with this
modern Cigar Store we have a real Ser
vice Barber Shop, operated by Mr. Par
vin. They are all union barbers and ex
pert haircutters. This shop is the oldest
in town. If you only want a shave, don't
be afraid to come here. These barbers
don't bother the life out of you selling
you something else in the shop. Try
these boys the first chance you get. Get
an Almond Meal and Peroxide Steam
Facial Massage. Tell us Mr. Parvin's
first name. Tell us how many maga
zines Mr. Corns has for sale at the
Cigar Counter. Give us the exact loca
tion of these two establishments.
(1) Think of the countless obstacles
the pioneers of old had to overcome
as they journeyed forth to lay the
foundation for a future that might
hold some promise' for them. Some
achieved their goal, others failed. Then
consider your own environment and
chances for the future. Your lot is a
path of roses compared with that of
tho pioneers. jfist lay aside a small
amount each week and start an ac
count with the First National Bank of
Palo Alto. They have a capital of
$100,000.00, and $24,000 surplus, and
are members of the Federal Reserve
System of Banking. The officers and
everyone connected with this bank
have always practiced service and
courtesy to their patrons. You are
treated with consideration whether
you are a large or small depositor or
whether you are a temporary visitor in
this favored locality. A man putting
his money in a bank should always
make sure that the institution is finan
cially solid and this is just such a
bank. They pay 4 per cent interest on
Term Deposits. Name the directors of
this banking institution. What is the
margin of security including stock
holders' liability?

(2) In purchasing jewelry, the buyer
puts more faith in the seller than any
other commodity that men buy and
sell. This article is about a jewelry
store that has been in business in
Palo Alto for a number of years, and
their reputation for being dependable
is second to none. In addition to their
exceptional stock of watches, jewelry,
rings, SILVERWARE, cut glass, etc.,
they do expert watch and jewelry re
pairing. This is the store to select your
•"Gifts That Last." Nielsen and Culver
are the kind of fellows we like to men
tion in our columns, because they have
a sociable and intelligent personality
—ones who know how to make friends
and keep them. Go see this store and
look over their high class line of jew
elry and you are sure to make all of
your purchases in this line from them.
Every article they sell not only bears
the guarantee of the manufacturers,
but their personal guarantee goes with
it as well. If you have a broken piece
of jewelry, no matter how fine it is,
they will repair it for you. What are
Mr. Culver'? initials, and where is
their store located. Also what other
department do they conduct? What is
their leading line of Silverware?

(3) It ticV les everybody's vanity to
a certain dc pre e to have his friends
say how we ! his homo is furnished,
and perhaps many of these friends se
cretly wish they knew where they
could buy furniture of equal looks.
There is no secret of obtaining the
right kind cf furniture if one knows
the place to shop. The Palo Alto Fur
niture Company is such a place. They
not only hf nd!e high-class furniture
for the parlor, bofl-roora and dining
room, but their kitchen department is
well stocked with ranges and
utensils and for the floor they have
Linoleum of the latest designs and
patterns. It is easily cleaned and al-

Introducing to You the Live Progressive Firms and People Who Make
up the Business Interests of Palo Alto
First Prize —$10.00 Theatre Tickets contributed by
* VARSITY AND STANFORD THEATRES
Second Prize —One Dozen Photographs contributed by
SHATTUCK STUDIOS
Third Prize —One Hand Painted Oil Picture of Chapel
contributed by FREEMAN'S ART STORE
Fourth Prize —One Box of Chancellor (after dinner) Cigars
contributed by FRANKLIN'S SMOKE HOUSE

ways sanitary. Just go to this store !
once and let them show you their col
lection of home furnishings. They are
sure to suit your individual taste, no
matter how exacting. They are featur
ing a complete line of stoves and
ranges. The best in the world is
Wedgewood. Where is this large fur
niture store located? and what make
of water heaters do, they recommend?
How many square feet of Inlaid Lin
oleum are they now laying in the Rus
sel Cafeteria?

(4) No matter who you are and what
your life is, it can be made happier
and better through the influence of
music. This up-to-date store that we
are writing about is the home of the
best there is in music, and they are
representatives for Brunswick and
Columbia phonographs. The Music
Shop at 273 University Avenue is the
music house of Palo Alto, for they not
only carry and sell phonographs and
pianos, but they carry all kinds of
musical instruments, sheet music,
player rolls and records. If you are
fond of string instruments, they have
anything from the ukelele to the cello.
They are exclusive representatives in
Palo Alto for two well-known phono
graphs which are recognized for their ;
many exceptional qualities. These ma
chines play disc records of any make.
If you like a lot of noise moulded into
music, then they have drums for your
choice. The proprietor here is a music
loving man, himself, and he delights in
showing his line to patrons. A visit
from you will be appreciated. What
make of Band Instruments does he
carry? Who are the manufacturers of
the Victor and Brunswick? What is
the price of the Gretsch Sac., Melody
C, Finish No. 2?

(5) Two of the best places to eat in j
Palo Alto are home and here. That is
what the editor thought after trying
one of this restaurant home-cooked
meals. All of you people do not know
of this restaurant or you would be
Johnny on the spot every time Old
Man Hunger gripped your frame. They
not only cater to the man who is in a
hurry with counter service but they
have linen-covered tables for the
ladies. However, the same service is
had at both places and at the same
prices. If you have lots of time to sit
and enjoy your meal, then sit at the
tables, but if you are a business man
with only a few minutes to "grab"
your lunch, the counter service will be
most ideal. The location of this home
like place is 105 Alma Street. The
proprietor of this restaurant has a
most affable manner and he does all
in his power to please his patrons.;
Anything that you want is not too
much trouble for him to get. He uses
the best grade of meats and come
fresh from the meat market when he
needs them and not a week before, j
Who is the energetic proprietor of the
"Popular" restaurant? What is the
price of their noon lunch? What brand
of coffee do they use? How much are
their meal tickets?

(6) Clothes cost too much money to
be carelessly cleaned and pressed, i
Your tailor should be picked just as
your doctor or your grocer. It is just
as important. If you send your clothes
to first one cleaner and then anothf r,
in the ert'd your clothes will be ruined,
and with none to blame but yourself.
The Stanford Dyeing and Cleaning
Works commands a high position in
the cleaning and pressing business of
Palo Alto, and they always guarantee
their work. These people know how to
press a suit. They press it to its
natural form and not "against the
srain." They also use an odorless pro
cess in their cleaning and every meth
od of handling clothes that is modern
is used by them. They have a call and
delivery system and for them to keep
your wardrobe in prefect trim at all
times is no trouble for you. They will
call at your home at regular intervals
tor your clothes and return them
promptly. This prompt service is a
great item in their business. They also
do repairing. What does this firm
charge for cleaning and pressing a
suit, and where is their plant located?
What does 444 mean?

(7) Chiropractic was born 27 years
•,'Ko. The suspicion, distrust and re
sentful criticism aimed at it in the

beginning has been dispelled. Chiro
practors have proven their worth in
healing the sick and lame with their
chiropractic adjustments. With all of
this human service in California they
were held under the yoke of the med
ical board. But thanks to the fair
minded people of this state, that is
over.
Dr. Minor and Dr. Hall wish to thank
all Iheir friends for the support they
gave them. These two doctors are
graduates of the Palmer School of
Chiropractic in Davenport, lowa. They
have practiced Chiropractic for years.
People come for miles around to Doc
tors Minor and Hall.
They are located at 153 University
Avenue. Give both the 'doctors' first
names and give two reasons why Chi
ropractic is beneficial to one's health.

(8) Don't junk your old tires. Take
them to a reliable tire shop and get
their opinion on their condition. They
may be vulcanized and run for several
thcHtsand miles more. And if you want
an honest opinion as to this, take your
tires to Palo Alto Vulcanizing Works.
Tires are this man's sole business,
and we make no mistake when we say
that he knows his business thoroughly.
Vhen he has patched a tube or vul
canized a "shoe" for you, then he has
made a friend. A guarantee goes with
evefy job he does and this is a guar
antee of absolute satisfaction. There
is no money value set on it, but it is a
personal guarantee that you get what
you want and no matter what it cost
him, he'll see that you get it. In addi
tion to the vulcanizing and repair de
partment, this man also carries a stock
of Goodyear tires and he has y ur size.
You don't want to meet a more con
genial man than Mr. Bogges with a
smile for you. Where is the shop lo
cated? What is his price for a Good
year Ford all-weather fabric tire?
What is the price of the 40x10 solid
truck tire that Mr. Bogges has in his
window?

(9) It is a source of discomfort and
worry for some people to buy a new
pair of shoes, but if you are careful in
selecting the correct size in the right
grade of shoes, you will not have this
inconvenience to contend with. At the
Lentos Shoe Store they will not only
sell you a new pair of shoes, but they
will make your old ones like new for
you. They conduct a modern electrical
shoe repairing shop in connection with
the shoe store and they do the work
just like it is done at the factories.
Let your next pair of shoes come from
this store and they will last you much
longer, for when you have worn off
the original soles, just return them
and they will put new ones on at a
small cost. They use the very best
double wear genuine leather soles and
the name and trade mark is stamped
cn them. When you have work done
here, it is well guaranteed, and there
is something back of the guarantee.
Then if it is in the power of these
people to do you a good turn, they
certainly will take pleasure in doing
it. They work for others as well as
themselves. What brand of pure
leather do they use on their soles, and
where is the store located?

. (10) Is milk and cream an important
part of your daily meals? If not, you
are one out of a hundred. Then with
this in view, it is only natural for peo
ple to be sure that their milk and
cream is' absolutely light. And to be
"right" it should contain a certain per
cent of butterfat, as well as be clean
and free from all foreign matter. The
milk, cream, butter and dairy products
you get at the Altomont Creamery are
all that the name implies—sanitary.
They feature pasteurized and guaran
teed dairy products. You can ask for
no better merchandise in this line. So
the next time you need any dairy
products of any sort, whether it be
butter, milk, cream, or cottage cheese,
just go to the Altomont Creamery. It
will be filled with satisfaction.
These people will give you service, as
their business depends upon it. If they
did not give you good service on your
first trip, you would not return again,
and they want your future friendship
and business. What is the location of
this firm's retail store, and what do
they get per quart for their milk. What
does pasteurized mean? and what does
guaranteed milk mean?

(11) When the pioneers blazed a
trail across the continent in '49 there
was also organized a man that blazed
the way in the paint industry, W. T.
Floyd. Since that time, this firm has
been beautifying Palo Alto with its
products. In addition to paints, they
also sell oils, glass, and if you are
looking for a waterproof paint, this is
the place to go. The Hadle Stormtight
Roof Paint firm has a very modern and
up-to-date store, and they are known
for their neatness and complete stock
of goods they carry. This store is a
credit to any city. This store which
this writing is for has the agency for
Acme Quality Paints and Varnishes,
the world's higest standard in paints.
Not only do they retail their products,
but wholesale as well. If you are a
paint man, you will know what firm we
are referring to for they carry one of
the largest stocks in these parts. What

is the name of this firm and what do
they recommend for floor varnish?
Just call at the local store and their
salesmen will gladly assist you. How
many square feet will a gallon of Acme
Quality Paint cover two coats?

(12) Just up the street at Mr. Ethen's
is he liveliest spot in Palo Alto. There is
something doing there most all of the
time and especially so after supper. It
is a place where gentlemen congregate
and exchange experiences of the day
over a friendly game of pocket bil
liards. But, in addition to the billiard
parlor, they also conduct a large bowl
ing alley and soda fountain where they
will make you a creamy milk shake
that will certainly make you return for
another in a short while. They are also
local agents for the United Cigar
Stores and carry a line of cigars that
cannot be had in any other establish
ment in the city. If you are looking for
a friend, you are sure to find him here.
It is a place where practically every
man frequents once in a while just for
the gentlemanly company he is sure to
find. If it is a box of candy you wisn
for your girl, then this is the place for
you to seek. They carry several differ
ent makes and it is kept in a specially
equipped refrigerator which insures
you of freshness at any time. How
many pocket pool tables have they?
What line of pipes do they carry? How
many alleys are there and name what
team is leading in the bowling tourna
ment now being conducted?

(13) Now comes a renowned meat
market which sells fresh meats. In
deed their meats are fresh. They make
it a point to keep them so, which is
responsible for the popularity and
wonderful business gained in the past
months. There are mrny tricks em
ployed by the meat buyers in judging
duality, and the Stanford Meat Com
pany is perfectly willing to share its
secrets with you. They buy only the
best, but they want you to know at
the time of your purchase that you
are getting what you want. Cleanli
ness is the watchword of this market.
The business is so great that their
daily purchases keep their meats
fresh. They seldom carry much over
from one day to another. We enjoy
writing about this market and its
owner for several reasons. One is they
say "never mind about buying, just
come in and look the good things
over." Give exact address. How long
have they been established? What are
their phone numbers? How often do
they get fresu fish at this market?

(14) In buying drugs, you want the
best, including purity and service,
which are two essential things to con
s'der when selecting from which to
buy these needs. Impure drugs are
worse than none at all, and poor ser
vice means aggravation and annoy
ance. Only the best drugs are ever
handled at the Young Drug Company
at the corner of University avenue
and Florence street. The proprietor
is a registered pharmacist and he en
deavors to keep a stock that will
meet with all requirements and cus
tomers do not have to go elsewhere
for anything usually found in an up-to
date drug store. In addition to drugs,
they carry a large stock of perfumery,
toilet articles, safety razors, and if
you happen to have a sweet tooth,
their candies will be appealing to you.
This store has the agency for all of
the Owl products, so you may obtain
these goods right here at home. What
is Ihe proprietor's name? Also what
line of remedies do they handle? What
is "Pom Pom" Luster?

(15) We are now presenting a firm
where fresh staple and fancy groceries
can be secured. It is a concern with
a conscience, and has an aim to please
the hard-to-suit in their lines. In fact,
you can close your eyes and buy here,
and every sale carries a guarantee of
satisfaction, and a little profit is all
they ask. Now just stop a second and
say to yourself, "Where is the best
stock of fruits, vegetables and gro
ceries carried in Palo Alto?" The best
brands of everything are the distin
guishing characteristics of this store,
along with its sanitary aspect. It is a
source of personal satisfaction to the
writer to write about this "quality"
store and the proprietor, Mr. Earle,
Ever since he started, years ago, his
popularity has met with a steady in
crease. He is not only a popular mer
chant. but is an alert business man,
and his idea is to always make the
place home-like when you do business
with him or his clerks, and so far he
has succeeded, and if he can make
Palo Alto a better city you can depend
upon him to take off his coat, roll up
his sleeves and help put it over. He
has for those who need it, a smile,
and has won their business or confi
dence. No merchant in Palo Alto is
more popular with his customers than
the owner of this store. Name the
owner and give his first name in full,
location and phone.

(16) Here is a works that makes a
lot of noise in a legitimate way. It is a
sheet metal establishment. They have
been making a big noise
for some time. They make a
of tin and sheet iron, and a 112

cialties are tanks, and irrigating pipe,
.spouting, skylights, cornice as well as
tin and copper sheet metal specialties.
The expert tinner is a great necessity
i'or those owning homes or business
places, as they look to them for re
l airs and parts. To be efficient, they
must be skilled in their calling and
geniuses as well. And these things are
apparent at the Palo Alto Sheet Metal
Works. There are many ways of tin
ning that will not stand the test. These
people use the right way. The owners
of this shop believe it better to be on
the level with their customers than
to climb upward by a crooked path.
Such a firm as this we surely like to
include in our feature. In fact, we can
not say enough for them, for they de
serve much more than a mere word of
praise. They deserve sure success.
Who is the proprietor of this shop and
Low long have they been established
here. Where are they located? What
size Warm Air Heater does it take to
heat a 7-room house? and give the
price of it.

(17) When a business establish
ment has reached the heights of suc
cess and prominence, it is either cred
ited to the skillful management or to
the quality of merchandise they han
dle. At the enterprising store at 317
University Avenue both of these items
are responsible for their standing in
Palo Alto. The most prominent resi
dents of the city are among their cus
tomer list. Their costumes can always
be depended upon for beiug the latest
styles and the good quality never
varies. "Where there is quality, there
is style." The Style Shop is well
known for both. (The store is attrac
tively decorated and the merchandise
is displayed in such a manner that it
becomes a profound pleasure to shop
with them). Their courteous sales
women also render great assistance
with their timely suggestions of "what
is being worn" and you leave the store
pleased witn your visit, feeling that
you have wasted no time whatever.
What is the slogan of this enterpris
ing store. Tell name of this classy
store's proprietor. A Big Clearance
Sale is now going on at the Smart
Shop. Everything in the store is re
duced for this Sale.

(18) The most widely known and
recognized decorations for any and all
occasions are flowers. They are recog
nized internationally and more can be
said with a small bunch of flowers
than can be said with a dozen tele
grams or any other form of communi
cation. "Say it with flowers" is a fit
ting slogan for their usefulness and
worth. The one flower shop in Palo
Alto that has created a reputation for
having in stock all of the different
(lowers in season is known as the
Palo Alto Flower & Seed Shop. They
carry a complete line of flowers for
the dining room table, to ship to your
friends or pot flowers to decorate your
home and porches. When you desire
to remember yourself to a friend, this
is the one place to come for they will
make up a beautiful boquet for you.
The proprietor here likes flowers him
self, which is symbolic of happiness.
His disposition is also like that of a
flower, bright and full of cheer. Who
is this proprietor? What is the num
ber of the shop? What kind of seeds
does he carry? What are the names
of the jardiners that they are selling
that come from Japan?

(19) Who is there in this city en
gaged in correction and the conserva
tion of eyesight? Many have come to
him and received great relief when
troubled with eye defects. His strict
attention to his business has won for
him a host of friends and patrons. Dr.
Cochran will be found very busy at
his offices at 122 University avenue
and you will make no mistake in con
sulting him about your eyes. He has
passed the State Board of Optometry
examinations and is recognized for his
excellent work, and is also a graduate
Dr. of Optometry. In addition to
working on your eyes, he will replace
broken lenses or make you a complete
pair of glasses. The eyes are the win
dows of the soul and when they are
wrong, the body is handicapped, for,
without clear vision, we can't see the
world as it is. Eye troubles are often
started when young and your chil
dren's eyes should be examined before
it is too late. Make an appointment
•with Dr. Cochran and get his opinion.
His office is completely equipped with
all of the modern instruments used in
this work. What are Dr. Cochran's ini
tials, and what is the range of prices
for his glasses? What is the store
motto?

(20) Most men like to know where
they can find a good barber shop, as
they are very particular about per
sonal appearance. They demand satis
factory work. When I suggest Mar
quee's Barber Shop, I know what I'm
talking about. They have a very sani
tary little shop with all the modern
equipment, also including five modern
chairs. They specialize in all kinds of
shampooing, scalp and facial treat
ments. If you want your hair to have
jompadour cut, or any other kind,
t let Marquee's do it for you. If

you are having trouble with your
scalp, they can help you. Dixol is the
scalp treatment they recommend. They
also bob children's hair, so bring them
in the next time you are down town.
Just ask anyone who has visited Mar
quee's shop, and they will tell you
how well satisfied they were. Where
ic their shop located? What brands of
hair tonic do they use and recom
mend?

(21) A most important institution of
business in any city, town or commun
ity is the reliable drug store. Here it
is that we depend for our health. And
It ere is where we go when we want
toilet articles, kodak supplies, foun
tain pens and a hundred other luxuries
and necessities. The Kenyon & Crow
Store is known for its large and com
plete stock of all of these articles, and
in fact, anything found in a first-class
store. In addition to their general line
of pure drugs, assortments of high
class cosmetics and sundries, they are
tlie Penslar Store in Palo Alto. This
line of household remedies is com
plete. There is one for every possible
need or use. Now is the time to begin
to think about Christmas Gifts. A
large collection of hand-colored Christ
mas Cards have just arrived. They
are wonderful in design and color.
Fountain pens and Pen and Pencil sets
in Christmas Boxes make a very fine
pi esent to your student friends, or a
big box of gift stationery. At this store
they conduct the largest Kodak print
ing and developing business 011 the
Peninsula, handling a full line of East
man Kodaks and Cameras. One of
the big features of this store is their
framed pictures and mirrors. They
have a framing department and are
able to frame for you any size picture
with most any style mounting you
desire. What profit-sharing system do
they practice? Find out the four lead
ing perfumes they handle? In what
line do they excell all other concerns
in this locality? What are the pro
prietors' nicknames?

(22) There is a mail in this town
much wiser than his sires; he ran
into a bramble bush and punctured all
four tires. When he saw his tires
were wrecked, with all his might and
main, he went to this tire shop and
had them fixed again. One of the first
things to learn if you own an auto
mobile is to know what vulcanizing
nrm gives Service that Serves. The
Retread Shop is recognized for their
expert tire repairing. You should con
sult these doctors when your tires get
sick for they surely have the dope
that cures. You cannot help but like
this firm for those connected with it
make every effort possible to please
you. They will always go out of their
way to do a good turn for you, and if
you have tire trouble on the street,
just notify them and they will render
assistance People who do business
here are really proud .of ttie fact and
it is simply because they give what
the customers want and should have
—"Satisfaction." Go to this shop and
meet these tire men and then tell us
what make of tires they sell and what
their price for a Ford-size cord tire in
the make begins with "F." Give two
reasons why this tire is the best on
the market for its size.

(23) Pleasure of motoring is in
creased if your car is in good working
condition. It is, therefore, advisable to
have your car looked over before you
start on this trip and when you have
your car worked on, be sure of* your
garage. The Palo Alto Garage on Em
reson street is indeed a thoroughly
dependable establishment in regard to
their repairing. Mr. J. M. Blackburn
employs only expert mechanics. The
Palo Alto Garage has the agency for
the Durant car and many others such
as the Chandler, Cadillac, and Cleve
land. Have you seen the new 1923
model Durant. Just step in and let
them sTiow you what a wonderful mod
el it is. The proprietor of this garage,
Mr. J. M. Blackburn, personally super
vises the garage at all times, and as
sures you of prompt service whether
you are buying a spark plug or filling
your tank with gas. They have Ever-
Ready Battery service, and they also
carry Associated Gasoline. They want
satisfied customers at the Palo Alto
Garage. That is their motto. Give two
reasons why the Durant car is more
practical. What is Mr. Blackburn's
first jiame? How long have they been
established?

(24) In writing of the leading busi
ness firms and institutions of Palo
Alto, we have come across an inter
esting shop at 367 University Avenue,
that well deserves mentioning. No, it
won't interest you men, particularly—
but has an especial appeal to the wo
men of Palo Alio and vicinity who
are lovers of beautiful things. This at
tractive shop is fairly overflowing with
wonderful creations of Laces, Em
broideries, Frocks, and Sport Skirts,
Reads for the Miss and Mistress —at-
tractively displayed, and just a) at
tractively priced. These are only a
112» w of the many beautiful and useful
articles to be found in this modern,
up-to-date shop—and the proprietor
takes great pleasure in dispensing I
courteous and attentive service to
every patron. We want you to tell us
the name of this worth while shop—
also the proprietor's name and cor
rect address. What are their prices on
their dresses? What price on stamped
pillow cases? Also stamped dresser
scarfs which come in packages.
(25) Look prosperous and save
money at the same time. This is what
so many people are trying to do and |
cannot quite manage it. The reason is
that they do not know where to buy
economically and where to get goods
hat stand wear and look well. It is
not economy to buy a cheap "hand-me
down" suit of clothes. It is a waste of
money. If you have a suit made by
the tailor that this article is about,
you will get a suit of clothes that will
last. This tailor has been sixteen years
in Palo Alto and has the finest trade
on the Peninsula. Specialist on ladies'
tailoring and sport suits. He holds a
gold medal given to him at the Lewis
and Clark Exposition for designing.
You will be surprised at the chicness
as well as the exceedingly low price
he charges for a suit. And another fea
ture of this tailor, all of the tailoring
is done on the premises. He does not
take your order and send it to San
Francisco or New York. Who is this
progressive tailor? His establishment
is upstairs at 123 University avenue.
Better stop in and let him take your
measure and you select your pattern
and style at the same time.
(26) The best friend of womankingis
that which takes the grievous burdens
from her shoulders. No woman likes
to bend over washtubs or ironing
boards, and it is the mission of the
University French Laundry to per
form this highest physical service for
her. This laundry is almost our own
concern. It takes soiled linen and
turns it into attractive wearing ap
parel. It is an extensive industry, em
ploying many people. Wagons are sent
out in every direction in Palo Alto to
collect and deliver laundry and to keep
the various articles separated, so that
you don't get your neighbors' clothes,
is a job of a highly specialized order.
The methods used at this laundry are
thoroughly modern, and the machinery
equipment makes the work most satis
factory. The manager of this laundry
takes an active interest in the welfare
of Palo Alto and his absolute support
can be counted upon when anything
for the betterment of the city is in
progress. Who is this energetic man
ager, and where is the laundry lo
cated? How many employes has he?
What is the phone number?
(27) Well, here we are. Just what
interests all%women in Palo Alto. I
know when you go to that party or
dance you want to look charming. It
just requires a little personal atten
tion. You have often been to some pub
lic place and admired some ladies'
hair of the transparent texture of her
skin. The kind that is clear and
smooth. Well, you can have that charm
just the same as she. You go and see
Mrs. Marie Montgomery who has
charge of this exclusive Beauty Shop.
You will find every kind of modern
equipment desired in this shop, and
their work is very satisfactory. So
many girls have bobbed hair nowa
days, and they find it quite a task to
keep it looking well. Just drop into the
Montgomery Beauty Shop, and they
will marcelle your hair, and give the
ends a round curl which improves it
very much. You will find their egg
shampoo very invigorating. They spe
cialize in scalp and facial treatments.
They do hair waving and curling of
all kinds. What is one of the finest
scalp treatment? All kinds of facial
treatments are given by Mrs. Mont
gomery. Tell us the price of her
I'lactique Facial Treatment?
(28) What is the name of the store
that comes into your mind so clearly
when you speak of Art Goods? It is
Edwin R. Freeman's Art and Photo
Shop. There is no other place in the
city where they have such a large as
sortment of Wonderful Gifts to select
from. The writer cannot begin to tell
you of the hundreds of articles in this
store. The candlestick and framed and
unframed pictures are the best that
Mr Freeman could make and buy.
They have the largest picture fram
ing department on the Peninsula, giv
ing you the largest assortment of
frames to choose from. Christmas sea
son is nearing. Your motto is to do
your shopping early, and if you are
looking for gifts to give your friends
that will make them long remembered
to you, go to Freeman's Art Store. If
you have a picture that you cherish,
bring it here and let them frame it, or
a negative, enlarge it. They have a
complete service for films, kodaks, and
enlarging. How is it that Mr. Freeman
can sell his Foto Art Prints cheaper
than others?
(29) Palo Alto with its amazing
wealth and attractive terms and prices

when you are indebted to the wide
awake firm at 111 Circle. Their long
experience, knowledge of values and
expert advice in such matters have
won for them a large number of satis
fled customers. Through their devotion
to the business of their clients, Mr.
Helm has gained an enviable reputa
tion. Whether it be the buying of a
home or the selection of a lot or acre
age, you can be sure of finding just
what you want at attractive terms and
price when you are dealing with this
firm. This company also has many
ranch lands, both raw and improved.
In fact, their operations along this line
is, indeed, second to none in Palo Alto.
They are authorities on ranch lands
and if you name the location, they can
come pretty close to telling you the
value. Therefore, their advice and per
sonal service in such matters is indeed
important. Just drop in at their office
and they will gladly assist you. They
have just moved to 111 Circle, former
ly at 257 University avenue. What is
the name of this firm and what other
line of business do they follow? What
is Mr. Helm's first name? What is the
name of Mr. Helm's new assistant?
(30) Did you ever notice how you
admire the clothes of others and can
not understand why you never look as
well when you know personally that
you spend more money on your wear
ing apparel than this particular fel
low? The secret can easily be solved
if you do your shopping at the right
place. To test this out, the next time
you need a suit of clothes, a hat, or
anything in the gents' furnishing line,
go to Wideman & Son. This is one
exclusive haberdashery. Their stock is
composed of such well-known makes
as Kuppenheimer Clothes, Knapp Felt
Hats and Caps, handled by only the
best stores, and the fact of the matter
is, their entire stock bears names just
as well-known and highly recommend
ed as these few mentioned. Winter is
here and now is the time to see that
you are equipped for it. You certainly
need a new suit or a new hat. If you
don't think you do, come here and
look at the difference in the style of
your old one and their new stock.
You'll change your mind immediately.
And another thing about this store:
everyone is courteous, even the clerks
greet you with a smile, and are glad
to show you everything. How long has
this firm been established? Give exact
address. What is their business agree
ment with customers?
(31) Here is just the place to visit
for lunches and home-made pastry. It
is known as Kapps lunchroom. They
serve a nice little lunch there, and the
coffee is delicious. It is a very clean,
sanitary shop, and you get quick ser
vice. They have home-made pies,
cakes, and doughnuts. The doughnuts
are those world-wide known "Bake
Rite." They sell for twenty-five cents
per dozen. When you are down town
drop into this shop. There is nothing
more tasty than hot doughnuts and
coffee. The process- by which these
doughnuts are made makes them light
er and fluffier than the average dough
nut. And those home-made pies such as
pumpkin and mince, certainly are en
joyable at this time of year. They also
serve a noon-day lunch for the busi
ness man that is a dandy. How many
chairs do thew have in this shop? How
many meat pies do they make a day
and what do they sell for? Give the
exact location of this shop?
(32) There is at least one cigar
store in Palo Alto that caters to
smokers and men who want the best
merchandise for their money. The
Franklin Smoke House makes a spe
cialty of fine cigars, all kinds of cigar
ettes and they carry a large stock of
tobaccos, pipes and smokers' acces
sories. The proprietors believe in giv
ing the people what they want and if
you happen to want something that is
not ordinarily carried in stock, just
let him know and he will order it for
you. If it is in the world, he will come
near gettng it for you. A Soda Foun
tain in connection with the Cigar Store
gives you a cold drink at any time.
Malted milks a specialty. You could
not think of a more suitable present
for a man than a box of cigars and
when you buy them, they should be
chosen by a man who knows you. The
proprietor will assist you. What are
the initials of this energetic proprietor
and what make of candy does he sell?
The Franklin Smoke House is the
most popular place in town for card
games. Bring your friends and play a
friendly game of "rummy." How many
card tables in this establishment?
(33) Where is the bakery where you
can get fresh bread —any and all kinds
of it? Where can you get "bread that
is light, doughnuts that delight, and
pies just right." This is the tale of a
bakery whose products bring to mind
mother's baking day. They are so good
that people come for blocks just to
buy right out of the oven. Their prod
ucts are baked under the most strin
gent sanitary conditions. It is entirely
fitting that the "Who's Who" should
call your attention to this bakery, for
in patronizing the Golden Poppy
Bakery, you not only get the best baked

goods, but you save money as well.
The mention of this name In Palo Alto !
tells a tale of quality goods in this line |
and every housewife is familiar with |
the name and the goods. The big fea
ture with this shop is the making of
whole wheat bread, made from the
finest of wheats, The manager meets
his trade personally and his own per
sonality is responsible to a large de
gree for the patronage which they
have. Who is the manager of this
local bakery and what system do they
use in baking? What are the best
sellers in French Pastry?
(34) A man is as old as he feels, but
a woman is as old as she looks. I won
der how many women in Palo Alto
know the value of personal appear
ance. It is one of the many things
women neglect. If you will just drop
in and see Madame Musy in the Wil
son building, 132 University avenue,
you will receive the personal atten
tion you have so long desired. Madame
Musy is there to please her patrons
and she desires satisfied customers.
It is every woman's idea to be beauti
ful and Madame Musy wishes to help
you. She has a wonderful shop and
does the finest work. Madame Musy is
known for the wonderful marcels she
known for the wonderful marcells she
will say that this is the nearest to
a natural wave that you ever have
had. Years of experience in this busi
ness is the answer for her excellent
work. If you will just give her a trial
I am sure you will be one of her
steady customers. How much does she
charge for a marcell? What is her
phone number? What does Madame
Musy recommend for falling hair?
(35) It tickles everybody's vanity to
a certain degree to have his friends
say how well his home is furnished,
and perhaps many of these friends
secretly wish they knew where they
could buy furniture of equal looks.
There is no secret in obtaining the
right kind of furniture if one knows
the place to shop. The Warren Furni
ture Company is such a place. They
not only handle high-class furniture
for the parlor, bedroom and dining
room, but their kitchen department is
well stocked with ranges and cooking
utensils, and for the floor they have
the Congoleum. This is recognized for
its qualities of not bulging and crack
ing. It's easily cleaned and always
sanitary. Just go to this store once
and let them show you their collection
of home furnishings. They are sure to
suit your individual taste, no matter
how exacting. They are featuring at
this time their Occidental Ranges and
Stoves. Where is this large furniture
store located, and what make of mat
tress do they recommend for its com
fort? They also sell them. W T hat make
of beds do they carry?
(36) Think of something good to eat
and then think of the Stanford Cafe.
They are synonymous. Not only do
they conduct a counter service that is
most appealing to the man who is in a
hurry but they have attractive tables
for those who have time to sit and
enjoy the meal from all angles. The
food at this cafe is prepared just as it
is at home. They would not think
about serving anything to their pat
rons that they would not eat them
selves and this is proof enough of its
purity. Sanitation is one of the chief
objectives of the proprietors of this
restaurant and is everywhere evident.
The service is rendered in a prompt
manner and you are not left studying
the menu all day. They take your or
der when you first sit down. This is
one thing the proprietors find that ap
peals to their customers. They want im
mediate service and they get it. They
also serve the finest of ice cream and
home-made pastry. Who is the pro
gressive proprietor of this cafe and
how many stools have they at the
gressive proprietors of this cafe and
cated? What brand of coffee do they
use?
(37) The most conveniently and cen
trally located market in Palo Alto to
do your shopping is the Palo Alto
Market. This market caters to the dis
criminating buyers of fresh and cured
meats. To the people that are careful
of the meats they eat, these people
are their friends. They handle nothing
but the very best inspected meats, and
the proprietor does not depend upon
the Federal and State authorities al
together. He makes a personal inspec
tion of them when they enter his
store. If they are not right, bingo!
they are sent back. When you enter
this establishment you are confronted
with an air of absolute cleanliness and
sanitation. Clean sawdust protects the
floor and the glass show cases and
marble counters make it impossible
for bits of meat to "hide" from the
scrutinizing eye of the butchers. The
market on a whole is kept in a state
of cleanliness that will meet the ap
proval of anyone. In fact, sanitation is
their main objective. What is the
exact location of this modern market
and what is their,phone number? How
long have they been established? What
line of hams do they carry? Also what
is their buying rule?

a holiday. It is a gentlemen's billiard I
parlor, conducted for gentlemen by gen
tlemen. Mr. Mahaney sees that these
principles are carried out in detail. At
Mahaney's they have live pool tables,
one snooker table and two billiard
tables, which gives every one a chance
to play the game they like. When you
get thirsty they have a soda fountain in
connection serving the finest of cold
drinks. All the standard brands of
cigars are carried here, and, believe me,
they are fresh. At their store No. 2,
next to the Stanford Theater, you will
find Mr. Krebs in charge, who is asso
ciated with Mr. Mahaney. A full line
of smokers' needs are carried here and
a big supply of cigars in boxes of 10,
25 and 50 in Christmas boxes will be
featured. Ladies' patronage is socilited
at this store. Get your Christmas Gifts
here for the men folks. What is Mr.
Mahaney's first name? Give the location
of store No. 1. What is Mr. Kreb's first
name?
(43) A famous banker once gave a
young man this advice: "Save your
money and look prosperous." We have
known young men to fail because they
did not realize the importance of being
well dressed. A good suit is a dis
tinctive asset to any man. If he is well
dressed, he immediately commands at
tention. If you want the right suit at
the right price, patronize Frazer & Co.
They are the home of good clothes in
Palo Alto, and in addition to these high
grade clothes, they carry such standard
lines of furnishings as Manhattan shirts
and Everwear hosiery. In fact, their
stock borders along high-class lines, and
it is the store in which to do your fall
shopping. They have many new styles,
cuts and materials awaiting your in
spection and their prices are very low,
consistent with the quality. The whole
store commands a high position in the
mercantile establishments of Palo Alto
because of the quality of merchandise
they handle. Meet these people and you
have met twentieth century merchants.
What make of clothing do they sell, and
what is the slogan of these clothes? Give
location, of the store.
(44) Just say "His Master's Voice"
and you have immediately spoken of the
best-known phonograph on the market.
The Victrola is made by pioneer manu
facturers in the business. It is the choice
of the greatest artists who indorse its
unerring register of the original voice
or instrument. Ralph C. Dodson's Music
Store, 340 University avenue, has Vic-,
trolas in many styles and prices. In
addition to the Victrolas this shop also
carries a large line of Victor records,
and new ones are added as soon as they
are released from the factory. A good
tip to the student is to have a "portable"
Victrola with you. If you want to dance
it is always handy and will give you
the music you like the best whenever
you want it. Go in and let them show
you their selection of Victrolas. They
will be glad to play for you any record
you would like to hear. You will ap
preciate meeting these people and they
will appreciate your patronage. Where
are the machines manufactured and how
long has this music shop been established?
What is the price of the style 100 Vic
trola? Have you heard the best seller
in records this month, "I Found a Four-
Leaf Clover," and what is the price of
this record ?
(45) Let's go to the movies. This
expression often shakes away gloom and
dullness and you gladly join the happy
ries a complete stock of crockery ware,
see a regular show. By "movies" the
people of Palo Alto mean the Varsity
and Stanford theaters. They know that
at these playhouses they will see the
best of screen offerings at prices con
sistent with conditions. These two cozy
theaters give the patrons day in and day
out the best in film plays that money
can buy. To those few in Palo Alto
that have not had the pleasure of at
tending these two modern playhouses,
they are missing one of the great joys
of life. The products of the most gifted
imaginations of the world are beautifully
and artistically portrayed with an ac
companiment of the finest of organ
music. You should get their regular
weekly program, which gives you the
names of the shows and the nights upon
which they will be exhibited. Tell us
the manager's name of the Varsity The
ater and how many seats have they?
Give us the exact location of the Stan
ford Theater. What is the Big Special
picture coming there next Monday?
(46) You may say what you want,
but say "Hardware" and the minds of
the people of Palo Alto will revert
automatically to the Palo Alto Hard
ware Company, "The Winchester Store."
This firm carries a complete line of
hardware, consisting of carpenters' and
mechanics' tools of every description;
cutlery as well as builders' hardware,
sporting goods, Bass Hcuter Paints,
Pennsylvania Vacuum Cup Tires—in
fact, everything you would expcct to find
in a modern up-to-date hardware store.
The Palo Alto Hardware Company is
known as the "Winchester Store," carry
ing a full line of Winchester products.
The Winchester Company puts out one
article each month at a special price—
the public are looking forward each
month for these big specials. The special
for November is a Winchester Flash

(3S) Time is money. Save time and
money. Spend the ten minutes allowed
on your street car transfer, buying
Christmas Cards or forgotten station
ery supplies at llyde's, 370 University
avenue, right at the transfer point.
There are but two transfer points, the
depot and opposite Hyde's new store.
Tou can get a basket for your many
packages here or a beautifully decor
ated one to send as a Christmas gift.
If you want a Fountain Pen, which one
does Hyde's guarantee? If you want to
give stationery to your sister, which
of Hyde's brands would you choose?
Which will have the bigger sale at
Hyde's for the kiddies, "Kritters of the
Kitchen Kingdom," or "The Chickens
Eating Corn"? What line of goods is
being especially featured at Hyde's
besides sttftionery, school supplies,
fountain pens, pictures, picture frames,
baskets, candles, beads, games, toys,
favors, memory books, and albums?
Call at Hyde's at the transfer point,
and they can answer the above ques
tions and also give you many sugges
tions for charming and inexpensive
Christmas presets. Their new store is
one of the finest of its kind in P. A.
(39) It is every man's wish to own
his own home. It makes for family
contentment and happiness. It saves
paying rent.
The University Realty Company sp&-
j cializes in providing people with
homes. Consult them as you would any
specialist.
Years of experience in this com
munity stands back of the University
Realty Company.
This Company can serve you in the
purchase or sale of real estate, in writ
ing all kinds of insurance, in renting
and leasing, in fact, in all matters per
taining to real estate and insurance.
How long has this Company been in
business in Palo Alto? Name one in
surance company that it represents.
(40) If you want to make your
friends happy, present them with a
good photograph of yourself. A photo
graph is a token of real friendship,
and is highly appreciated by everyone.
And when you are in Palo Alto and
desire a portrait of yourself and are
not satisfied with just ordinary work,
go to the Shattuck Studio and you will
be pleased. This is one man who is
"behind the camera, but not behind
the times." His portrait work is indic
ative of this. In his little studio on
University avenue he will be found
very busy most every day snapping
and developing and then touching up,
putting the finishing touches on, which
removes all blemishes. The art of fin
ishing portraits is not possessed by
everyone, but this photographer is in
deed an expert. Then, too, his prices
are exceedingly moderate, considering
the beauty and quality of work turned
out. You are always sure of a success
ful picture here. Do you know that
your picture is the only present your
friends cannot buy? Where is the
exact location of this studio? What
other photographic work do they do?
(41) Everyone knows Wagner, "The
Meat Man." He is a master in the meat
business. He came to Palo Alto eight
years ago and started business in a
small market in a small way on High
street. Today his business has ex
panded to such an extent that it has
outgrown the old market.
Mr. Wagner says he doesn't take the
credit for making his business what it
is in Palo Alto, but owes it to Mr. N.
Benson who has been with him ever
since he has located in this vicinity
and who will continue to manage the
local market. Mr. Benson has a great
many friends here in Palo Alto.
Mr. Wagnor owns the block of four
stores on the corner of University and
Florence streets, his new market being
the main Corner Store Room. This
wonder market is a palace of marble.
The counters are of marble and glass
and the latest word in modern sanita
tion. The woodwork is finished in
French gray and the walls in gray
with green trimmings. Cold storage
plant is of the latest modern auto
matic control and the best that money
can buy.
There is not a question in tlie
writer's mind but what this is one of
the most modern and finest equipped
markets in the state of California.
Mr. Wagner owns a chain of mar
kets extending to San Jose and Hol
lister and most of his time is con
fined to the purchasing end of the bus
iness. He has been in the meat bus
iness so long that he doesn't guess at
the quality of meat when he buys. He
knows that they are the best, so, when
purchasing the meat from him you
don't have to worry about its not being
of the best quality.
He is still going to be known as
"The Meat Man" in his new market
and will give the same service and
high quality meats that has made him
such a success.
It will pay you to watch for his ad
vertisements appearing in the daily
papers.
(42) This article is about one of the
liveliest spots in Palo Alto. There is
something doing here most all of the
time, and especially after dinner or on

Light, complete with battery for 89 cents.
The Palo Alto Hardware Company Car
rie sa complete stock of crockery ware,
dishes in plain and open sets and the
finest aluminum and enameled ware in
the city. How long has this store been
established? What is tie special price
on the 50-piece set of Gold Band Potter
Chinaware? What make of electric
washer do they sell?
(47) Fitting feet is a matter of no
little importance, for there .ire a very
few people that enjoy the fitting of a
n<iw pair of shoes, even when they fit
perfectly. However, Thoit's Shoe Store
is a firm that is noted all over the Coast
for its ability to produce shoes that
"feel just like the old ones." They are
the local distributors of Hanan Shoes
and other reputable makes of more mod
erate price. This store is a home store.
Its management is a good example to
follow, for courtesy and personal ser
vice is its aim. It is needless to speak
of the quality of their shoes, as this is
too well known, but we will say that they
carefully select as to quality, workman
ship and style. Their wearing qualities,
as well as looks, are second to none.
When you have met the proprietor of
the local firm you will have met a man
that is all for Stanford and Palo Alto.
Where is their modern shoe store lo
cated? How many members of the fam
ily can they fit in shoes? When was
this business established?
(48) There is one photographer in.
Palo Alto, "An Artistic Photographer,"'
who has gained a national reputation
and holds first prize in America for ex
cellency of work. He now has por
traits on exhibition in the National Salon.
Has also been awarded highest honors
in the states of New York, Ohio and
Michigan. He has probably photo
graphed more prominent and profes
sional people than any photographer in
America. Was with Hartsook Studios
for the past eleven years, specializing
principally in photographing moving pic
ture stars and theatricals in general. A
visit to his studio, 126 University ave
nue, which was formerly the Davey
Studio, will convince the most skeptical
of the superiority of his work. Who is
this artist who has made it possible for
the Palo Alto people to get something
different, something highly artistic*
without having to go to the larger
cities? And what makes a successful
artistic portrait? Remember Friend
ship's Perfect Gift—Your Photo.
(49) There is a wonderful industry
in this city that 1 belit*vo many do not
know about. Why is it so many people
go to San Francisco to purchase their
gifts when right here in Palo Alto there
is a shop that is known by exclusive
shops all over the United States and
whose goods have gone to England..
Australia, and Honolulu? Miss Herrick
conducts a shop the year round to servj;
you. When you are thinking of gifts,
go first to Miss Herrick's and you will
be surprised at the exclusive articles
you will find there and more reasonably
priced than elsewhere. This Studio must,
be seen to be appreciated. Give us the
names of two articles just received from
India. Tell us three articles made ex
clusively in Herrick Studios and sold
all over the United States.
(50) Here is one of the busiest stores
in Palo Alto. Segar Service Shop. Be
lieve me, the proprietor sure is popular
with the young fellows. There never is
a time but what you will see a bunch in
his store. The reason for that is his
service to every one, no matter if you
only buy a package of cigarette papers*
or if it is a brier pipe, you get the same
courteous treatment. A large assortment
of pipes have just arrived for the Christ
mas trade. Also jars of smoking to
bacco. A complete line of magazines
are carried here. In connection with this
modern Cigar Store we have a real Ser
vice Barber Shop, operated by Mr. Par
vin. They are all union barbers and ex
pert haircutters. This shop is the oldest
in town. If you only want a shave, don't
be afraid to come here. These barbers
don't bother the life out of you selling
you something else in the shop. Try
these boys the first chance you get. Get
an Almond Meal and Peroxide Steam
Facial Massage. Tell us Mr. Parvin's
first name. Tell us how many maga
zines Mr. Corns has for sale at the
Cigar Counter. Give us the exact loca
tion of these two establishments.
(1) Think of the countless obstacles
the pioneers of old had to overcome
as they journeyed forth to lay the
foundation for a future that might
hold some promise' for them. Some
achieved their goal, others failed. Then
consider your own environment and
chances for the future. Your lot is a
path of roses compared with that of
tho pioneers. jfist lay aside a small
amount each week and start an ac
count with the First National Bank of
Palo Alto. They have a capital of
$100,000.00, and $24,000 surplus, and
are members of the Federal Reserve
System of Banking. The officers and
everyone connected with this bank
have always practiced service and
courtesy to their patrons. You are
treated with consideration whether
you are a large or small depositor or
whether you are a temporary visitor in
this favored locality. A man putting
his money in a bank should always
make sure that the institution is finan
cially solid and this is just such a
bank. They pay 4 per cent interest on
Term Deposits. Name the directors of
this banking institution. What is the
margin of security including stock
holders' liability?

(2) In purchasing jewelry, the buyer
puts more faith in the seller than any
other commodity that men buy and
sell. This article is about a jewelry
store that has been in business in
Palo Alto for a number of years, and
their reputation for being dependable
is second to none. In addition to their
exceptional stock of watches, jewelry,
rings, SILVERWARE, cut glass, etc.,
they do expert watch and jewelry re
pairing. This is the store to select your
•"Gifts That Last." Nielsen and Culver
are the kind of fellows we like to men
tion in our columns, because they have
a sociable and intelligent personality
—ones who know how to make friends
and keep them. Go see this store and
look over their high class line of jew
elry and you are sure to make all of
your purchases in this line from them.
Every article they sell not only bears
the guarantee of the manufacturers,
but their personal guarantee goes with
it as well. If you have a broken piece
of jewelry, no matter how fine it is,
they will repair it for you. What are
Mr. Culver'? initials, and where is
their store located. Also what other
department do they conduct? What is
their leading line of Silverware?

(3) It ticV les everybody's vanity to
a certain dc pre e to have his friends
say how we ! his homo is furnished,
and perhaps many of these friends se
cretly wish they knew where they
could buy furniture of equal looks.
There is no secret of obtaining the
right kind cf furniture if one knows
the place to shop. The Palo Alto Fur
niture Company is such a place. They
not only hf nd!e high-class furniture
for the parlor, bofl-roora and dining
room, but their kitchen department is
well stocked with ranges and
utensils and for the floor they have
Linoleum of the latest designs and
patterns. It is easily cleaned and al-

Introducing to You the Live Progressive Firms and People Who Make
up the Business Interests of Palo Alto
First Prize —$10.00 Theatre Tickets contributed by
* VARSITY AND STANFORD THEATRES
Second Prize —One Dozen Photographs contributed by
SHATTUCK STUDIOS
Third Prize —One Hand Painted Oil Picture of Chapel
contributed by FREEMAN'S ART STORE
Fourth Prize —One Box of Chancellor (after dinner) Cigars
contributed by FRANKLIN'S SMOKE HOUSE

ways sanitary. Just go to this store !
once and let them show you their col
lection of home furnishings. They are
sure to suit your individual taste, no
matter how exacting. They are featur
ing a complete line of stoves and
ranges. The best in the world is
Wedgewood. Where is this large fur
niture store located? and what make
of water heaters do, they recommend?
How many square feet of Inlaid Lin
oleum are they now laying in the Rus
sel Cafeteria?

(4) No matter who you are and what
your life is, it can be made happier
and better through the influence of
music. This up-to-date store that we
are writing about is the home of the
best there is in music, and they are
representatives for Brunswick and
Columbia phonographs. The Music
Shop at 273 University Avenue is the
music house of Palo Alto, for they not
only carry and sell phonographs and
pianos, but they carry all kinds of
musical instruments, sheet music,
player rolls and records. If you are
fond of string instruments, they have
anything from the ukelele to the cello.
They are exclusive representatives in
Palo Alto for two well-known phono
graphs which are recognized for their ;
many exceptional qualities. These ma
chines play disc records of any make.
If you like a lot of noise moulded into
music, then they have drums for your
choice. The proprietor here is a music
loving man, himself, and he delights in
showing his line to patrons. A visit
from you will be appreciated. What
make of Band Instruments does he
carry? Who are the manufacturers of
the Victor and Brunswick? What is
the price of the Gretsch Sac., Melody
C, Finish No. 2?

(5) Two of the best places to eat in j
Palo Alto are home and here. That is
what the editor thought after trying
one of this restaurant home-cooked
meals. All of you people do not know
of this restaurant or you would be
Johnny on the spot every time Old
Man Hunger gripped your frame. They
not only cater to the man who is in a
hurry with counter service but they
have linen-covered tables for the
ladies. However, the same service is
had at both places and at the same
prices. If you have lots of time to sit
and enjoy your meal, then sit at the
tables, but if you are a business man
with only a few minutes to "grab"
your lunch, the counter service will be
most ideal. The location of this home
like place is 105 Alma Street. The
proprietor of this restaurant has a
most affable manner and he does all
in his power to please his patrons.;
Anything that you want is not too
much trouble for him to get. He uses
the best grade of meats and come
fresh from the meat market when he
needs them and not a week before, j
Who is the energetic proprietor of the
"Popular" restaurant? What is the
price of their noon lunch? What brand
of coffee do they use? How much are
their meal tickets?

(6) Clothes cost too much money to
be carelessly cleaned and pressed, i
Your tailor should be picked just as
your doctor or your grocer. It is just
as important. If you send your clothes
to first one cleaner and then anothf r,
in the ert'd your clothes will be ruined,
and with none to blame but yourself.
The Stanford Dyeing and Cleaning
Works commands a high position in
the cleaning and pressing business of
Palo Alto, and they always guarantee
their work. These people know how to
press a suit. They press it to its
natural form and not "against the
srain." They also use an odorless pro
cess in their cleaning and every meth
od of handling clothes that is modern
is used by them. They have a call and
delivery system and for them to keep
your wardrobe in prefect trim at all
times is no trouble for you. They will
call at your home at regular intervals
tor your clothes and return them
promptly. This prompt service is a
great item in their business. They also
do repairing. What does this firm
charge for cleaning and pressing a
suit, and where is their plant located?
What does 444 mean?

(7) Chiropractic was born 27 years
•,'Ko. The suspicion, distrust and re
sentful criticism aimed at it in the

beginning has been dispelled. Chiro
practors have proven their worth in
healing the sick and lame with their
chiropractic adjustments. With all of
this human service in California they
were held under the yoke of the med
ical board. But thanks to the fair
minded people of this state, that is
over.
Dr. Minor and Dr. Hall wish to thank
all Iheir friends for the support they
gave them. These two doctors are
graduates of the Palmer School of
Chiropractic in Davenport, lowa. They
have practiced Chiropractic for years.
People come for miles around to Doc
tors Minor and Hall.
They are located at 153 University
Avenue. Give both the 'doctors' first
names and give two reasons why Chi
ropractic is beneficial to one's health.

(8) Don't junk your old tires. Take
them to a reliable tire shop and get
their opinion on their condition. They
may be vulcanized and run for several
thcHtsand miles more. And if you want
an honest opinion as to this, take your
tires to Palo Alto Vulcanizing Works.
Tires are this man's sole business,
and we make no mistake when we say
that he knows his business thoroughly.
Vhen he has patched a tube or vul
canized a "shoe" for you, then he has
made a friend. A guarantee goes with
evefy job he does and this is a guar
antee of absolute satisfaction. There
is no money value set on it, but it is a
personal guarantee that you get what
you want and no matter what it cost
him, he'll see that you get it. In addi
tion to the vulcanizing and repair de
partment, this man also carries a stock
of Goodyear tires and he has y ur size.
You don't want to meet a more con
genial man than Mr. Bogges with a
smile for you. Where is the shop lo
cated? What is his price for a Good
year Ford all-weather fabric tire?
What is the price of the 40x10 solid
truck tire that Mr. Bogges has in his
window?

(9) It is a source of discomfort and
worry for some people to buy a new
pair of shoes, but if you are careful in
selecting the correct size in the right
grade of shoes, you will not have this
inconvenience to contend with. At the
Lentos Shoe Store they will not only
sell you a new pair of shoes, but they
will make your old ones like new for
you. They conduct a modern electrical
shoe repairing shop in connection with
the shoe store and they do the work
just like it is done at the factories.
Let your next pair of shoes come from
this store and they will last you much
longer, for when you have worn off
the original soles, just return them
and they will put new ones on at a
small cost. They use the very best
double wear genuine leather soles and
the name and trade mark is stamped
cn them. When you have work done
here, it is well guaranteed, and there
is something back of the guarantee.
Then if it is in the power of these
people to do you a good turn, they
certainly will take pleasure in doing
it. They work for others as well as
themselves. What brand of pure
leather do they use on their soles, and
where is the store located?

. (10) Is milk and cream an important
part of your daily meals? If not, you
are one out of a hundred. Then with
this in view, it is only natural for peo
ple to be sure that their milk and
cream is' absolutely light. And to be
"right" it should contain a certain per
cent of butterfat, as well as be clean
and free from all foreign matter. The
milk, cream, butter and dairy products
you get at the Altomont Creamery are
all that the name implies—sanitary.
They feature pasteurized and guaran
teed dairy products. You can ask for
no better merchandise in this line. So
the next time you need any dairy
products of any sort, whether it be
butter, milk, cream, or cottage cheese,
just go to the Altomont Creamery. It
will be filled with satisfaction.
These people will give you service, as
their business depends upon it. If they
did not give you good service on your
first trip, you would not return again,
and they want your future friendship
and business. What is the location of
this firm's retail store, and what do
they get per quart for their milk. What
does pasteurized mean? and what does
guaranteed milk mean?

(11) When the pioneers blazed a
trail across the continent in '49 there
was also organized a man that blazed
the way in the paint industry, W. T.
Floyd. Since that time, this firm has
been beautifying Palo Alto with its
products. In addition to paints, they
also sell oils, glass, and if you are
looking for a waterproof paint, this is
the place to go. The Hadle Stormtight
Roof Paint firm has a very modern and
up-to-date store, and they are known
for their neatness and complete stock
of goods they carry. This store is a
credit to any city. This store which
this writing is for has the agency for
Acme Quality Paints and Varnishes,
the world's higest standard in paints.
Not only do they retail their products,
but wholesale as well. If you are a
paint man, you will know what firm we
are referring to for they carry one of
the largest stocks in these parts. What

is the name of this firm and what do
they recommend for floor varnish?
Just call at the local store and their
salesmen will gladly assist you. How
many square feet will a gallon of Acme
Quality Paint cover two coats?

(12) Just up the street at Mr. Ethen's
is he liveliest spot in Palo Alto. There is
something doing there most all of the
time and especially so after supper. It
is a place where gentlemen congregate
and exchange experiences of the day
over a friendly game of pocket bil
liards. But, in addition to the billiard
parlor, they also conduct a large bowl
ing alley and soda fountain where they
will make you a creamy milk shake
that will certainly make you return for
another in a short while. They are also
local agents for the United Cigar
Stores and carry a line of cigars that
cannot be had in any other establish
ment in the city. If you are looking for
a friend, you are sure to find him here.
It is a place where practically every
man frequents once in a while just for
the gentlemanly company he is sure to
find. If it is a box of candy you wisn
for your girl, then this is the place for
you to seek. They carry several differ
ent makes and it is kept in a specially
equipped refrigerator which insures
you of freshness at any time. How
many pocket pool tables have they?
What line of pipes do they carry? How
many alleys are there and name what
team is leading in the bowling tourna
ment now being conducted?

(13) Now comes a renowned meat
market which sells fresh meats. In
deed their meats are fresh. They make
it a point to keep them so, which is
responsible for the popularity and
wonderful business gained in the past
months. There are mrny tricks em
ployed by the meat buyers in judging
duality, and the Stanford Meat Com
pany is perfectly willing to share its
secrets with you. They buy only the
best, but they want you to know at
the time of your purchase that you
are getting what you want. Cleanli
ness is the watchword of this market.
The business is so great that their
daily purchases keep their meats
fresh. They seldom carry much over
from one day to another. We enjoy
writing about this market and its
owner for several reasons. One is they
say "never mind about buying, just
come in and look the good things
over." Give exact address. How long
have they been established? What are
their phone numbers? How often do
they get fresu fish at this market?

(14) In buying drugs, you want the
best, including purity and service,
which are two essential things to con
s'der when selecting from which to
buy these needs. Impure drugs are
worse than none at all, and poor ser
vice means aggravation and annoy
ance. Only the best drugs are ever
handled at the Young Drug Company
at the corner of University avenue
and Florence street. The proprietor
is a registered pharmacist and he en
deavors to keep a stock that will
meet with all requirements and cus
tomers do not have to go elsewhere
for anything usually found in an up-to
date drug store. In addition to drugs,
they carry a large stock of perfumery,
toilet articles, safety razors, and if
you happen to have a sweet tooth,
their candies will be appealing to you.
This store has the agency for all of
the Owl products, so you may obtain
these goods right here at home. What
is Ihe proprietor's name? Also what
line of remedies do they handle? What
is "Pom Pom" Luster?

(15) We are now presenting a firm
where fresh staple and fancy groceries
can be secured. It is a concern with
a conscience, and has an aim to please
the hard-to-suit in their lines. In fact,
you can close your eyes and buy here,
and every sale carries a guarantee of
satisfaction, and a little profit is all
they ask. Now just stop a second and
say to yourself, "Where is the best
stock of fruits, vegetables and gro
ceries carried in Palo Alto?" The best
brands of everything are the distin
guishing characteristics of this store,
along with its sanitary aspect. It is a
source of personal satisfaction to the
writer to write about this "quality"
store and the proprietor, Mr. Earle,
Ever since he started, years ago, his
popularity has met with a steady in
crease. He is not only a popular mer
chant. but is an alert business man,
and his idea is to always make the
place home-like when you do business
with him or his clerks, and so far he
has succeeded, and if he can make
Palo Alto a better city you can depend
upon him to take off his coat, roll up
his sleeves and help put it over. He
has for those who need it, a smile,
and has won their business or confi
dence. No merchant in Palo Alto is
more popular with his customers than
the owner of this store. Name the
owner and give his first name in full,
location and phone.

(16) Here is a works that makes a
lot of noise in a legitimate way. It is a
sheet metal establishment. They have
been making a big noise
for some time. They make a
of tin and sheet iron, and a 112

cialties are tanks, and irrigating pipe,
.spouting, skylights, cornice as well as
tin and copper sheet metal specialties.
The expert tinner is a great necessity
i'or those owning homes or business
places, as they look to them for re
l airs and parts. To be efficient, they
must be skilled in their calling and
geniuses as well. And these things are
apparent at the Palo Alto Sheet Metal
Works. There are many ways of tin
ning that will not stand the test. These
people use the right way. The owners
of this shop believe it better to be on
the level with their customers than
to climb upward by a crooked path.
Such a firm as this we surely like to
include in our feature. In fact, we can
not say enough for them, for they de
serve much more than a mere word of
praise. They deserve sure success.
Who is the proprietor of this shop and
Low long have they been established
here. Where are they located? What
size Warm Air Heater does it take to
heat a 7-room house? and give the
price of it.

(17) When a business establish
ment has reached the heights of suc
cess and prominence, it is either cred
ited to the skillful management or to
the quality of merchandise they han
dle. At the enterprising store at 317
University Avenue both of these items
are responsible for their standing in
Palo Alto. The most prominent resi
dents of the city are among their cus
tomer list. Their costumes can always
be depended upon for beiug the latest
styles and the good quality never
varies. "Where there is quality, there
is style." The Style Shop is well
known for both. (The store is attrac
tively decorated and the merchandise
is displayed in such a manner that it
becomes a profound pleasure to shop
with them). Their courteous sales
women also render great assistance
with their timely suggestions of "what
is being worn" and you leave the store
pleased witn your visit, feeling that
you have wasted no time whatever.
What is the slogan of this enterpris
ing store. Tell name of this classy
store's proprietor. A Big Clearance
Sale is now going on at the Smart
Shop. Everything in the store is re
duced for this Sale.

(18) The most widely known and
recognized decorations for any and all
occasions are flowers. They are recog
nized internationally and more can be
said with a small bunch of flowers
than can be said with a dozen tele
grams or any other form of communi
cation. "Say it with flowers" is a fit
ting slogan for their usefulness and
worth. The one flower shop in Palo
Alto that has created a reputation for
having in stock all of the different
(lowers in season is known as the
Palo Alto Flower & Seed Shop. They
carry a complete line of flowers for
the dining room table, to ship to your
friends or pot flowers to decorate your
home and porches. When you desire
to remember yourself to a friend, this
is the one place to come for they will
make up a beautiful boquet for you.
The proprietor here likes flowers him
self, which is symbolic of happiness.
His disposition is also like that of a
flower, bright and full of cheer. Who
is this proprietor? What is the num
ber of the shop? What kind of seeds
does he carry? What are the names
of the jardiners that they are selling
that come from Japan?

(19) Who is there in this city en
gaged in correction and the conserva
tion of eyesight? Many have come to
him and received great relief when
troubled with eye defects. His strict
attention to his business has won for
him a host of friends and patrons. Dr.
Cochran will be found very busy at
his offices at 122 University avenue
and you will make no mistake in con
sulting him about your eyes. He has
passed the State Board of Optometry
examinations and is recognized for his
excellent work, and is also a graduate
Dr. of Optometry. In addition to
working on your eyes, he will replace
broken lenses or make you a complete
pair of glasses. The eyes are the win
dows of the soul and when they are
wrong, the body is handicapped, for,
without clear vision, we can't see the
world as it is. Eye troubles are often
started when young and your chil
dren's eyes should be examined before
it is too late. Make an appointment
•with Dr. Cochran and get his opinion.
His office is completely equipped with
all of the modern instruments used in
this work. What are Dr. Cochran's ini
tials, and what is the range of prices
for his glasses? What is the store
motto?

(20) Most men like to know where
they can find a good barber shop, as
they are very particular about per
sonal appearance. They demand satis
factory work. When I suggest Mar
quee's Barber Shop, I know what I'm
talking about. They have a very sani
tary little shop with all the modern
equipment, also including five modern
chairs. They specialize in all kinds of
shampooing, scalp and facial treat
ments. If you want your hair to have
jompadour cut, or any other kind,
t let Marquee's do it for you. If

you are having trouble with your
scalp, they can help you. Dixol is the
scalp treatment they recommend. They
also bob children's hair, so bring them
in the next time you are down town.
Just ask anyone who has visited Mar
quee's shop, and they will tell you
how well satisfied they were. Where
ic their shop located? What brands of
hair tonic do they use and recom
mend?

(21) A most important institution of
business in any city, town or commun
ity is the reliable drug store. Here it
is that we depend for our health. And
It ere is where we go when we want
toilet articles, kodak supplies, foun
tain pens and a hundred other luxuries
and necessities. The Kenyon & Crow
Store is known for its large and com
plete stock of all of these articles, and
in fact, anything found in a first-class
store. In addition to their general line
of pure drugs, assortments of high
class cosmetics and sundries, they are
tlie Penslar Store in Palo Alto. This
line of household remedies is com
plete. There is one for every possible
need or use. Now is the time to begin
to think about Christmas Gifts. A
large collection of hand-colored Christ
mas Cards have just arrived. They
are wonderful in design and color.
Fountain pens and Pen and Pencil sets
in Christmas Boxes make a very fine
pi esent to your student friends, or a
big box of gift stationery. At this store
they conduct the largest Kodak print
ing and developing business 011 the
Peninsula, handling a full line of East
man Kodaks and Cameras. One of
the big features of this store is their
framed pictures and mirrors. They
have a framing department and are
able to frame for you any size picture
with most any style mounting you
desire. What profit-sharing system do
they practice? Find out the four lead
ing perfumes they handle? In what
line do they excell all other concerns
in this locality? What are the pro
prietors' nicknames?

(22) There is a mail in this town
much wiser than his sires; he ran
into a bramble bush and punctured all
four tires. When he saw his tires
were wrecked, with all his might and
main, he went to this tire shop and
had them fixed again. One of the first
things to learn if you own an auto
mobile is to know what vulcanizing
nrm gives Service that Serves. The
Retread Shop is recognized for their
expert tire repairing. You should con
sult these doctors when your tires get
sick for they surely have the dope
that cures. You cannot help but like
this firm for those connected with it
make every effort possible to please
you. They will always go out of their
way to do a good turn for you, and if
you have tire trouble on the street,
just notify them and they will render
assistance People who do business
here are really proud .of ttie fact and
it is simply because they give what
the customers want and should have
—"Satisfaction." Go to this shop and
meet these tire men and then tell us
what make of tires they sell and what
their price for a Ford-size cord tire in
the make begins with "F." Give two
reasons why this tire is the best on
the market for its size.

(23) Pleasure of motoring is in
creased if your car is in good working
condition. It is, therefore, advisable to
have your car looked over before you
start on this trip and when you have
your car worked on, be sure of* your
garage. The Palo Alto Garage on Em
reson street is indeed a thoroughly
dependable establishment in regard to
their repairing. Mr. J. M. Blackburn
employs only expert mechanics. The
Palo Alto Garage has the agency for
the Durant car and many others such
as the Chandler, Cadillac, and Cleve
land. Have you seen the new 1923
model Durant. Just step in and let
them sTiow you what a wonderful mod
el it is. The proprietor of this garage,
Mr. J. M. Blackburn, personally super
vises the garage at all times, and as
sures you of prompt service whether
you are buying a spark plug or filling
your tank with gas. They have Ever-
Ready Battery service, and they also
carry Associated Gasoline. They want
satisfied customers at the Palo Alto
Garage. That is their motto. Give two
reasons why the Durant car is more
practical. What is Mr. Blackburn's
first jiame? How long have they been
established?

(24) In writing of the leading busi
ness firms and institutions of Palo
Alto, we have come across an inter
esting shop at 367 University Avenue,
that well deserves mentioning. No, it
won't interest you men, particularly—
but has an especial appeal to the wo
men of Palo Alio and vicinity who
are lovers of beautiful things. This at
tractive shop is fairly overflowing with
wonderful creations of Laces, Em
broideries, Frocks, and Sport Skirts,
Reads for the Miss and Mistress —at-
tractively displayed, and just a) at
tractively priced. These are only a
112» w of the many beautiful and useful
articles to be found in this modern,
up-to-date shop—and the proprietor
takes great pleasure in dispensing I
courteous and attentive service to
every patron. We want you to tell us
the name of this worth while shop—
also the proprietor's name and cor
rect address. What are their prices on
their dresses? What price on stamped
pillow cases? Also stamped dresser
scarfs which come in packages.
(25) Look prosperous and save
money at the same time. This is what
so many people are trying to do and |
cannot quite manage it. The reason is
that they do not know where to buy
economically and where to get goods
hat stand wear and look well. It is
not economy to buy a cheap "hand-me
down" suit of clothes. It is a waste of
money. If you have a suit made by
the tailor that this article is about,
you will get a suit of clothes that will
last. This tailor has been sixteen years
in Palo Alto and has the finest trade
on the Peninsula. Specialist on ladies'
tailoring and sport suits. He holds a
gold medal given to him at the Lewis
and Clark Exposition for designing.
You will be surprised at the chicness
as well as the exceedingly low price
he charges for a suit. And another fea
ture of this tailor, all of the tailoring
is done on the premises. He does not
take your order and send it to San
Francisco or New York. Who is this
progressive tailor? His establishment
is upstairs at 123 University avenue.
Better stop in and let him take your
measure and you select your pattern
and style at the same time.
(26) The best friend of womankingis
that which takes the grievous burdens
from her shoulders. No woman likes
to bend over washtubs or ironing
boards, and it is the mission of the
University French Laundry to per
form this highest physical service for
her. This laundry is almost our own
concern. It takes soiled linen and
turns it into attractive wearing ap
parel. It is an extensive industry, em
ploying many people. Wagons are sent
out in every direction in Palo Alto to
collect and deliver laundry and to keep
the various articles separated, so that
you don't get your neighbors' clothes,
is a job of a highly specialized order.
The methods used at this laundry are
thoroughly modern, and the machinery
equipment makes the work most satis
factory. The manager of this laundry
takes an active interest in the welfare
of Palo Alto and his absolute support
can be counted upon when anything
for the betterment of the city is in
progress. Who is this energetic man
ager, and where is the laundry lo
cated? How many employes has he?
What is the phone number?
(27) Well, here we are. Just what
interests all%women in Palo Alto. I
know when you go to that party or
dance you want to look charming. It
just requires a little personal atten
tion. You have often been to some pub
lic place and admired some ladies'
hair of the transparent texture of her
skin. The kind that is clear and
smooth. Well, you can have that charm
just the same as she. You go and see
Mrs. Marie Montgomery who has
charge of this exclusive Beauty Shop.
You will find every kind of modern
equipment desired in this shop, and
their work is very satisfactory. So
many girls have bobbed hair nowa
days, and they find it quite a task to
keep it looking well. Just drop into the
Montgomery Beauty Shop, and they
will marcelle your hair, and give the
ends a round curl which improves it
very much. You will find their egg
shampoo very invigorating. They spe
cialize in scalp and facial treatments.
They do hair waving and curling of
all kinds. What is one of the finest
scalp treatment? All kinds of facial
treatments are given by Mrs. Mont
gomery. Tell us the price of her
I'lactique Facial Treatment?
(28) What is the name of the store
that comes into your mind so clearly
when you speak of Art Goods? It is
Edwin R. Freeman's Art and Photo
Shop. There is no other place in the
city where they have such a large as
sortment of Wonderful Gifts to select
from. The writer cannot begin to tell
you of the hundreds of articles in this
store. The candlestick and framed and
unframed pictures are the best that
Mr Freeman could make and buy.
They have the largest picture fram
ing department on the Peninsula, giv
ing you the largest assortment of
frames to choose from. Christmas sea
son is nearing. Your motto is to do
your shopping early, and if you are
looking for gifts to give your friends
that will make them long remembered
to you, go to Freeman's Art Store. If
you have a picture that you cherish,
bring it here and let them frame it, or
a negative, enlarge it. They have a
complete service for films, kodaks, and
enlarging. How is it that Mr. Freeman
can sell his Foto Art Prints cheaper
than others?
(29) Palo Alto with its amazing
wealth and attractive terms and prices

when you are indebted to the wide
awake firm at 111 Circle. Their long
experience, knowledge of values and
expert advice in such matters have
won for them a large number of satis
fled customers. Through their devotion
to the business of their clients, Mr.
Helm has gained an enviable reputa
tion. Whether it be the buying of a
home or the selection of a lot or acre
age, you can be sure of finding just
what you want at attractive terms and
price when you are dealing with this
firm. This company also has many
ranch lands, both raw and improved.
In fact, their operations along this line
is, indeed, second to none in Palo Alto.
They are authorities on ranch lands
and if you name the location, they can
come pretty close to telling you the
value. Therefore, their advice and per
sonal service in such matters is indeed
important. Just drop in at their office
and they will gladly assist you. They
have just moved to 111 Circle, former
ly at 257 University avenue. What is
the name of this firm and what other
line of business do they follow? What
is Mr. Helm's first name? What is the
name of Mr. Helm's new assistant?
(30) Did you ever notice how you
admire the clothes of others and can
not understand why you never look as
well when you know personally that
you spend more money on your wear
ing apparel than this particular fel
low? The secret can easily be solved
if you do your shopping at the right
place. To test this out, the next time
you need a suit of clothes, a hat, or
anything in the gents' furnishing line,
go to Wideman & Son. This is one
exclusive haberdashery. Their stock is
composed of such well-known makes
as Kuppenheimer Clothes, Knapp Felt
Hats and Caps, handled by only the
best stores, and the fact of the matter
is, their entire stock bears names just
as well-known and highly recommend
ed as these few mentioned. Winter is
here and now is the time to see that
you are equipped for it. You certainly
need a new suit or a new hat. If you
don't think you do, come here and
look at the difference in the style of
your old one and their new stock.
You'll change your mind immediately.
And another thing about this store:
everyone is courteous, even the clerks
greet you with a smile, and are glad
to show you everything. How long has
this firm been established? Give exact
address. What is their business agree
ment with customers?
(31) Here is just the place to visit
for lunches and home-made pastry. It
is known as Kapps lunchroom. They
serve a nice little lunch there, and the
coffee is delicious. It is a very clean,
sanitary shop, and you get quick ser
vice. They have home-made pies,
cakes, and doughnuts. The doughnuts
are those world-wide known "Bake
Rite." They sell for twenty-five cents
per dozen. When you are down town
drop into this shop. There is nothing
more tasty than hot doughnuts and
coffee. The process- by which these
doughnuts are made makes them light
er and fluffier than the average dough
nut. And those home-made pies such as
pumpkin and mince, certainly are en
joyable at this time of year. They also
serve a noon-day lunch for the busi
ness man that is a dandy. How many
chairs do thew have in this shop? How
many meat pies do they make a day
and what do they sell for? Give the
exact location of this shop?
(32) There is at least one cigar
store in Palo Alto that caters to
smokers and men who want the best
merchandise for their money. The
Franklin Smoke House makes a spe
cialty of fine cigars, all kinds of cigar
ettes and they carry a large stock of
tobaccos, pipes and smokers' acces
sories. The proprietors believe in giv
ing the people what they want and if
you happen to want something that is
not ordinarily carried in stock, just
let him know and he will order it for
you. If it is in the world, he will come
near gettng it for you. A Soda Foun
tain in connection with the Cigar Store
gives you a cold drink at any time.
Malted milks a specialty. You could
not think of a more suitable present
for a man than a box of cigars and
when you buy them, they should be
chosen by a man who knows you. The
proprietor will assist you. What are
the initials of this energetic proprietor
and what make of candy does he sell?
The Franklin Smoke House is the
most popular place in town for card
games. Bring your friends and play a
friendly game of "rummy." How many
card tables in this establishment?
(33) Where is the bakery where you
can get fresh bread —any and all kinds
of it? Where can you get "bread that
is light, doughnuts that delight, and
pies just right." This is the tale of a
bakery whose products bring to mind
mother's baking day. They are so good
that people come for blocks just to
buy right out of the oven. Their prod
ucts are baked under the most strin
gent sanitary conditions. It is entirely
fitting that the "Who's Who" should
call your attention to this bakery, for
in patronizing the Golden Poppy
Bakery, you not only get the best baked

goods, but you save money as well.
The mention of this name In Palo Alto !
tells a tale of quality goods in this line |
and every housewife is familiar with |
the name and the goods. The big fea
ture with this shop is the making of
whole wheat bread, made from the
finest of wheats, The manager meets
his trade personally and his own per
sonality is responsible to a large de
gree for the patronage which they
have. Who is the manager of this
local bakery and what system do they
use in baking? What are the best
sellers in French Pastry?
(34) A man is as old as he feels, but
a woman is as old as she looks. I won
der how many women in Palo Alto
know the value of personal appear
ance. It is one of the many things
women neglect. If you will just drop
in and see Madame Musy in the Wil
son building, 132 University avenue,
you will receive the personal atten
tion you have so long desired. Madame
Musy is there to please her patrons
and she desires satisfied customers.
It is every woman's idea to be beauti
ful and Madame Musy wishes to help
you. She has a wonderful shop and
does the finest work. Madame Musy is
known for the wonderful marcels she
known for the wonderful marcells she
will say that this is the nearest to
a natural wave that you ever have
had. Years of experience in this busi
ness is the answer for her excellent
work. If you will just give her a trial
I am sure you will be one of her
steady customers. How much does she
charge for a marcell? What is her
phone number? What does Madame
Musy recommend for falling hair?
(35) It tickles everybody's vanity to
a certain degree to have his friends
say how well his home is furnished,
and perhaps many of these friends
secretly wish they knew where they
could buy furniture of equal looks.
There is no secret in obtaining the
right kind of furniture if one knows
the place to shop. The Warren Furni
ture Company is such a place. They
not only handle high-class furniture
for the parlor, bedroom and dining
room, but their kitchen department is
well stocked with ranges and cooking
utensils, and for the floor they have
the Congoleum. This is recognized for
its qualities of not bulging and crack
ing. It's easily cleaned and always
sanitary. Just go to this store once
and let them show you their collection
of home furnishings. They are sure to
suit your individual taste, no matter
how exacting. They are featuring at
this time their Occidental Ranges and
Stoves. Where is this large furniture
store located, and what make of mat
tress do they recommend for its com
fort? They also sell them. W T hat make
of beds do they carry?
(36) Think of something good to eat
and then think of the Stanford Cafe.
They are synonymous. Not only do
they conduct a counter service that is
most appealing to the man who is in a
hurry but they have attractive tables
for those who have time to sit and
enjoy the meal from all angles. The
food at this cafe is prepared just as it
is at home. They would not think
about serving anything to their pat
rons that they would not eat them
selves and this is proof enough of its
purity. Sanitation is one of the chief
objectives of the proprietors of this
restaurant and is everywhere evident.
The service is rendered in a prompt
manner and you are not left studying
the menu all day. They take your or
der when you first sit down. This is
one thing the proprietors find that ap
peals to their customers. They want im
mediate service and they get it. They
also serve the finest of ice cream and
home-made pastry. Who is the pro
gressive proprietor of this cafe and
how many stools have they at the
gressive proprietors of this cafe and
cated? What brand of coffee do they
use?
(37) The most conveniently and cen
trally located market in Palo Alto to
do your shopping is the Palo Alto
Market. This market caters to the dis
criminating buyers of fresh and cured
meats. To the people that are careful
of the meats they eat, these people
are their friends. They handle nothing
but the very best inspected meats, and
the proprietor does not depend upon
the Federal and State authorities al
together. He makes a personal inspec
tion of them when they enter his
store. If they are not right, bingo!
they are sent back. When you enter
this establishment you are confronted
with an air of absolute cleanliness and
sanitation. Clean sawdust protects the
floor and the glass show cases and
marble counters make it impossible
for bits of meat to "hide" from the
scrutinizing eye of the butchers. The
market on a whole is kept in a state
of cleanliness that will meet the ap
proval of anyone. In fact, sanitation is
their main objective. What is the
exact location of this modern market
and what is their,phone number? How
long have they been established? What
line of hams do they carry? Also what
is their buying rule?

a holiday. It is a gentlemen's billiard I
parlor, conducted for gentlemen by gen
tlemen. Mr. Mahaney sees that these
principles are carried out in detail. At
Mahaney's they have live pool tables,
one snooker table and two billiard
tables, which gives every one a chance
to play the game they like. When you
get thirsty they have a soda fountain in
connection serving the finest of cold
drinks. All the standard brands of
cigars are carried here, and, believe me,
they are fresh. At their store No. 2,
next to the Stanford Theater, you will
find Mr. Krebs in charge, who is asso
ciated with Mr. Mahaney. A full line
of smokers' needs are carried here and
a big supply of cigars in boxes of 10,
25 and 50 in Christmas boxes will be
featured. Ladies' patronage is socilited
at this store. Get your Christmas Gifts
here for the men folks. What is Mr.
Mahaney's first name? Give the location
of store No. 1. What is Mr. Kreb's first
name?
(43) A famous banker once gave a
young man this advice: "Save your
money and look prosperous." We have
known young men to fail because they
did not realize the importance of being
well dressed. A good suit is a dis
tinctive asset to any man. If he is well
dressed, he immediately commands at
tention. If you want the right suit at
the right price, patronize Frazer & Co.
They are the home of good clothes in
Palo Alto, and in addition to these high
grade clothes, they carry such standard
lines of furnishings as Manhattan shirts
and Everwear hosiery. In fact, their
stock borders along high-class lines, and
it is the store in which to do your fall
shopping. They have many new styles,
cuts and materials awaiting your in
spection and their prices are very low,
consistent with the quality. The whole
store commands a high position in the
mercantile establishments of Palo Alto
because of the quality of merchandise
they handle. Meet these people and you
have met twentieth century merchants.
What make of clothing do they sell, and
what is the slogan of these clothes? Give
location, of the store.
(44) Just say "His Master's Voice"
and you have immediately spoken of the
best-known phonograph on the market.
The Victrola is made by pioneer manu
facturers in the business. It is the choice
of the greatest artists who indorse its
unerring register of the original voice
or instrument. Ralph C. Dodson's Music
Store, 340 University avenue, has Vic-,
trolas in many styles and prices. In
addition to the Victrolas this shop also
carries a large line of Victor records,
and new ones are added as soon as they
are released from the factory. A good
tip to the student is to have a "portable"
Victrola with you. If you want to dance
it is always handy and will give you
the music you like the best whenever
you want it. Go in and let them show
you their selection of Victrolas. They
will be glad to play for you any record
you would like to hear. You will ap
preciate meeting these people and they
will appreciate your patronage. Where
are the machines manufactured and how
long has this music shop been established?
What is the price of the style 100 Vic
trola? Have you heard the best seller
in records this month, "I Found a Four-
Leaf Clover," and what is the price of
this record ?
(45) Let's go to the movies. This
expression often shakes away gloom and
dullness and you gladly join the happy
ries a complete stock of crockery ware,
see a regular show. By "movies" the
people of Palo Alto mean the Varsity
and Stanford theaters. They know that
at these playhouses they will see the
best of screen offerings at prices con
sistent with conditions. These two cozy
theaters give the patrons day in and day
out the best in film plays that money
can buy. To those few in Palo Alto
that have not had the pleasure of at
tending these two modern playhouses,
they are missing one of the great joys
of life. The products of the most gifted
imaginations of the world are beautifully
and artistically portrayed with an ac
companiment of the finest of organ
music. You should get their regular
weekly program, which gives you the
names of the shows and the nights upon
which they will be exhibited. Tell us
the manager's name of the Varsity The
ater and how many seats have they?
Give us the exact location of the Stan
ford Theater. What is the Big Special
picture coming there next Monday?
(46) You may say what you want,
but say "Hardware" and the minds of
the people of Palo Alto will revert
automatically to the Palo Alto Hard
ware Company, "The Winchester Store."
This firm carries a complete line of
hardware, consisting of carpenters' and
mechanics' tools of every description;
cutlery as well as builders' hardware,
sporting goods, Bass Hcuter Paints,
Pennsylvania Vacuum Cup Tires—in
fact, everything you would expcct to find
in a modern up-to-date hardware store.
The Palo Alto Hardware Company is
known as the "Winchester Store," carry
ing a full line of Winchester products.
The Winchester Company puts out one
article each month at a special price—
the public are looking forward each
month for these big specials. The special
for November is a Winchester Flash

(3S) Time is money. Save time and
money. Spend the ten minutes allowed
on your street car transfer, buying
Christmas Cards or forgotten station
ery supplies at llyde's, 370 University
avenue, right at the transfer point.
There are but two transfer points, the
depot and opposite Hyde's new store.
Tou can get a basket for your many
packages here or a beautifully decor
ated one to send as a Christmas gift.
If you want a Fountain Pen, which one
does Hyde's guarantee? If you want to
give stationery to your sister, which
of Hyde's brands would you choose?
Which will have the bigger sale at
Hyde's for the kiddies, "Kritters of the
Kitchen Kingdom," or "The Chickens
Eating Corn"? What line of goods is
being especially featured at Hyde's
besides sttftionery, school supplies,
fountain pens, pictures, picture frames,
baskets, candles, beads, games, toys,
favors, memory books, and albums?
Call at Hyde's at the transfer point,
and they can answer the above ques
tions and also give you many sugges
tions for charming and inexpensive
Christmas presets. Their new store is
one of the finest of its kind in P. A.
(39) It is every man's wish to own
his own home. It makes for family
contentment and happiness. It saves
paying rent.
The University Realty Company sp&-
j cializes in providing people with
homes. Consult them as you would any
specialist.
Years of experience in this com
munity stands back of the University
Realty Company.
This Company can serve you in the
purchase or sale of real estate, in writ
ing all kinds of insurance, in renting
and leasing, in fact, in all matters per
taining to real estate and insurance.
How long has this Company been in
business in Palo Alto? Name one in
surance company that it represents.
(40) If you want to make your
friends happy, present them with a
good photograph of yourself. A photo
graph is a token of real friendship,
and is highly appreciated by everyone.
And when you are in Palo Alto and
desire a portrait of yourself and are
not satisfied with just ordinary work,
go to the Shattuck Studio and you will
be pleased. This is one man who is
"behind the camera, but not behind
the times." His portrait work is indic
ative of this. In his little studio on
University avenue he will be found
very busy most every day snapping
and developing and then touching up,
putting the finishing touches on, which
removes all blemishes. The art of fin
ishing portraits is not possessed by
everyone, but this photographer is in
deed an expert. Then, too, his prices
are exceedingly moderate, considering
the beauty and quality of work turned
out. You are always sure of a success
ful picture here. Do you know that
your picture is the only present your
friends cannot buy? Where is the
exact location of this studio? What
other photographic work do they do?
(41) Everyone knows Wagner, "The
Meat Man." He is a master in the meat
business. He came to Palo Alto eight
years ago and started business in a
small market in a small way on High
street. Today his business has ex
panded to such an extent that it has
outgrown the old market.
Mr. Wagner says he doesn't take the
credit for making his business what it
is in Palo Alto, but owes it to Mr. N.
Benson who has been with him ever
since he has located in this vicinity
and who will continue to manage the
local market. Mr. Benson has a great
many friends here in Palo Alto.
Mr. Wagnor owns the block of four
stores on the corner of University and
Florence streets, his new market being
the main Corner Store Room. This
wonder market is a palace of marble.
The counters are of marble and glass
and the latest word in modern sanita
tion. The woodwork is finished in
French gray and the walls in gray
with green trimmings. Cold storage
plant is of the latest modern auto
matic control and the best that money
can buy.
There is not a question in tlie
writer's mind but what this is one of
the most modern and finest equipped
markets in the state of California.
Mr. Wagner owns a chain of mar
kets extending to San Jose and Hol
lister and most of his time is con
fined to the purchasing end of the bus
iness. He has been in the meat bus
iness so long that he doesn't guess at
the quality of meat when he buys. He
knows that they are the best, so, when
purchasing the meat from him you
don't have to worry about its not being
of the best quality.
He is still going to be known as
"The Meat Man" in his new market
and will give the same service and
high quality meats that has made him
such a success.
It will pay you to watch for his ad
vertisements appearing in the daily
papers.
(42) This article is about one of the
liveliest spots in Palo Alto. There is
something doing here most all of the
time, and especially after dinner or on

Light, complete with battery for 89 cents.
The Palo Alto Hardware Company Car
rie sa complete stock of crockery ware,
dishes in plain and open sets and the
finest aluminum and enameled ware in
the city. How long has this store been
established? What is tie special price
on the 50-piece set of Gold Band Potter
Chinaware? What make of electric
washer do they sell?
(47) Fitting feet is a matter of no
little importance, for there .ire a very
few people that enjoy the fitting of a
n<iw pair of shoes, even when they fit
perfectly. However, Thoit's Shoe Store
is a firm that is noted all over the Coast
for its ability to produce shoes that
"feel just like the old ones." They are
the local distributors of Hanan Shoes
and other reputable makes of more mod
erate price. This store is a home store.
Its management is a good example to
follow, for courtesy and personal ser
vice is its aim. It is needless to speak
of the quality of their shoes, as this is
too well known, but we will say that they
carefully select as to quality, workman
ship and style. Their wearing qualities,
as well as looks, are second to none.
When you have met the proprietor of
the local firm you will have met a man
that is all for Stanford and Palo Alto.
Where is their modern shoe store lo
cated? How many members of the fam
ily can they fit in shoes? When was
this business established?
(48) There is one photographer in.
Palo Alto, "An Artistic Photographer,"'
who has gained a national reputation
and holds first prize in America for ex
cellency of work. He now has por
traits on exhibition in the National Salon.
Has also been awarded highest honors
in the states of New York, Ohio and
Michigan. He has probably photo
graphed more prominent and profes
sional people than any photographer in
America. Was with Hartsook Studios
for the past eleven years, specializing
principally in photographing moving pic
ture stars and theatricals in general. A
visit to his studio, 126 University ave
nue, which was formerly the Davey
Studio, will convince the most skeptical
of the superiority of his work. Who is
this artist who has made it possible for
the Palo Alto people to get something
different, something highly artistic*
without having to go to the larger
cities? And what makes a successful
artistic portrait? Remember Friend
ship's Perfect Gift—Your Photo.
(49) There is a wonderful industry
in this city that 1 belit*vo many do not
know about. Why is it so many people
go to San Francisco to purchase their
gifts when right here in Palo Alto there
is a shop that is known by exclusive
shops all over the United States and
whose goods have gone to England..
Australia, and Honolulu? Miss Herrick
conducts a shop the year round to servj;
you. When you are thinking of gifts,
go first to Miss Herrick's and you will
be surprised at the exclusive articles
you will find there and more reasonably
priced than elsewhere. This Studio must,
be seen to be appreciated. Give us the
names of two articles just received from
India. Tell us three articles made ex
clusively in Herrick Studios and sold
all over the United States.
(50) Here is one of the busiest stores
in Palo Alto. Segar Service Shop. Be
lieve me, the proprietor sure is popular
with the young fellows. There never is
a time but what you will see a bunch in
his store. The reason for that is his
service to every one, no matter if you
only buy a package of cigarette papers*
or if it is a brier pipe, you get the same
courteous treatment. A large assortment
of pipes have just arrived for the Christ
mas trade. Also jars of smoking to
bacco. A complete line of magazines
are carried here. In connection with this
modern Cigar Store we have a real Ser
vice Barber Shop, operated by Mr. Par
vin. They are all union barbers and ex
pert haircutters. This shop is the oldest
in town. If you only want a shave, don't
be afraid to come here. These barbers
don't bother the life out of you selling
you something else in the shop. Try
these boys the first chance you get. Get
an Almond Meal and Peroxide Steam
Facial Massage. Tell us Mr. Parvin's
first name. Tell us how many maga
zines Mr. Corns has for sale at the
Cigar Counter. Give us the exact loca
tion of these two establishments.
(1) Think of the countless obstacles
the pioneers of old had to overcome
as they journeyed forth to lay the
foundation for a future that might
hold some promise' for them. Some
achieved their goal, others failed. Then
consider your own environment and
chances for the future. Your lot is a
path of roses compared with that of
tho pioneers. jfist lay aside a small
amount each week and start an ac
count with the First National Bank of
Palo Alto. They have a capital of
$100,000.00, and $24,000 surplus, and
are members of the Federal Reserve
System of Banking. The officers and
everyone connected with this bank
have always practiced service and
courtesy to their patrons. You are
treated with consideration whether
you are a large or small depositor or
whether you are a temporary visitor in
this favored locality. A man putting
his money in a bank should always
make sure that the institution is finan
cially solid and this is just such a
bank. They pay 4 per cent interest on
Term Deposits. Name the directors of
this banking institution. What is the
margin of security including stock
holders' liability?

(2) In purchasing jewelry, the buyer
puts more faith in the seller than any
other commodity that men buy and
sell. This article is about a jewelry
store that has been in business in
Palo Alto for a number of years, and
their reputation for being dependable
is second to none. In addition to their
exceptional stock of watches, jewelry,
rings, SILVERWARE, cut glass, etc.,
they do expert watch and jewelry re
pairing. This is the store to select your
•"Gifts That Last." Nielsen and Culver
are the kind of fellows we like to men
tion in our columns, because they have
a sociable and intelligent personality
—ones who know how to make friends
and keep them. Go see this store and
look over their high class line of jew
elry and you are sure to make all of
your purchases in this line from them.
Every article they sell not only bears
the guarantee of the manufacturers,
but their personal guarantee goes with
it as well. If you have a broken piece
of jewelry, no matter how fine it is,
they will repair it for you. What are
Mr. Culver'? initials, and where is
their store located. Also what other
department do they conduct? What is
their leading line of Silverware?

(3) It ticV les everybody's vanity to
a certain dc pre e to have his friends
say how we ! his homo is furnished,
and perhaps many of these friends se
cretly wish they knew where they
could buy furniture of equal looks.
There is no secret of obtaining the
right kind cf furniture if one knows
the place to shop. The Palo Alto Fur
niture Company is such a place. They
not only hf nd!e high-class furniture
for the parlor, bofl-roora and dining
room, but their kitchen department is
well stocked with ranges and
utensils and for the floor they have
Linoleum of the latest designs and
patterns. It is easily cleaned and al-

Introducing to You the Live Progressive Firms and People Who Make
up the Business Interests of Palo Alto
First Prize —$10.00 Theatre Tickets contributed by
* VARSITY AND STANFORD THEATRES
Second Prize —One Dozen Photographs contributed by
SHATTUCK STUDIOS
Third Prize —One Hand Painted Oil Picture of Chapel
contributed by FREEMAN'S ART STORE
Fourth Prize —One Box of Chancellor (after dinner) Cigars
contributed by FRANKLIN'S SMOKE HOUSE

ways sanitary. Just go to this store !
once and let them show you their col
lection of home furnishings. They are
sure to suit your individual taste, no
matter how exacting. They are featur
ing a complete line of stoves and
ranges. The best in the world is
Wedgewood. Where is this large fur
niture store located? and what make
of water heaters do, they recommend?
How many square feet of Inlaid Lin
oleum are they now laying in the Rus
sel Cafeteria?

(4) No matter who you are and what
your life is, it can be made happier
and better through the influence of
music. This up-to-date store that we
are writing about is the home of the
best there is in music, and they are
representatives for Brunswick and
Columbia phonographs. The Music
Shop at 273 University Avenue is the
music house of Palo Alto, for they not
only carry and sell phonographs and
pianos, but they carry all kinds of
musical instruments, sheet music,
player rolls and records. If you are
fond of string instruments, they have
anything from the ukelele to the cello.
They are exclusive representatives in
Palo Alto for two well-known phono
graphs which are recognized for their ;
many exceptional qualities. These ma
chines play disc records of any make.
If you like a lot of noise moulded into
music, then they have drums for your
choice. The proprietor here is a music
loving man, himself, and he delights in
showing his line to patrons. A visit
from you will be appreciated. What
make of Band Instruments does he
carry? Who are the manufacturers of
the Victor and Brunswick? What is
the price of the Gretsch Sac., Melody
C, Finish No. 2?

(5) Two of the best places to eat in j
Palo Alto are home and here. That is
what the editor thought after trying
one of this restaurant home-cooked
meals. All of you people do not know
of this restaurant or you would be
Johnny on the spot every time Old
Man Hunger gripped your frame. They
not only cater to the man who is in a
hurry with counter service but they
have linen-covered tables for the
ladies. However, the same service is
had at both places and at the same
prices. If you have lots of time to sit
and enjoy your meal, then sit at the
tables, but if you are a business man
with only a few minutes to "grab"
your lunch, the counter service will be
most ideal. The location of this home
like place is 105 Alma Street. The
proprietor of this restaurant has a
most affable manner and he does all
in his power to please his patrons.;
Anything that you want is not too
much trouble for him to get. He uses
the best grade of meats and come
fresh from the meat market when he
needs them and not a week before, j
Who is the energetic proprietor of the
"Popular" restaurant? What is the
price of their noon lunch? What brand
of coffee do they use? How much are
their meal tickets?

(6) Clothes cost too much money to
be carelessly cleaned and pressed, i
Your tailor should be picked just as
your doctor or your grocer. It is just
as important. If you send your clothes
to first one cleaner and then anothf r,
in the ert'd your clothes will be ruined,
and with none to blame but yourself.
The Stanford Dyeing and Cleaning
Works commands a high position in
the cleaning and pressing business of
Palo Alto, and they always guarantee
their work. These people know how to
press a suit. They press it to its
natural form and not "against the
srain." They also use an odorless pro
cess in their cleaning and every meth
od of handling clothes that is modern
is used by them. They have a call and
delivery system and for them to keep
your wardrobe in prefect trim at all
times is no trouble for you. They will
call at your home at regular intervals
tor your clothes and return them
promptly. This prompt service is a
great item in their business. They also
do repairing. What does this firm
charge for cleaning and pressing a
suit, and where is their plant located?
What does 444 mean?

(7) Chiropractic was born 27 years
•,'Ko. The suspicion, distrust and re
sentful criticism aimed at it in the

beginning has been dispelled. Chiro
practors have proven their worth in
healing the sick and lame with their
chiropractic adjustments. With all of
this human service in California they
were held under the yoke of the med
ical board. But thanks to the fair
minded people of this state, that is
over.
Dr. Minor and Dr. Hall wish to thank
all Iheir friends for the support they
gave them. These two doctors are
graduates of the Palmer School of
Chiropractic in Davenport, lowa. They
have practiced Chiropractic for years.
People come for miles around to Doc
tors Minor and Hall.
They are located at 153 University
Avenue. Give both the 'doctors' first
names and give two reasons why Chi
ropractic is beneficial to one's health.

(8) Don't junk your old tires. Take
them to a reliable tire shop and get
their opinion on their condition. They
may be vulcanized and run for several
thcHtsand miles more. And if you want
an honest opinion as to this, take your
tires to Palo Alto Vulcanizing Works.
Tires are this man's sole business,
and we make no mistake when we say
that he knows his business thoroughly.
Vhen he has patched a tube or vul
canized a "shoe" for you, then he has
made a friend. A guarantee goes with
evefy job he does and this is a guar
antee of absolute satisfaction. There
is no money value set on it, but it is a
personal guarantee that you get what
you want and no matter what it cost
him, he'll see that you get it. In addi
tion to the vulcanizing and repair de
partment, this man also carries a stock
of Goodyear tires and he has y ur size.
You don't want to meet a more con
genial man than Mr. Bogges with a
smile for you. Where is the shop lo
cated? What is his price for a Good
year Ford all-weather fabric tire?
What is the price of the 40x10 solid
truck tire that Mr. Bogges has in his
window?

(9) It is a source of discomfort and
worry for some people to buy a new
pair of shoes, but if you are careful in
selecting the correct size in the right
grade of shoes, you will not have this
inconvenience to contend with. At the
Lentos Shoe Store they will not only
sell you a new pair of shoes, but they
will make your old ones like new for
you. They conduct a modern electrical
shoe repairing shop in connection with
the shoe store and they do the work
just like it is done at the factories.
Let your next pair of shoes come from
this store and they will last you much
longer, for when you have worn off
the original soles, just return them
and they will put new ones on at a
small cost. They use the very best
double wear genuine leather soles and
the name and trade mark is stamped
cn them. When you have work done
here, it is well guaranteed, and there
is something back of the guarantee.
Then if it is in the power of these
people to do you a good turn, they
certainly will take pleasure in doing
it. They work for others as well as
themselves. What brand of pure
leather do they use on their soles, and
where is the store located?

. (10) Is milk and cream an important
part of your daily meals? If not, you
are one out of a hundred. Then with
this in view, it is only natural for peo
ple to be sure that their milk and
cream is' absolutely light. And to be
"right" it should contain a certain per
cent of butterfat, as well as be clean
and free from all foreign matter. The
milk, cream, butter and dairy products
you get at the Altomont Creamery are
all that the name implies—sanitary.
They feature pasteurized and guaran
teed dairy products. You can ask for
no better merchandise in this line. So
the next time you need any dairy
products of any sort, whether it be
butter, milk, cream, or cottage cheese,
just go to the Altomont Creamery. It
will be filled with satisfaction.
These people will give you service, as
their business depends upon it. If they
did not give you good service on your
first trip, you would not return again,
and they want your future friendship
and business. What is the location of
this firm's retail store, and what do
they get per quart for their milk. What
does pasteurized mean? and what does
guaranteed milk mean?

(11) When the pioneers blazed a
trail across the continent in '49 there
was also organized a man that blazed
the way in the paint industry, W. T.
Floyd. Since that time, this firm has
been beautifying Palo Alto with its
products. In addition to paints, they
also sell oils, glass, and if you are
looking for a waterproof paint, this is
the place to go. The Hadle Stormtight
Roof Paint firm has a very modern and
up-to-date store, and they are known
for their neatness and complete stock
of goods they carry. This store is a
credit to any city. This store which
this writing is for has the agency for
Acme Quality Paints and Varnishes,
the world's higest standard in paints.
Not only do they retail their products,
but wholesale as well. If you are a
paint man, you will know what firm we
are referring to for they carry one of
the largest stocks in these parts. What

is the name of this firm and what do
they recommend for floor varnish?
Just call at the local store and their
salesmen will gladly assist you. How
many square feet will a gallon of Acme
Quality Paint cover two coats?

(12) Just up the street at Mr. Ethen's
is he liveliest spot in Palo Alto. There is
something doing there most all of the
time and especially so after supper. It
is a place where gentlemen congregate
and exchange experiences of the day
over a friendly game of pocket bil
liards. But, in addition to the billiard
parlor, they also conduct a large bowl
ing alley and soda fountain where they
will make you a creamy milk shake
that will certainly make you return for
another in a short while. They are also
local agents for the United Cigar
Stores and carry a line of cigars that
cannot be had in any other establish
ment in the city. If you are looking for
a friend, you are sure to find him here.
It is a place where practically every
man frequents once in a while just for
the gentlemanly company he is sure to
find. If it is a box of candy you wisn
for your girl, then this is the place for
you to seek. They carry several differ
ent makes and it is kept in a specially
equipped refrigerator which insures
you of freshness at any time. How
many pocket pool tables have they?
What line of pipes do they carry? How
many alleys are there and name what
team is leading in the bowling tourna
ment now being conducted?

(13) Now comes a renowned meat
market which sells fresh meats. In
deed their meats are fresh. They make
it a point to keep them so, which is
responsible for the popularity and
wonderful business gained in the past
months. There are mrny tricks em
ployed by the meat buyers in judging
duality, and the Stanford Meat Com
pany is perfectly willing to share its
secrets with you. They buy only the
best, but they want you to know at
the time of your purchase that you
are getting what you want. Cleanli
ness is the watchword of this market.
The business is so great that their
daily purchases keep their meats
fresh. They seldom carry much over
from one day to another. We enjoy
writing about this market and its
owner for several reasons. One is they
say "never mind about buying, just
come in and look the good things
over." Give exact address. How long
have they been established? What are
their phone numbers? How often do
they get fresu fish at this market?

(14) In buying drugs, you want the
best, including purity and service,
which are two essential things to con
s'der when selecting from which to
buy these needs. Impure drugs are
worse than none at all, and poor ser
vice means aggravation and annoy
ance. Only the best drugs are ever
handled at the Young Drug Company
at the corner of University avenue
and Florence street. The proprietor
is a registered pharmacist and he en
deavors to keep a stock that will
meet with all requirements and cus
tomers do not have to go elsewhere
for anything usually found in an up-to
date drug store. In addition to drugs,
they carry a large stock of perfumery,
toilet articles, safety razors, and if
you happen to have a sweet tooth,
their candies will be appealing to you.
This store has the agency for all of
the Owl products, so you may obtain
these goods right here at home. What
is Ihe proprietor's name? Also what
line of remedies do they handle? What
is "Pom Pom" Luster?

(15) We are now presenting a firm
where fresh staple and fancy groceries
can be secured. It is a concern with
a conscience, and has an aim to please
the hard-to-suit in their lines. In fact,
you can close your eyes and buy here,
and every sale carries a guarantee of
satisfaction, and a little profit is all
they ask. Now just stop a second and
say to yourself, "Where is the best
stock of fruits, vegetables and gro
ceries carried in Palo Alto?" The best
brands of everything are the distin
guishing characteristics of this store,
along with its sanitary aspect. It is a
source of personal satisfaction to the
writer to write about this "quality"
store and the proprietor, Mr. Earle,
Ever since he started, years ago, his
popularity has met with a steady in
crease. He is not only a popular mer
chant. but is an alert business man,
and his idea is to always make the
place home-like when you do business
with him or his clerks, and so far he
has succeeded, and if he can make
Palo Alto a better city you can depend
upon him to take off his coat, roll up
his sleeves and help put it over. He
has for those who need it, a smile,
and has won their business or confi
dence. No merchant in Palo Alto is
more popular with his customers than
the owner of this store. Name the
owner and give his first name in full,
location and phone.

(16) Here is a works that makes a
lot of noise in a legitimate way. It is a
sheet metal establishment. They have
been making a big noise
for some time. They make a
of tin and sheet iron, and a 112

cialties are tanks, and irrigating pipe,
.spouting, skylights, cornice as well as
tin and copper sheet metal specialties.
The expert tinner is a great necessity
i'or those owning homes or business
places, as they look to them for re
l airs and parts. To be efficient, they
must be skilled in their calling and
geniuses as well. And these things are
apparent at the Palo Alto Sheet Metal
Works. There are many ways of tin
ning that will not stand the test. These
people use the right way. The owners
of this shop believe it better to be on
the level with their customers than
to climb upward by a crooked path.
Such a firm as this we surely like to
include in our feature. In fact, we can
not say enough for them, for they de
serve much more than a mere word of
praise. They deserve sure success.
Who is the proprietor of this shop and
Low long have they been established
here. Where are they located? What
size Warm Air Heater does it take to
heat a 7-room house? and give the
price of it.

(17) When a business establish
ment has reached the heights of suc
cess and prominence, it is either cred
ited to the skillful management or to
the quality of merchandise they han
dle. At the enterprising store at 317
University Avenue both of these items
are responsible for their standing in
Palo Alto. The most prominent resi
dents of the city are among their cus
tomer list. Their costumes can always
be depended upon for beiug the latest
styles and the good quality never
varies. "Where there is quality, there
is style." The Style Shop is well
known for both. (The store is attrac
tively decorated and the merchandise
is displayed in such a manner that it
becomes a profound pleasure to shop
with them). Their courteous sales
women also render great assistance
with their timely suggestions of "what
is being worn" and you leave the store
pleased witn your visit, feeling that
you have wasted no time whatever.
What is the slogan of this enterpris
ing store. Tell name of this classy
store's proprietor. A Big Clearance
Sale is now going on at the Smart
Shop. Everything in the store is re
duced for this Sale.

(18) The most widely known and
recognized decorations for any and all
occasions are flowers. They are recog
nized internationally and more can be
said with a small bunch of flowers
than can be said with a dozen tele
grams or any other form of communi
cation. "Say it with flowers" is a fit
ting slogan for their usefulness and
worth. The one flower shop in Palo
Alto that has created a reputation for
having in stock all of the different
(lowers in season is known as the
Palo Alto Flower & Seed Shop. They
carry a complete line of flowers for
the dining room table, to ship to your
friends or pot flowers to decorate your
home and porches. When you desire
to remember yourself to a friend, this
is the one place to come for they will
make up a beautiful boquet for you.
The proprietor here likes flowers him
self, which is symbolic of happiness.
His disposition is also like that of a
flower, bright and full of cheer. Who
is this proprietor? What is the num
ber of the shop? What kind of seeds
does he carry? What are the names
of the jardiners that they are selling
that come from Japan?

(19) Who is there in this city en
gaged in correction and the conserva
tion of eyesight? Many have come to
him and received great relief when
troubled with eye defects. His strict
attention to his business has won for
him a host of friends and patrons. Dr.
Cochran will be found very busy at
his offices at 122 University avenue
and you will make no mistake in con
sulting him about your eyes. He has
passed the State Board of Optometry
examinations and is recognized for his
excellent work, and is also a graduate
Dr. of Optometry. In addition to
working on your eyes, he will replace
broken lenses or make you a complete
pair of glasses. The eyes are the win
dows of the soul and when they are
wrong, the body is handicapped, for,
without clear vision, we can't see the
world as it is. Eye troubles are often
started when young and your chil
dren's eyes should be examined before
it is too late. Make an appointment
•with Dr. Cochran and get his opinion.
His office is completely equipped with
all of the modern instruments used in
this work. What are Dr. Cochran's ini
tials, and what is the range of prices
for his glasses? What is the store
motto?

(20) Most men like to know where
they can find a good barber shop, as
they are very particular about per
sonal appearance. They demand satis
factory work. When I suggest Mar
quee's Barber Shop, I know what I'm
talking about. They have a very sani
tary little shop with all the modern
equipment, also including five modern
chairs. They specialize in all kinds of
shampooing, scalp and facial treat
ments. If you want your hair to have
jompadour cut, or any other kind,
t let Marquee's do it for you. If

you are having trouble with your
scalp, they can help you. Dixol is the
scalp treatment they recommend. They
also bob children's hair, so bring them
in the next time you are down town.
Just ask anyone who has visited Mar
quee's shop, and they will tell you
how well satisfied they were. Where
ic their shop located? What brands of
hair tonic do they use and recom
mend?

(21) A most important institution of
business in any city, town or commun
ity is the reliable drug store. Here it
is that we depend for our health. And
It ere is where we go when we want
toilet articles, kodak supplies, foun
tain pens and a hundred other luxuries
and necessities. The Kenyon & Crow
Store is known for its large and com
plete stock of all of these articles, and
in fact, anything found in a first-class
store. In addition to their general line
of pure drugs, assortments of high
class cosmetics and sundries, they are
tlie Penslar Store in Palo Alto. This
line of household remedies is com
plete. There is one for every possible
need or use. Now is the time to begin
to think about Christmas Gifts. A
large collection of hand-colored Christ
mas Cards have just arrived. They
are wonderful in design and color.
Fountain pens and Pen and Pencil sets
in Christmas Boxes make a very fine
pi esent to your student friends, or a
big box of gift stationery. At this store
they conduct the largest Kodak print
ing and developing business 011 the
Peninsula, handling a full line of East
man Kodaks and Cameras. One of
the big features of this store is their
framed pictures and mirrors. They
have a framing department and are
able to frame for you any size picture
with most any style mounting you
desire. What profit-sharing system do
they practice? Find out the four lead
ing perfumes they handle? In what
line do they excell all other concerns
in this locality? What are the pro
prietors' nicknames?

(22) There is a mail in this town
much wiser than his sires; he ran
into a bramble bush and punctured all
four tires. When he saw his tires
were wrecked, with all his might and
main, he went to this tire shop and
had them fixed again. One of the first
things to learn if you own an auto
mobile is to know what vulcanizing
nrm gives Service that Serves. The
Retread Shop is recognized for their
expert tire repairing. You should con
sult these doctors when your tires get
sick for they surely have the dope
that cures. You cannot help but like
this firm for those connected with it
make every effort possible to please
you. They will always go out of their
way to do a good turn for you, and if
you have tire trouble on the street,
just notify them and they will render
assistance People who do business
here are really proud .of ttie fact and
it is simply because they give what
the customers want and should have
—"Satisfaction." Go to this shop and
meet these tire men and then tell us
what make of tires they sell and what
their price for a Ford-size cord tire in
the make begins with "F." Give two
reasons why this tire is the best on
the market for its size.

(23) Pleasure of motoring is in
creased if your car is in good working
condition. It is, therefore, advisable to
have your car looked over before you
start on this trip and when you have
your car worked on, be sure of* your
garage. The Palo Alto Garage on Em
reson street is indeed a thoroughly
dependable establishment in regard to
their repairing. Mr. J. M. Blackburn
employs only expert mechanics. The
Palo Alto Garage has the agency for
the Durant car and many others such
as the Chandler, Cadillac, and Cleve
land. Have you seen the new 1923
model Durant. Just step in and let
them sTiow you what a wonderful mod
el it is. The proprietor of this garage,
Mr. J. M. Blackburn, personally super
vises the garage at all times, and as
sures you of prompt service whether
you are buying a spark plug or filling
your tank with gas. They have Ever-
Ready Battery service, and they also
carry Associated Gasoline. They want
satisfied customers at the Palo Alto
Garage. That is their motto. Give two
reasons why the Durant car is more
practical. What is Mr. Blackburn's
first jiame? How long have they been
established?

(24) In writing of the leading busi
ness firms and institutions of Palo
Alto, we have come across an inter
esting shop at 367 University Avenue,
that well deserves mentioning. No, it
won't interest you men, particularly—
but has an especial appeal to the wo
men of Palo Alio and vicinity who
are lovers of beautiful things. This at
tractive shop is fairly overflowing with
wonderful creations of Laces, Em
broideries, Frocks, and Sport Skirts,
Reads for the Miss and Mistress —at-
tractively displayed, and just a) at
tractively priced. These are only a
112» w of the many beautiful and useful
articles to be found in this modern,
up-to-date shop—and the proprietor
takes great pleasure in dispensing I
courteous and attentive service to
every patron. We want you to tell us
the name of this worth while shop—
also the proprietor's name and cor
rect address. What are their prices on
their dresses? What price on stamped
pillow cases? Also stamped dresser
scarfs which come in packages.
(25) Look prosperous and save
money at the same time. This is what
so many people are trying to do and |
cannot quite manage it. The reason is
that they do not know where to buy
economically and where to get goods
hat stand wear and look well. It is
not economy to buy a cheap "hand-me
down" suit of clothes. It is a waste of
money. If you have a suit made by
the tailor that this article is about,
you will get a suit of clothes that will
last. This tailor has been sixteen years
in Palo Alto and has the finest trade
on the Peninsula. Specialist on ladies'
tailoring and sport suits. He holds a
gold medal given to him at the Lewis
and Clark Exposition for designing.
You will be surprised at the chicness
as well as the exceedingly low price
he charges for a suit. And another fea
ture of this tailor, all of the tailoring
is done on the premises. He does not
take your order and send it to San
Francisco or New York. Who is this
progressive tailor? His establishment
is upstairs at 123 University avenue.
Better stop in and let him take your
measure and you select your pattern
and style at the same time.
(26) The best friend of womankingis
that which takes the grievous burdens
from her shoulders. No woman likes
to bend over washtubs or ironing
boards, and it is the mission of the
University French Laundry to per
form this highest physical service for
her. This laundry is almost our own
concern. It takes soiled linen and
turns it into attractive wearing ap
parel. It is an extensive industry, em
ploying many people. Wagons are sent
out in every direction in Palo Alto to
collect and deliver laundry and to keep
the various articles separated, so that
you don't get your neighbors' clothes,
is a job of a highly specialized order.
The methods used at this laundry are
thoroughly modern, and the machinery
equipment makes the work most satis
factory. The manager of this laundry
takes an active interest in the welfare
of Palo Alto and his absolute support
can be counted upon when anything
for the betterment of the city is in
progress. Who is this energetic man
ager, and where is the laundry lo
cated? How many employes has he?
What is the phone number?
(27) Well, here we are. Just what
interests all%women in Palo Alto. I
know when you go to that party or
dance you want to look charming. It
just requires a little personal atten
tion. You have often been to some pub
lic place and admired some ladies'
hair of the transparent texture of her
skin. The kind that is clear and
smooth. Well, you can have that charm
just the same as she. You go and see
Mrs. Marie Montgomery who has
charge of this exclusive Beauty Shop.
You will find every kind of modern
equipment desired in this shop, and
their work is very satisfactory. So
many girls have bobbed hair nowa
days, and they find it quite a task to
keep it looking well. Just drop into the
Montgomery Beauty Shop, and they
will marcelle your hair, and give the
ends a round curl which improves it
very much. You will find their egg
shampoo very invigorating. They spe
cialize in scalp and facial treatments.
They do hair waving and curling of
all kinds. What is one of the finest
scalp treatment? All kinds of facial
treatments are given by Mrs. Mont
gomery. Tell us the price of her
I'lactique Facial Treatment?
(28) What is the name of the store
that comes into your mind so clearly
when you speak of Art Goods? It is
Edwin R. Freeman's Art and Photo
Shop. There is no other place in the
city where they have such a large as
sortment of Wonderful Gifts to select
from. The writer cannot begin to tell
you of the hundreds of articles in this
store. The candlestick and framed and
unframed pictures are the best that
Mr Freeman could make and buy.
They have the largest picture fram
ing department on the Peninsula, giv
ing you the largest assortment of
frames to choose from. Christmas sea
son is nearing. Your motto is to do
your shopping early, and if you are
looking for gifts to give your friends
that will make them long remembered
to you, go to Freeman's Art Store. If
you have a picture that you cherish,
bring it here and let them frame it, or
a negative, enlarge it. They have a
complete service for films, kodaks, and
enlarging. How is it that Mr. Freeman
can sell his Foto Art Prints cheaper
than others?
(29) Palo Alto with its amazing
wealth and attractive terms and prices

when you are indebted to the wide
awake firm at 111 Circle. Their long
experience, knowledge of values and
expert advice in such matters have
won for them a large number of satis
fled customers. Through their devotion
to the business of their clients, Mr.
Helm has gained an enviable reputa
tion. Whether it be the buying of a
home or the selection of a lot or acre
age, you can be sure of finding just
what you want at attractive terms and
price when you are dealing with this
firm. This company also has many
ranch lands, both raw and improved.
In fact, their operations along this line
is, indeed, second to none in Palo Alto.
They are authorities on ranch lands
and if you name the location, they can
come pretty close to telling you the
value. Therefore, their advice and per
sonal service in such matters is indeed
important. Just drop in at their office
and they will gladly assist you. They
have just moved to 111 Circle, former
ly at 257 University avenue. What is
the name of this firm and what other
line of business do they follow? What
is Mr. Helm's first name? What is the
name of Mr. Helm's new assistant?
(30) Did you ever notice how you
admire the clothes of others and can
not understand why you never look as
well when you know personally that
you spend more money on your wear
ing apparel than this particular fel
low? The secret can easily be solved
if you do your shopping at the right
place. To test this out, the next time
you need a suit of clothes, a hat, or
anything in the gents' furnishing line,
go to Wideman & Son. This is one
exclusive haberdashery. Their stock is
composed of such well-known makes
as Kuppenheimer Clothes, Knapp Felt
Hats and Caps, handled by only the
best stores, and the fact of the matter
is, their entire stock bears names just
as well-known and highly recommend
ed as these few mentioned. Winter is
here and now is the time to see that
you are equipped for it. You certainly
need a new suit or a new hat. If you
don't think you do, come here and
look at the difference in the style of
your old one and their new stock.
You'll change your mind immediately.
And another thing about this store:
everyone is courteous, even the clerks
greet you with a smile, and are glad
to show you everything. How long has
this firm been established? Give exact
address. What is their business agree
ment with customers?
(31) Here is just the place to visit
for lunches and home-made pastry. It
is known as Kapps lunchroom. They
serve a nice little lunch there, and the
coffee is delicious. It is a very clean,
sanitary shop, and you get quick ser
vice. They have home-made pies,
cakes, and doughnuts. The doughnuts
are those world-wide known "Bake
Rite." They sell for twenty-five cents
per dozen. When you are down town
drop into this shop. There is nothing
more tasty than hot doughnuts and
coffee. The process- by which these
doughnuts are made makes them light
er and fluffier than the average dough
nut. And those home-made pies such as
pumpkin and mince, certainly are en
joyable at this time of year. They also
serve a noon-day lunch for the busi
ness man that is a dandy. How many
chairs do thew have in this shop? How
many meat pies do they make a day
and what do they sell for? Give the
exact location of this shop?
(32) There is at least one cigar
store in Palo Alto that caters to
smokers and men who want the best
merchandise for their money. The
Franklin Smoke House makes a spe
cialty of fine cigars, all kinds of cigar
ettes and they carry a large stock of
tobaccos, pipes and smokers' acces
sories. The proprietors believe in giv
ing the people what they want and if
you happen to want something that is
not ordinarily carried in stock, just
let him know and he will order it for
you. If it is in the world, he will come
near gettng it for you. A Soda Foun
tain in connection with the Cigar Store
gives you a cold drink at any time.
Malted milks a specialty. You could
not think of a more suitable present
for a man than a box of cigars and
when you buy them, they should be
chosen by a man who knows you. The
proprietor will assist you. What are
the initials of this energetic proprietor
and what make of candy does he sell?
The Franklin Smoke House is the
most popular place in town for card
games. Bring your friends and play a
friendly game of "rummy." How many
card tables in this establishment?
(33) Where is the bakery where you
can get fresh bread —any and all kinds
of it? Where can you get "bread that
is light, doughnuts that delight, and
pies just right." This is the tale of a
bakery whose products bring to mind
mother's baking day. They are so good
that people come for blocks just to
buy right out of the oven. Their prod
ucts are baked under the most strin
gent sanitary conditions. It is entirely
fitting that the "Who's Who" should
call your attention to this bakery, for
in patronizing the Golden Poppy
Bakery, you not only get the best baked

goods, but you save money as well.
The mention of this name In Palo Alto !
tells a tale of quality goods in this line |
and every housewife is familiar with |
the name and the goods. The big fea
ture with this shop is the making of
whole wheat bread, made from the
finest of wheats, The manager meets
his trade personally and his own per
sonality is responsible to a large de
gree for the patronage which they
have. Who is the manager of this
local bakery and what system do they
use in baking? What are the best
sellers in French Pastry?
(34) A man is as old as he feels, but
a woman is as old as she looks. I won
der how many women in Palo Alto
know the value of personal appear
ance. It is one of the many things
women neglect. If you will just drop
in and see Madame Musy in the Wil
son building, 132 University avenue,
you will receive the personal atten
tion you have so long desired. Madame
Musy is there to please her patrons
and she desires satisfied customers.
It is every woman's idea to be beauti
ful and Madame Musy wishes to help
you. She has a wonderful shop and
does the finest work. Madame Musy is
known for the wonderful marcels she
known for the wonderful marcells she
will say that this is the nearest to
a natural wave that you ever have
had. Years of experience in this busi
ness is the answer for her excellent
work. If you will just give her a trial
I am sure you will be one of her
steady customers. How much does she
charge for a marcell? What is her
phone number? What does Madame
Musy recommend for falling hair?
(35) It tickles everybody's vanity to
a certain degree to have his friends
say how well his home is furnished,
and perhaps many of these friends
secretly wish they knew where they
could buy furniture of equal looks.
There is no secret in obtaining the
right kind of furniture if one knows
the place to shop. The Warren Furni
ture Company is such a place. They
not only handle high-class furniture
for the parlor, bedroom and dining
room, but their kitchen department is
well stocked with ranges and cooking
utensils, and for the floor they have
the Congoleum. This is recognized for
its qualities of not bulging and crack
ing. It's easily cleaned and always
sanitary. Just go to this store once
and let them show you their collection
of home furnishings. They are sure to
suit your individual taste, no matter
how exacting. They are featuring at
this time their Occidental Ranges and
Stoves. Where is this large furniture
store located, and what make of mat
tress do they recommend for its com
fort? They also sell them. W T hat make
of beds do they carry?
(36) Think of something good to eat
and then think of the Stanford Cafe.
They are synonymous. Not only do
they conduct a counter service that is
most appealing to the man who is in a
hurry but they have attractive tables
for those who have time to sit and
enjoy the meal from all angles. The
food at this cafe is prepared just as it
is at home. They would not think
about serving anything to their pat
rons that they would not eat them
selves and this is proof enough of its
purity. Sanitation is one of the chief
objectives of the proprietors of this
restaurant and is everywhere evident.
The service is rendered in a prompt
manner and you are not left studying
the menu all day. They take your or
der when you first sit down. This is
one thing the proprietors find that ap
peals to their customers. They want im
mediate service and they get it. They
also serve the finest of ice cream and
home-made pastry. Who is the pro
gressive proprietor of this cafe and
how many stools have they at the
gressive proprietors of this cafe and
cated? What brand of coffee do they
use?
(37) The most conveniently and cen
trally located market in Palo Alto to
do your shopping is the Palo Alto
Market. This market caters to the dis
criminating buyers of fresh and cured
meats. To the people that are careful
of the meats they eat, these people
are their friends. They handle nothing
but the very best inspected meats, and
the proprietor does not depend upon
the Federal and State authorities al
together. He makes a personal inspec
tion of them when they enter his
store. If they are not right, bingo!
they are sent back. When you enter
this establishment you are confronted
with an air of absolute cleanliness and
sanitation. Clean sawdust protects the
floor and the glass show cases and
marble counters make it impossible
for bits of meat to "hide" from the
scrutinizing eye of the butchers. The
market on a whole is kept in a state
of cleanliness that will meet the ap
proval of anyone. In fact, sanitation is
their main objective. What is the
exact location of this modern market
and what is their,phone number? How
long have they been established? What
line of hams do they carry? Also what
is their buying rule?

a holiday. It is a gentlemen's billiard I
parlor, conducted for gentlemen by gen
tlemen. Mr. Mahaney sees that these
principles are carried out in detail. At
Mahaney's they have live pool tables,
one snooker table and two billiard
tables, which gives every one a chance
to play the game they like. When you
get thirsty they have a soda fountain in
connection serving the finest of cold
drinks. All the standard brands of
cigars are carried here, and, believe me,
they are fresh. At their store No. 2,
next to the Stanford Theater, you will
find Mr. Krebs in charge, who is asso
ciated with Mr. Mahaney. A full line
of smokers' needs are carried here and
a big supply of cigars in boxes of 10,
25 and 50 in Christmas boxes will be
featured. Ladies' patronage is socilited
at this store. Get your Christmas Gifts
here for the men folks. What is Mr.
Mahaney's first name? Give the location
of store No. 1. What is Mr. Kreb's first
name?
(43) A famous banker once gave a
young man this advice: "Save your
money and look prosperous." We have
known young men to fail because they
did not realize the importance of being
well dressed. A good suit is a dis
tinctive asset to any man. If he is well
dressed, he immediately commands at
tention. If you want the right suit at
the right price, patronize Frazer & Co.
They are the home of good clothes in
Palo Alto, and in addition to these high
grade clothes, they carry such standard
lines of furnishings as Manhattan shirts
and Everwear hosiery. In fact, their
stock borders along high-class lines, and
it is the store in which to do your fall
shopping. They have many new styles,
cuts and materials awaiting your in
spection and their prices are very low,
consistent with the quality. The whole
store commands a high position in the
mercantile establishments of Palo Alto
because of the quality of merchandise
they handle. Meet these people and you
have met twentieth century merchants.
What make of clothing do they sell, and
what is the slogan of these clothes? Give
location, of the store.
(44) Just say "His Master's Voice"
and you have immediately spoken of the
best-known phonograph on the market.
The Victrola is made by pioneer manu
facturers in the business. It is the choice
of the greatest artists who indorse its
unerring register of the original voice
or instrument. Ralph C. Dodson's Music
Store, 340 University avenue, has Vic-,
trolas in many styles and prices. In
addition to the Victrolas this shop also
carries a large line of Victor records,
and new ones are added as soon as they
are released from the factory. A good
tip to the student is to have a "portable"
Victrola with you. If you want to dance
it is always handy and will give you
the music you like the best whenever
you want it. Go in and let them show
you their selection of Victrolas. They
will be glad to play for you any record
you would like to hear. You will ap
preciate meeting these people and they
will appreciate your patronage. Where
are the machines manufactured and how
long has this music shop been established?
What is the price of the style 100 Vic
trola? Have you heard the best seller
in records this month, "I Found a Four-
Leaf Clover," and what is the price of
this record ?
(45) Let's go to the movies. This
expression often shakes away gloom and
dullness and you gladly join the happy
ries a complete stock of crockery ware,
see a regular show. By "movies" the
people of Palo Alto mean the Varsity
and Stanford theaters. They know that
at these playhouses they will see the
best of screen offerings at prices con
sistent with conditions. These two cozy
theaters give the patrons day in and day
out the best in film plays that money
can buy. To those few in Palo Alto
that have not had the pleasure of at
tending these two modern playhouses,
they are missing one of the great joys
of life. The products of the most gifted
imaginations of the world are beautifully
and artistically portrayed with an ac
companiment of the finest of organ
music. You should get their regular
weekly program, which gives you the
names of the shows and the nights upon
which they will be exhibited. Tell us
the manager's name of the Varsity The
ater and how many seats have they?
Give us the exact location of the Stan
ford Theater. What is the Big Special
picture coming there next Monday?
(46) You may say what you want,
but say "Hardware" and the minds of
the people of Palo Alto will revert
automatically to the Palo Alto Hard
ware Company, "The Winchester Store."
This firm carries a complete line of
hardware, consisting of carpenters' and
mechanics' tools of every description;
cutlery as well as builders' hardware,
sporting goods, Bass Hcuter Paints,
Pennsylvania Vacuum Cup Tires—in
fact, everything you would expcct to find
in a modern up-to-date hardware store.
The Palo Alto Hardware Company is
known as the "Winchester Store," carry
ing a full line of Winchester products.
The Winchester Company puts out one
article each month at a special price—
the public are looking forward each
month for these big specials. The special
for November is a Winchester Flash

(3S) Time is money. Save time and
money. Spend the ten minutes allowed
on your street car transfer, buying
Christmas Cards or forgotten station
ery supplies at llyde's, 370 University
avenue, right at the transfer point.
There are but two transfer points, the
depot and opposite Hyde's new store.
Tou can get a basket for your many
packages here or a beautifully decor
ated one to send as a Christmas gift.
If you want a Fountain Pen, which one
does Hyde's guarantee? If you want to
give stationery to your sister, which
of Hyde's brands would you choose?
Which will have the bigger sale at
Hyde's for the kiddies, "Kritters of the
Kitchen Kingdom," or "The Chickens
Eating Corn"? What line of goods is
being especially featured at Hyde's
besides sttftionery, school supplies,
fountain pens, pictures, picture frames,
baskets, candles, beads, games, toys,
favors, memory books, and albums?
Call at Hyde's at the transfer point,
and they can answer the above ques
tions and also give you many sugges
tions for charming and inexpensive
Christmas presets. Their new store is
one of the finest of its kind in P. A.
(39) It is every man's wish to own
his own home. It makes for family
contentment and happiness. It saves
paying rent.
The University Realty Company sp&-
j cializes in providing people with
homes. Consult them as you would any
specialist.
Years of experience in this com
munity stands back of the University
Realty Company.
This Company can serve you in the
purchase or sale of real estate, in writ
ing all kinds of insurance, in renting
and leasing, in fact, in all matters per
taining to real estate and insurance.
How long has this Company been in
business in Palo Alto? Name one in
surance company that it represents.
(40) If you want to make your
friends happy, present them with a
good photograph of yourself. A photo
graph is a token of real friendship,
and is highly appreciated by everyone.
And when you are in Palo Alto and
desire a portrait of yourself and are
not satisfied with just ordinary work,
go to the Shattuck Studio and you will
be pleased. This is one man who is
"behind the camera, but not behind
the times." His portrait work is indic
ative of this. In his little studio on
University avenue he will be found
very busy most every day snapping
and developing and then touching up,
putting the finishing touches on, which
removes all blemishes. The art of fin
ishing portraits is not possessed by
everyone, but this photographer is in
deed an expert. Then, too, his prices
are exceedingly moderate, considering
the beauty and quality of work turned
out. You are always sure of a success
ful picture here. Do you know that
your picture is the only present your
friends cannot buy? Where is the
exact location of this studio? What
other photographic work do they do?
(41) Everyone knows Wagner, "The
Meat Man." He is a master in the meat
business. He came to Palo Alto eight
years ago and started business in a
small market in a small way on High
street. Today his business has ex
panded to such an extent that it has
outgrown the old market.
Mr. Wagner says he doesn't take the
credit for making his business what it
is in Palo Alto, but owes it to Mr. N.
Benson who has been with him ever
since he has located in this vicinity
and who will continue to manage the
local market. Mr. Benson has a great
many friends here in Palo Alto.
Mr. Wagnor owns the block of four
stores on the corner of University and
Florence streets, his new market being
the main Corner Store Room. This
wonder market is a palace of marble.
The counters are of marble and glass
and the latest word in modern sanita
tion. The woodwork is finished in
French gray and the walls in gray
with green trimmings. Cold storage
plant is of the latest modern auto
matic control and the best that money
can buy.
There is not a question in tlie
writer's mind but what this is one of
the most modern and finest equipped
markets in the state of California.
Mr. Wagner owns a chain of mar
kets extending to San Jose and Hol
lister and most of his time is con
fined to the purchasing end of the bus
iness. He has been in the meat bus
iness so long that he doesn't guess at
the quality of meat when he buys. He
knows that they are the best, so, when
purchasing the meat from him you
don't have to worry about its not being
of the best quality.
He is still going to be known as
"The Meat Man" in his new market
and will give the same service and
high quality meats that has made him
such a success.
It will pay you to watch for his ad
vertisements appearing in the daily
papers.
(42) This article is about one of the
liveliest spots in Palo Alto. There is
something doing here most all of the
time, and especially after dinner or on

Light, complete with battery for 89 cents.
The Palo Alto Hardware Company Car
rie sa complete stock of crockery ware,
dishes in plain and open sets and the
finest aluminum and enameled ware in
the city. How long has this store been
established? What is tie special price
on the 50-piece set of Gold Band Potter
Chinaware? What make of electric
washer do they sell?
(47) Fitting feet is a matter of no
little importance, for there .ire a very
few people that enjoy the fitting of a
n<iw pair of shoes, even when they fit
perfectly. However, Thoit's Shoe Store
is a firm that is noted all over the Coast
for its ability to produce shoes that
"feel just like the old ones." They are
the local distributors of Hanan Shoes
and other reputable makes of more mod
erate price. This store is a home store.
Its management is a good example to
follow, for courtesy and personal ser
vice is its aim. It is needless to speak
of the quality of their shoes, as this is
too well known, but we will say that they
carefully select as to quality, workman
ship and style. Their wearing qualities,
as well as looks, are second to none.
When you have met the proprietor of
the local firm you will have met a man
that is all for Stanford and Palo Alto.
Where is their modern shoe store lo
cated? How many members of the fam
ily can they fit in shoes? When was
this business established?
(48) There is one photographer in.
Palo Alto, "An Artistic Photographer,"'
who has gained a national reputation
and holds first prize in America for ex
cellency of work. He now has por
traits on exhibition in the National Salon.
Has also been awarded highest honors
in the states of New York, Ohio and
Michigan. He has probably photo
graphed more prominent and profes
sional people than any photographer in
America. Was with Hartsook Studios
for the past eleven years, specializing
principally in photographing moving pic
ture stars and theatricals in general. A
visit to his studio, 126 University ave
nue, which was formerly the Davey
Studio, will convince the most skeptical
of the superiority of his work. Who is
this artist who has made it possible for
the Palo Alto people to get something
different, something highly artistic*
without having to go to the larger
cities? And what makes a successful
artistic portrait? Remember Friend
ship's Perfect Gift—Your Photo.
(49) There is a wonderful industry
in this city that 1 belit*vo many do not
know about. Why is it so many people
go to San Francisco to purchase their
gifts when right here in Palo Alto there
is a shop that is known by exclusive
shops all over the United States and
whose goods have gone to England..
Australia, and Honolulu? Miss Herrick
conducts a shop the year round to servj;
you. When you are thinking of gifts,
go first to Miss Herrick's and you will
be surprised at the exclusive articles
you will find there and more reasonably
priced than elsewhere. This Studio must,
be seen to be appreciated. Give us the
names of two articles just received from
India. Tell us three articles made ex
clusively in Herrick Studios and sold
all over the United States.
(50) Here is one of the busiest stores
in Palo Alto. Segar Service Shop. Be
lieve me, the proprietor sure is popular
with the young fellows. There never is
a time but what you will see a bunch in
his store. The reason for that is his
service to every one, no matter if you
only buy a package of cigarette papers*
or if it is a brier pipe, you get the same
courteous treatment. A large assortment
of pipes have just arrived for the Christ
mas trade. Also jars of smoking to
bacco. A complete line of magazines
are carried here. In connection with this
modern Cigar Store we have a real Ser
vice Barber Shop, operated by Mr. Par
vin. They are all union barbers and ex
pert haircutters. This shop is the oldest
in town. If you only want a shave, don't
be afraid to come here. These barbers
don't bother the life out of you selling
you something else in the shop. Try
these boys the first chance you get. Get
an Almond Meal and Peroxide Steam
Facial Massage. Tell us Mr. Parvin's
first name. Tell us how many maga
zines Mr. Corns has for sale at the
Cigar Counter. Give us the exact loca
tion of these two establishments.
(1) Think of the countless obstacles
the pioneers of old had to overcome
as they journeyed forth to lay the
foundation for a future that might
hold some promise' for them. Some
achieved their goal, others failed. Then
consider your own environment and
chances for the future. Your lot is a
path of roses compared with that of
tho pioneers. jfist lay aside a small
amount each week and start an ac
count with the First National Bank of
Palo Alto. They have a capital of
$100,000.00, and $24,000 surplus, and
are members of the Federal Reserve
System of Banking. The officers and
everyone connected with this bank
have always practiced service and
courtesy to their patrons. You are
treated with consideration whether
you are a large or small depositor or
whether you are a temporary visitor in
this favored locality. A man putting
his money in a bank should always
make sure that the institution is finan
cially solid and this is just such a
bank. They pay 4 per cent interest on
Term Deposits. Name the directors of
this banking institution. What is the
margin of security including stock
holders' liability?

(2) In purchasing jewelry, the buyer
puts more faith in the seller than any
other commodity that men buy and
sell. This article is about a jewelry
store that has been in business in
Palo Alto for a number of years, and
their reputation for being dependable
is second to none. In addition to their
exceptional stock of watches, jewelry,
rings, SILVERWARE, cut glass, etc.,
they do expert watch and jewelry re
pairing. This is the store to select your
•"Gifts That Last." Nielsen and Culver
are the kind of fellows we like to men
tion in our columns, because they have
a sociable and intelligent personality
—ones who know how to make friends
and keep them. Go see this store and
look over their high class line of jew
elry and you are sure to make all of
your purchases in this line from them.
Every article they sell not only bears
the guarantee of the manufacturers,
but their personal guarantee goes with
it as well. If you have a broken piece
of jewelry, no matter how fine it is,
they will repair it for you. What are
Mr. Culver'? initials, and where is
their store located. Also what other
department do they conduct? What is
their leading line of Silverware?

(3) It ticV les everybody's vanity to
a certain dc pre e to have his friends
say how we ! his homo is furnished,
and perhaps many of these friends se
cretly wish they knew where they
could buy furniture of equal looks.
There is no secret of obtaining the
right kind cf furniture if one knows
the place to shop. The Palo Alto Fur
niture Company is such a place. They
not only hf nd!e high-class furniture
for the parlor, bofl-roora and dining
room, but their kitchen department is
well stocked with ranges and
utensils and for the floor they have
Linoleum of the latest designs and
patterns. It is easily cleaned and al-

Introducing to You the Live Progressive Firms and People Who Make
up the Business Interests of Palo Alto
First Prize —$10.00 Theatre Tickets contributed by
* VARSITY AND STANFORD THEATRES
Second Prize —One Dozen Photographs contributed by
SHATTUCK STUDIOS
Third Prize —One Hand Painted Oil Picture of Chapel
contributed by FREEMAN'S ART STORE
Fourth Prize —One Box of Chancellor (after dinner) Cigars
contributed by FRANKLIN'S SMOKE HOUSE

ways sanitary. Just go to this store !
once and let them show you their col
lection of home furnishings. They are
sure to suit your individual taste, no
matter how exacting. They are featur
ing a complete line of stoves and
ranges. The best in the world is
Wedgewood. Where is this large fur
niture store located? and what make
of water heaters do, they recommend?
How many square feet of Inlaid Lin
oleum are they now laying in the Rus
sel Cafeteria?

(4) No matter who you are and what
your life is, it can be made happier
and better through the influence of
music. This up-to-date store that we
are writing about is the home of the
best there is in music, and they are
representatives for Brunswick and
Columbia phonographs. The Music
Shop at 273 University Avenue is the
music house of Palo Alto, for they not
only carry and sell phonographs and
pianos, but they carry all kinds of
musical instruments, sheet music,
player rolls and records. If you are
fond of string instruments, they have
anything from the ukelele to the cello.
They are exclusive representatives in
Palo Alto for two well-known phono
graphs which are recognized for their ;
many exceptional qualities. These ma
chines play disc records of any make.
If you like a lot of noise moulded into
music, then they have drums for your
choice. The proprietor here is a music
loving man, himself, and he delights in
showing his line to patrons. A visit
from you will be appreciated. What
make of Band Instruments does he
carry? Who are the manufacturers of
the Victor and Brunswick? What is
the price of the Gretsch Sac., Melody
C, Finish No. 2?

(5) Two of the best places to eat in j
Palo Alto are home and here. That is
what the editor thought after trying
one of this restaurant home-cooked
meals. All of you people do not know
of this restaurant or you would be
Johnny on the spot every time Old
Man Hunger gripped your frame. They
not only cater to the man who is in a
hurry with counter service but they
have linen-covered tables for the
ladies. However, the same service is
had at both places and at the same
prices. If you have lots of time to sit
and enjoy your meal, then sit at the
tables, but if you are a business man
with only a few minutes to "grab"
your lunch, the counter service will be
most ideal. The location of this home
like place is 105 Alma Street. The
proprietor of this restaurant has a
most affable manner and he does all
in his power to please his patrons.;
Anything that you want is not too
much trouble for him to get. He uses
the best grade of meats and come
fresh from the meat market when he
needs them and not a week before, j
Who is the energetic proprietor of the
"Popular" restaurant? What is the
price of their noon lunch? What brand
of coffee do they use? How much are
their meal tickets?

(6) Clothes cost too much money to
be carelessly cleaned and pressed, i
Your tailor should be picked just as
your doctor or your grocer. It is just
as important. If you send your clothes
to first one cleaner and then anothf r,
in the ert'd your clothes will be ruined,
and with none to blame but yourself.
The Stanford Dyeing and Cleaning
Works commands a high position in
the cleaning and pressing business of
Palo Alto, and they always guarantee
their work. These people know how to
press a suit. They press it to its
natural form and not "against the
srain." They also use an odorless pro
cess in their cleaning and every meth
od of handling clothes that is modern
is used by them. They have a call and
delivery system and for them to keep
your wardrobe in prefect trim at all
times is no trouble for you. They will
call at your home at regular intervals
tor your clothes and return them
promptly. This prompt service is a
great item in their business. They also
do repairing. What does this firm
charge for cleaning and pressing a
suit, and where is their plant located?
What does 444 mean?

(7) Chiropractic was born 27 years
•,'Ko. The suspicion, distrust and re
sentful criticism aimed at it in the

beginning has been dispelled. Chiro
practors have proven their worth in
healing the sick and lame with their
chiropractic adjustments. With all of
this human service in California they
were held under the yoke of the med
ical board. But thanks to the fair
minded people of this state, that is
over.
Dr. Minor and Dr. Hall wish to thank
all Iheir friends for the support they
gave them. These two doctors are
graduates of the Palmer School of
Chiropractic in Davenport, lowa. They
have practiced Chiropractic for years.
People come for miles around to Doc
tors Minor and Hall.
They are located at 153 University
Avenue. Give both the 'doctors' first
names and give two reasons why Chi
ropractic is beneficial to one's health.

(8) Don't junk your old tires. Take
them to a reliable tire shop and get
their opinion on their condition. They
may be vulcanized and run for several
thcHtsand miles more. And if you want
an honest opinion as to this, take your
tires to Palo Alto Vulcanizing Works.
Tires are this man's sole business,
and we make no mistake when we say
that he knows his business thoroughly.
Vhen he has patched a tube or vul
canized a "shoe" for you, then he has
made a friend. A guarantee goes with
evefy job he does and this is a guar
antee of absolute satisfaction. There
is no money value set on it, but it is a
personal guarantee that you get what
you want and no matter what it cost
him, he'll see that you get it. In addi
tion to the vulcanizing and repair de
partment, this man also carries a stock
of Goodyear tires and he has y ur size.
You don't want to meet a more con
genial man than Mr. Bogges with a
smile for you. Where is the shop lo
cated? What is his price for a Good
year Ford all-weather fabric tire?
What is the price of the 40x10 solid
truck tire that Mr. Bogges has in his
window?

(9) It is a source of discomfort and
worry for some people to buy a new
pair of shoes, but if you are careful in
selecting the correct size in the right
grade of shoes, you will not have this
inconvenience to contend with. At the
Lentos Shoe Store they will not only
sell you a new pair of shoes, but they
will make your old ones like new for
you. They conduct a modern electrical
shoe repairing shop in connection with
the shoe store and they do the work
just like it is done at the factories.
Let your next pair of shoes come from
this store and they will last you much
longer, for when you have worn off
the original soles, just return them
and they will put new ones on at a
small cost. They use the very best
double wear genuine leather soles and
the name and trade mark is stamped
cn them. When you have work done
here, it is well guaranteed, and there
is something back of the guarantee.
Then if it is in the power of these
people to do you a good turn, they
certainly will take pleasure in doing
it. They work for others as well as
themselves. What brand of pure
leather do they use on their soles, and
where is the store located?

. (10) Is milk and cream an important
part of your daily meals? If not, you
are one out of a hundred. Then with
this in view, it is only natural for peo
ple to be sure that their milk and
cream is' absolutely light. And to be
"right" it should contain a certain per
cent of butterfat, as well as be clean
and free from all foreign matter. The
milk, cream, butter and dairy products
you get at the Altomont Creamery are
all that the name implies—sanitary.
They feature pasteurized and guaran
teed dairy products. You can ask for
no better merchandise in this line. So
the next time you need any dairy
products of any sort, whether it be
butter, milk, cream, or cottage cheese,
just go to the Altomont Creamery. It
will be filled with satisfaction.
These people will give you service, as
their business depends upon it. If they
did not give you good service on your
first trip, you would not return again,
and they want your future friendship
and business. What is the location of
this firm's retail store, and what do
they get per quart for their milk. What
does pasteurized mean? and what does
guaranteed milk mean?

(11) When the pioneers blazed a
trail across the continent in '49 there
was also organized a man that blazed
the way in the paint industry, W. T.
Floyd. Since that time, this firm has
been beautifying Palo Alto with its
products. In addition to paints, they
also sell oils, glass, and if you are
looking for a waterproof paint, this is
the place to go. The Hadle Stormtight
Roof Paint firm has a very modern and
up-to-date store, and they are known
for their neatness and complete stock
of goods they carry. This store is a
credit to any city. This store which
this writing is for has the agency for
Acme Quality Paints and Varnishes,
the world's higest standard in paints.
Not only do they retail their products,
but wholesale as well. If you are a
paint man, you will know what firm we
are referring to for they carry one of
the largest stocks in these parts. What

is the name of this firm and what do
they recommend for floor varnish?
Just call at the local store and their
salesmen will gladly assist you. How
many square feet will a gallon of Acme
Quality Paint cover two coats?

(12) Just up the street at Mr. Ethen's
is he liveliest spot in Palo Alto. There is
something doing there most all of the
time and especially so after supper. It
is a place where gentlemen congregate
and exchange experiences of the day
over a friendly game of pocket bil
liards. But, in addition to the billiard
parlor, they also conduct a large bowl
ing alley and soda fountain where they
will make you a creamy milk shake
that will certainly make you return for
another in a short while. They are also
local agents for the United Cigar
Stores and carry a line of cigars that
cannot be had in any other establish
ment in the city. If you are looking for
a friend, you are sure to find him here.
It is a place where practically every
man frequents once in a while just for
the gentlemanly company he is sure to
find. If it is a box of candy you wisn
for your girl, then this is the place for
you to seek. They carry several differ
ent makes and it is kept in a specially
equipped refrigerator which insures
you of freshness at any time. How
many pocket pool tables have they?
What line of pipes do they carry? How
many alleys are there and name what
team is leading in the bowling tourna
ment now being conducted?

(13) Now comes a renowned meat
market which sells fresh meats. In
deed their meats are fresh. They make
it a point to keep them so, which is
responsible for the popularity and
wonderful business gained in the past
months. There are mrny tricks em
ployed by the meat buyers in judging
duality, and the Stanford Meat Com
pany is perfectly willing to share its
secrets with you. They buy only the
best, but they want you to know at
the time of your purchase that you
are getting what you want. Cleanli
ness is the watchword of this market.
The business is so great that their
daily purchases keep their meats
fresh. They seldom carry much over
from one day to another. We enjoy
writing about this market and its
owner for several reasons. One is they
say "never mind about buying, just
come in and look the good things
over." Give exact address. How long
have they been established? What are
their phone numbers? How often do
they get fresu fish at this market?

(14) In buying drugs, you want the
best, including purity and service,
which are two essential things to con
s'der when selecting from which to
buy these needs. Impure drugs are
worse than none at all, and poor ser
vice means aggravation and annoy
ance. Only the best drugs are ever
handled at the Young Drug Company
at the corner of University avenue
and Florence street. The proprietor
is a registered pharmacist and he en
deavors to keep a stock that will
meet with all requirements and cus
tomers do not have to go elsewhere
for anything usually found in an up-to
date drug store. In addition to drugs,
they carry a large stock of perfumery,
toilet articles, safety razors, and if
you happen to have a sweet tooth,
their candies will be appealing to you.
This store has the agency for all of
the Owl products, so you may obtain
these goods right here at home. What
is Ihe proprietor's name? Also what
line of remedies do they handle? What
is "Pom Pom" Luster?

(15) We are now presenting a firm
where fresh staple and fancy groceries
can be secured. It is a concern with
a conscience, and has an aim to please
the hard-to-suit in their lines. In fact,
you can close your eyes and buy here,
and every sale carries a guarantee of
satisfaction, and a little profit is all
they ask. Now just stop a second and
say to yourself, "Where is the best
stock of fruits, vegetables and gro
ceries carried in Palo Alto?" The best
brands of everything are the distin
guishing characteristics of this store,
along with its sanitary aspect. It is a
source of personal satisfaction to the
writer to write about this "quality"
store and the proprietor, Mr. Earle,
Ever since he started, years ago, his
popularity has met with a steady in
crease. He is not only a popular mer
chant. but is an alert business man,
and his idea is to always make the
place home-like when you do business
with him or his clerks, and so far he
has succeeded, and if he can make
Palo Alto a better city you can depend
upon him to take off his coat, roll up
his sleeves and help put it over. He
has for those who need it, a smile,
and has won their business or confi
dence. No merchant in Palo Alto is
more popular with his customers than
the owner of this store. Name the
owner and give his first name in full,
location and phone.

(16) Here is a works that makes a
lot of noise in a legitimate way. It is a
sheet metal establishment. They have
been making a big noise
for some time. They make a
of tin and sheet iron, and a 112

cialties are tanks, and irrigating pipe,
.spouting, skylights, cornice as well as
tin and copper sheet metal specialties.
The expert tinner is a great necessity
i'or those owning homes or business
places, as they look to them for re
l airs and parts. To be efficient, they
must be skilled in their calling and
geniuses as well. And these things are
apparent at the Palo Alto Sheet Metal
Works. There are many ways of tin
ning that will not stand the test. These
people use the right way. The owners
of this shop believe it better to be on
the level with their customers than
to climb upward by a crooked path.
Such a firm as this we surely like to
include in our feature. In fact, we can
not say enough for them, for they de
serve much more than a mere word of
praise. They deserve sure success.
Who is the proprietor of this shop and
Low long have they been established
here. Where are they located? What
size Warm Air Heater does it take to
heat a 7-room house? and give the
price of it.

(17) When a business establish
ment has reached the heights of suc
cess and prominence, it is either cred
ited to the skillful management or to
the quality of merchandise they han
dle. At the enterprising store at 317
University Avenue both of these items
are responsible for their standing in
Palo Alto. The most prominent resi
dents of the city are among their cus
tomer list. Their costumes can always
be depended upon for beiug the latest
styles and the good quality never
varies. "Where there is quality, there
is style." The Style Shop is well
known for both. (The store is attrac
tively decorated and the merchandise
is displayed in such a manner that it
becomes a profound pleasure to shop
with them). Their courteous sales
women also render great assistance
with their timely suggestions of "what
is being worn" and you leave the store
pleased witn your visit, feeling that
you have wasted no time whatever.
What is the slogan of this enterpris
ing store. Tell name of this classy
store's proprietor. A Big Clearance
Sale is now going on at the Smart
Shop. Everything in the store is re
duced for this Sale.

(18) The most widely known and
recognized decorations for any and all
occasions are flowers. They are recog
nized internationally and more can be
said with a small bunch of flowers
than can be said with a dozen tele
grams or any other form of communi
cation. "Say it with flowers" is a fit
ting slogan for their usefulness and
worth. The one flower shop in Palo
Alto that has created a reputation for
having in stock all of the different
(lowers in season is known as the
Palo Alto Flower & Seed Shop. They
carry a complete line of flowers for
the dining room table, to ship to your
friends or pot flowers to decorate your
home and porches. When you desire
to remember yourself to a friend, this
is the one place to come for they will
make up a beautiful boquet for you.
The proprietor here likes flowers him
self, which is symbolic of happiness.
His disposition is also like that of a
flower, bright and full of cheer. Who
is this proprietor? What is the num
ber of the shop? What kind of seeds
does he carry? What are the names
of the jardiners that they are selling
that come from Japan?

(19) Who is there in this city en
gaged in correction and the conserva
tion of eyesight? Many have come to
him and received great relief when
troubled with eye defects. His strict
attention to his business has won for
him a host of friends and patrons. Dr.
Cochran will be found very busy at
his offices at 122 University avenue
and you will make no mistake in con
sulting him about your eyes. He has
passed the State Board of Optometry
examinations and is recognized for his
excellent work, and is also a graduate
Dr. of Optometry. In addition to
working on your eyes, he will replace
broken lenses or make you a complete
pair of glasses. The eyes are the win
dows of the soul and when they are
wrong, the body is handicapped, for,
without clear vision, we can't see the
world as it is. Eye troubles are often
started when young and your chil
dren's eyes should be examined before
it is too late. Make an appointment
•with Dr. Cochran and get his opinion.
His office is completely equipped with
all of the modern instruments used in
this work. What are Dr. Cochran's ini
tials, and what is the range of prices
for his glasses? What is the store
motto?

(20) Most men like to know where
they can find a good barber shop, as
they are very particular about per
sonal appearance. They demand satis
factory work. When I suggest Mar
quee's Barber Shop, I know what I'm
talking about. They have a very sani
tary little shop with all the modern
equipment, also including five modern
chairs. They specialize in all kinds of
shampooing, scalp and facial treat
ments. If you want your hair to have
jompadour cut, or any other kind,
t let Marquee's do it for you. If

you are having trouble with your
scalp, they can help you. Dixol is the
scalp treatment they recommend. They
also bob children's hair, so bring them
in the next time you are down town.
Just ask anyone who has visited Mar
quee's shop, and they will tell you
how well satisfied they were. Where
ic their shop located? What brands of
hair tonic do they use and recom
mend?

(21) A most important institution of
business in any city, town or commun
ity is the reliable drug store. Here it
is that we depend for our health. And
It ere is where we go when we want
toilet articles, kodak supplies, foun
tain pens and a hundred other luxuries
and necessities. The Kenyon & Crow
Store is known for its large and com
plete stock of all of these articles, and
in fact, anything found in a first-class
store. In addition to their general line
of pure drugs, assortments of high
class cosmetics and sundries, they are
tlie Penslar Store in Palo Alto. This
line of household remedies is com
plete. There is one for every possible
need or use. Now is the time to begin
to think about Christmas Gifts. A
large collection of hand-colored Christ
mas Cards have just arrived. They
are wonderful in design and color.
Fountain pens and Pen and Pencil sets
in Christmas Boxes make a very fine
pi esent to your student friends, or a
big box of gift stationery. At this store
they conduct the largest Kodak print
ing and developing business 011 the
Peninsula, handling a full line of East
man Kodaks and Cameras. One of
the big features of this store is their
framed pictures and mirrors. They
have a framing department and are
able to frame for you any size picture
with most any style mounting you
desire. What profit-sharing system do
they practice? Find out the four lead
ing perfumes they handle? In what
line do they excell all other concerns
in this locality? What are the pro
prietors' nicknames?

(22) There is a mail in this town
much wiser than his sires; he ran
into a bramble bush and punctured all
four tires. When he saw his tires
were wrecked, with all his might and
main, he went to this tire shop and
had them fixed again. One of the first
things to learn if you own an auto
mobile is to know what vulcanizing
nrm gives Service that Serves. The
Retread Shop is recognized for their
expert tire repairing. You should con
sult these doctors when your tires get
sick for they surely have the dope
that cures. You cannot help but like
this firm for those connected with it
make every effort possible to please
you. They will always go out of their
way to do a good turn for you, and if
you have tire trouble on the street,
just notify them and they will render
assistance People who do business
here are really proud .of ttie fact and
it is simply because they give what
the customers want and should have
—"Satisfaction." Go to this shop and
meet these tire men and then tell us
what make of tires they sell and what
their price for a Ford-size cord tire in
the make begins with "F." Give two
reasons why this tire is the best on
the market for its size.

(23) Pleasure of motoring is in
creased if your car is in good working
condition. It is, therefore, advisable to
have your car looked over before you
start on this trip and when you have
your car worked on, be sure of* your
garage. The Palo Alto Garage on Em
reson street is indeed a thoroughly
dependable establishment in regard to
their repairing. Mr. J. M. Blackburn
employs only expert mechanics. The
Palo Alto Garage has the agency for
the Durant car and many others such
as the Chandler, Cadillac, and Cleve
land. Have you seen the new 1923
model Durant. Just step in and let
them sTiow you what a wonderful mod
el it is. The proprietor of this garage,
Mr. J. M. Blackburn, personally super
vises the garage at all times, and as
sures you of prompt service whether
you are buying a spark plug or filling
your tank with gas. They have Ever-
Ready Battery service, and they also
carry Associated Gasoline. They want
satisfied customers at the Palo Alto
Garage. That is their motto. Give two
reasons why the Durant car is more
practical. What is Mr. Blackburn's
first jiame? How long have they been
established?

(24) In writing of the leading busi
ness firms and institutions of Palo
Alto, we have come across an inter
esting shop at 367 University Avenue,
that well deserves mentioning. No, it
won't interest you men, particularly—
but has an especial appeal to the wo
men of Palo Alio and vicinity who
are lovers of beautiful things. This at
tractive shop is fairly overflowing with
wonderful creations of Laces, Em
broideries, Frocks, and Sport Skirts,
Reads for the Miss and Mistress —at-
tractively displayed, and just a) at
tractively priced. These are only a
112» w of the many beautiful and useful
articles to be found in this modern,
up-to-date shop—and the proprietor
takes great pleasure in dispensing I
courteous and attentive service to
every patron. We want you to tell us
the name of this worth while shop—
also the proprietor's name and cor
rect address. What are their prices on
their dresses? What price on stamped
pillow cases? Also stamped dresser
scarfs which come in packages.
(25) Look prosperous and save
money at the same time. This is what
so many people are trying to do and |
cannot quite manage it. The reason is
that they do not know where to buy
economically and where to get goods
hat stand wear and look well. It is
not economy to buy a cheap "hand-me
down" suit of clothes. It is a waste of
money. If you have a suit made by
the tailor that this article is about,
you will get a suit of clothes that will
last. This tailor has been sixteen years
in Palo Alto and has the finest trade
on the Peninsula. Specialist on ladies'
tailoring and sport suits. He holds a
gold medal given to him at the Lewis
and Clark Exposition for designing.
You will be surprised at the chicness
as well as the exceedingly low price
he charges for a suit. And another fea
ture of this tailor, all of the tailoring
is done on the premises. He does not
take your order and send it to San
Francisco or New York. Who is this
progressive tailor? His establishment
is upstairs at 123 University avenue.
Better stop in and let him take your
measure and you select your pattern
and style at the same time.
(26) The best friend of womankingis
that which takes the grievous burdens
from her shoulders. No woman likes
to bend over washtubs or ironing
boards, and it is the mission of the
University French Laundry to per
form this highest physical service for
her. This laundry is almost our own
concern. It takes soiled linen and
turns it into attractive wearing ap
parel. It is an extensive industry, em
ploying many people. Wagons are sent
out in every direction in Palo Alto to
collect and deliver laundry and to keep
the various articles separated, so that
you don't get your neighbors' clothes,
is a job of a highly specialized order.
The methods used at this laundry are
thoroughly modern, and the machinery
equipment makes the work most satis
factory. The manager of this laundry
takes an active interest in the welfare
of Palo Alto and his absolute support
can be counted upon when anything
for the betterment of the city is in
progress. Who is this energetic man
ager, and where is the laundry lo
cated? How many employes has he?
What is the phone number?
(27) Well, here we are. Just what
interests all%women in Palo Alto. I
know when you go to that party or
dance you want to look charming. It
just requires a little personal atten
tion. You have often been to some pub
lic place and admired some ladies'
hair of the transparent texture of her
skin. The kind that is clear and
smooth. Well, you can have that charm
just the same as she. You go and see
Mrs. Marie Montgomery who has
charge of this exclusive Beauty Shop.
You will find every kind of modern
equipment desired in this shop, and
their work is very satisfactory. So
many girls have bobbed hair nowa
days, and they find it quite a task to
keep it looking well. Just drop into the
Montgomery Beauty Shop, and they
will marcelle your hair, and give the
ends a round curl which improves it
very much. You will find their egg
shampoo very invigorating. They spe
cialize in scalp and facial treatments.
They do hair waving and curling of
all kinds. What is one of the finest
scalp treatment? All kinds of facial
treatments are given by Mrs. Mont
gomery. Tell us the price of her
I'lactique Facial Treatment?
(28) What is the name of the store
that comes into your mind so clearly
when you speak of Art Goods? It is
Edwin R. Freeman's Art and Photo
Shop. There is no other place in the
city where they have such a large as
sortment of Wonderful Gifts to select
from. The writer cannot begin to tell
you of the hundreds of articles in this
store. The candlestick and framed and
unframed pictures are the best that
Mr Freeman could make and buy.
They have the largest picture fram
ing department on the Peninsula, giv
ing you the largest assortment of
frames to choose from. Christmas sea
son is nearing. Your motto is to do
your shopping early, and if you are
looking for gifts to give your friends
that will make them long remembered
to you, go to Freeman's Art Store. If
you have a picture that you cherish,
bring it here and let them frame it, or
a negative, enlarge it. They have a
complete service for films, kodaks, and
enlarging. How is it that Mr. Freeman
can sell his Foto Art Prints cheaper
than others?
(29) Palo Alto with its amazing
wealth and attractive terms and prices

when you are indebted to the wide
awake firm at 111 Circle. Their long
experience, knowledge of values and
expert advice in such matters have
won for them a large number of satis
fled customers. Through their devotion
to the business of their clients, Mr.
Helm has gained an enviable reputa
tion. Whether it be the buying of a
home or the selection of a lot or acre
age, you can be sure of finding just
what you want at attractive terms and
price when you are dealing with this
firm. This company also has many
ranch lands, both raw and improved.
In fact, their operations along this line
is, indeed, second to none in Palo Alto.
They are authorities on ranch lands
and if you name the location, they can
come pretty close to telling you the
value. Therefore, their advice and per
sonal service in such matters is indeed
important. Just drop in at their office
and they will gladly assist you. They
have just moved to 111 Circle, former
ly at 257 University avenue. What is
the name of this firm and what other
line of business do they follow? What
is Mr. Helm's first name? What is the
name of Mr. Helm's new assistant?
(30) Did you ever notice how you
admire the clothes of others and can
not understand why you never look as
well when you know personally that
you spend more money on your wear
ing apparel than this particular fel
low? The secret can easily be solved
if you do your shopping at the right
place. To test this out, the next time
you need a suit of clothes, a hat, or
anything in the gents' furnishing line,
go to Wideman & Son. This is one
exclusive haberdashery. Their stock is
composed of such well-known makes
as Kuppenheimer Clothes, Knapp Felt
Hats and Caps, handled by only the
best stores, and the fact of the matter
is, their entire stock bears names just
as well-known and highly recommend
ed as these few mentioned. Winter is
here and now is the time to see that
you are equipped for it. You certainly
need a new suit or a new hat. If you
don't think you do, come here and
look at the difference in the style of
your old one and their new stock.
You'll change your mind immediately.
And another thing about this store:
everyone is courteous, even the clerks
greet you with a smile, and are glad
to show you everything. How long has
this firm been established? Give exact
address. What is their business agree
ment with customers?
(31) Here is just the place to visit
for lunches and home-made pastry. It
is known as Kapps lunchroom. They
serve a nice little lunch there, and the
coffee is delicious. It is a very clean,
sanitary shop, and you get quick ser
vice. They have home-made pies,
cakes, and doughnuts. The doughnuts
are those world-wide known "Bake
Rite." They sell for twenty-five cents
per dozen. When you are down town
drop into this shop. There is nothing
more tasty than hot doughnuts and
coffee. The process- by which these
doughnuts are made makes them light
er and fluffier than the average dough
nut. And those home-made pies such as
pumpkin and mince, certainly are en
joyable at this time of year. They also
serve a noon-day lunch for the busi
ness man that is a dandy. How many
chairs do thew have in this shop? How
many meat pies do they make a day
and what do they sell for? Give the
exact location of this shop?
(32) There is at least one cigar
store in Palo Alto that caters to
smokers and men who want the best
merchandise for their money. The
Franklin Smoke House makes a spe
cialty of fine cigars, all kinds of cigar
ettes and they carry a large stock of
tobaccos, pipes and smokers' acces
sories. The proprietors believe in giv
ing the people what they want and if
you happen to want something that is
not ordinarily carried in stock, just
let him know and he will order it for
you. If it is in the world, he will come
near gettng it for you. A Soda Foun
tain in connection with the Cigar Store
gives you a cold drink at any time.
Malted milks a specialty. You could
not think of a more suitable present
for a man than a box of cigars and
when you buy them, they should be
chosen by a man who knows you. The
proprietor will assist you. What are
the initials of this energetic proprietor
and what make of candy does he sell?
The Franklin Smoke House is the
most popular place in town for card
games. Bring your friends and play a
friendly game of "rummy." How many
card tables in this establishment?
(33) Where is the bakery where you
can get fresh bread —any and all kinds
of it? Where can you get "bread that
is light, doughnuts that delight, and
pies just right." This is the tale of a
bakery whose products bring to mind
mother's baking day. They are so good
that people come for blocks just to
buy right out of the oven. Their prod
ucts are baked under the most strin
gent sanitary conditions. It is entirely
fitting that the "Who's Who" should
call your attention to this bakery, for
in patronizing the Golden Poppy
Bakery, you not only get the best baked

goods, but you save money as well.
The mention of this name In Palo Alto !
tells a tale of quality goods in this line |
and every housewife is familiar with |
the name and the goods. The big fea
ture with this shop is the making of
whole wheat bread, made from the
finest of wheats, The manager meets
his trade personally and his own per
sonality is responsible to a large de
gree for the patronage which they
have. Who is the manager of this
local bakery and what system do they
use in baking? What are the best
sellers in French Pastry?
(34) A man is as old as he feels, but
a woman is as old as she looks. I won
der how many women in Palo Alto
know the value of personal appear
ance. It is one of the many things
women neglect. If you will just drop
in and see Madame Musy in the Wil
son building, 132 University avenue,
you will receive the personal atten
tion you have so long desired. Madame
Musy is there to please her patrons
and she desires satisfied customers.
It is every woman's idea to be beauti
ful and Madame Musy wishes to help
you. She has a wonderful shop and
does the finest work. Madame Musy is
known for the wonderful marcels she
known for the wonderful marcells she
will say that this is the nearest to
a natural wave that you ever have
had. Years of experience in this busi
ness is the answer for her excellent
work. If you will just give her a trial
I am sure you will be one of her
steady customers. How much does she
charge for a marcell? What is her
phone number? What does Madame
Musy recommend for falling hair?
(35) It tickles everybody's vanity to
a certain degree to have his friends
say how well his home is furnished,
and perhaps many of these friends
secretly wish they knew where they
could buy furniture of equal looks.
There is no secret in obtaining the
right kind of furniture if one knows
the place to shop. The Warren Furni
ture Company is such a place. They
not only handle high-class furniture
for the parlor, bedroom and dining
room, but their kitchen department is
well stocked with ranges and cooking
utensils, and for the floor they have
the Congoleum. This is recognized for
its qualities of not bulging and crack
ing. It's easily cleaned and always
sanitary. Just go to this store once
and let them show you their collection
of home furnishings. They are sure to
suit your individual taste, no matter
how exacting. They are featuring at
this time their Occidental Ranges and
Stoves. Where is this large furniture
store located, and what make of mat
tress do they recommend for its com
fort? They also sell them. W T hat make
of beds do they carry?
(36) Think of something good to eat
and then think of the Stanford Cafe.
They are synonymous. Not only do
they conduct a counter service that is
most appealing to the man who is in a
hurry but they have attractive tables
for those who have time to sit and
enjoy the meal from all angles. The
food at this cafe is prepared just as it
is at home. They would not think
about serving anything to their pat
rons that they would not eat them
selves and this is proof enough of its
purity. Sanitation is one of the chief
objectives of the proprietors of this
restaurant and is everywhere evident.
The service is rendered in a prompt
manner and you are not left studying
the menu all day. They take your or
der when you first sit down. This is
one thing the proprietors find that ap
peals to their customers. They want im
mediate service and they get it. They
also serve the finest of ice cream and
home-made pastry. Who is the pro
gressive proprietor of this cafe and
how many stools have they at the
gressive proprietors of this cafe and
cated? What brand of coffee do they
use?
(37) The most conveniently and cen
trally located market in Palo Alto to
do your shopping is the Palo Alto
Market. This market caters to the dis
criminating buyers of fresh and cured
meats. To the people that are careful
of the meats they eat, these people
are their friends. They handle nothing
but the very best inspected meats, and
the proprietor does not depend upon
the Federal and State authorities al
together. He makes a personal inspec
tion of them when they enter his
store. If they are not right, bingo!
they are sent back. When you enter
this establishment you are confronted
with an air of absolute cleanliness and
sanitation. Clean sawdust protects the
floor and the glass show cases and
marble counters make it impossible
for bits of meat to "hide" from the
scrutinizing eye of the butchers. The
market on a whole is kept in a state
of cleanliness that will meet the ap
proval of anyone. In fact, sanitation is
their main objective. What is the
exact location of this modern market
and what is their,phone number? How
long have they been established? What
line of hams do they carry? Also what
is their buying rule?

a holiday. It is a gentlemen's billiard I
parlor, conducted for gentlemen by gen
tlemen. Mr. Mahaney sees that these
principles are carried out in detail. At
Mahaney's they have live pool tables,
one snooker table and two billiard
tables, which gives every one a chance
to play the game they like. When you
get thirsty they have a soda fountain in
connection serving the finest of cold
drinks. All the standard brands of
cigars are carried here, and, believe me,
they are fresh. At their store No. 2,
next to the Stanford Theater, you will
find Mr. Krebs in charge, who is asso
ciated with Mr. Mahaney. A full line
of smokers' needs are carried here and
a big supply of cigars in boxes of 10,
25 and 50 in Christmas boxes will be
featured. Ladies' patronage is socilited
at this store. Get your Christmas Gifts
here for the men folks. What is Mr.
Mahaney's first name? Give the location
of store No. 1. What is Mr. Kreb's first
name?
(43) A famous banker once gave a
young man this advice: "Save your
money and look prosperous." We have
known young men to fail because they
did not realize the importance of being
well dressed. A good suit is a dis
tinctive asset to any man. If he is well
dressed, he immediately commands at
tention. If you want the right suit at
the right price, patronize Frazer & Co.
They are the home of good clothes in
Palo Alto, and in addition to these high
grade clothes, they carry such standard
lines of furnishings as Manhattan shirts
and Everwear hosiery. In fact, their
stock borders along high-class lines, and
it is the store in which to do your fall
shopping. They have many new styles,
cuts and materials awaiting your in
spection and their prices are very low,
consistent with the quality. The whole
store commands a high position in the
mercantile establishments of Palo Alto
because of the quality of merchandise
they handle. Meet these people and you
have met twentieth century merchants.
What make of clothing do they sell, and
what is the slogan of these clothes? Give
location, of the store.
(44) Just say "His Master's Voice"
and you have immediately spoken of the
best-known phonograph on the market.
The Victrola is made by pioneer manu
facturers in the business. It is the choice
of the greatest artists who indorse its
unerring register of the original voice
or instrument. Ralph C. Dodson's Music
Store, 340 University avenue, has Vic-,
trolas in many styles and prices. In
addition to the Victrolas this shop also
carries a large line of Victor records,
and new ones are added as soon as they
are released from the factory. A good
tip to the student is to have a "portable"
Victrola with you. If you want to dance
it is always handy and will give you
the music you like the best whenever
you want it. Go in and let them show
you their selection of Victrolas. They
will be glad to play for you any record
you would like to hear. You will ap
preciate meeting these people and they
will appreciate your patronage. Where
are the machines manufactured and how
long has this music shop been established?
What is the price of the style 100 Vic
trola? Have you heard the best seller
in records this month, "I Found a Four-
Leaf Clover," and what is the price of
this record ?
(45) Let's go to the movies. This
expression often shakes away gloom and
dullness and you gladly join the happy
ries a complete stock of crockery ware,
see a regular show. By "movies" the
people of Palo Alto mean the Varsity
and Stanford theaters. They know that
at these playhouses they will see the
best of screen offerings at prices con
sistent with conditions. These two cozy
theaters give the patrons day in and day
out the best in film plays that money
can buy. To those few in Palo Alto
that have not had the pleasure of at
tending these two modern playhouses,
they are missing one of the great joys
of life. The products of the most gifted
imaginations of the world are beautifully
and artistically portrayed with an ac
companiment of the finest of organ
music. You should get their regular
weekly program, which gives you the
names of the shows and the nights upon
which they will be exhibited. Tell us
the manager's name of the Varsity The
ater and how many seats have they?
Give us the exact location of the Stan
ford Theater. What is the Big Special
picture coming there next Monday?
(46) You may say what you want,
but say "Hardware" and the minds of
the people of Palo Alto will revert
automatically to the Palo Alto Hard
ware Company, "The Winchester Store."
This firm carries a complete line of
hardware, consisting of carpenters' and
mechanics' tools of every description;
cutlery as well as builders' hardware,
sporting goods, Bass Hcuter Paints,
Pennsylvania Vacuum Cup Tires—in
fact, everything you would expcct to find
in a modern up-to-date hardware store.
The Palo Alto Hardware Company is
known as the "Winchester Store," carry
ing a full line of Winchester products.
The Winchester Company puts out one
article each month at a special price—
the public are looking forward each
month for these big specials. The special
for November is a Winchester Flash

(3S) Time is money. Save time and
money. Spend the ten minutes allowed
on your street car transfer, buying
Christmas Cards or forgotten station
ery supplies at llyde's, 370 University
avenue, right at the transfer point.
There are but two transfer points, the
depot and opposite Hyde's new store.
Tou can get a basket for your many
packages here or a beautifully decor
ated one to send as a Christmas gift.
If you want a Fountain Pen, which one
does Hyde's guarantee? If you want to
give stationery to your sister, which
of Hyde's brands would you choose?
Which will have the bigger sale at
Hyde's for the kiddies, "Kritters of the
Kitchen Kingdom," or "The Chickens
Eating Corn"? What line of goods is
being especially featured at Hyde's
besides sttftionery, school supplies,
fountain pens, pictures, picture frames,
baskets, candles, beads, games, toys,
favors, memory books, and albums?
Call at Hyde's at the transfer point,
and they can answer the above ques
tions and also give you many sugges
tions for charming and inexpensive
Christmas presets. Their new store is
one of the finest of its kind in P. A.
(39) It is every man's wish to own
his own home. It makes for family
contentment and happiness. It saves
paying rent.
The University Realty Company sp&-
j cializes in providing people with
homes. Consult them as you would any
specialist.
Years of experience in this com
munity stands back of the University
Realty Company.
This Company can serve you in the
purchase or sale of real estate, in writ
ing all kinds of insurance, in renting
and leasing, in fact, in all matters per
taining to real estate and insurance.
How long has this Company been in
business in Palo Alto? Name one in
surance company that it represents.
(40) If you want to make your
friends happy, present them with a
good photograph of yourself. A photo
graph is a token of real friendship,
and is highly appreciated by everyone.
And when you are in Palo Alto and
desire a portrait of yourself and are
not satisfied with just ordinary work,
go to the Shattuck Studio and you will
be pleased. This is one man who is
"behind the camera, but not behind
the times." His portrait work is indic
ative of this. In his little studio on
University avenue he will be found
very busy most every day snapping
and developing and then touching up,
putting the finishing touches on, which
removes all blemishes. The art of fin
ishing portraits is not possessed by
everyone, but this photographer is in
deed an expert. Then, too, his prices
are exceedingly moderate, considering
the beauty and quality of work turned
out. You are always sure of a success
ful picture here. Do you know that
your picture is the only present your
friends cannot buy? Where is the
exact location of this studio? What
other photographic work do they do?
(41) Everyone knows Wagner, "The
Meat Man." He is a master in the meat
business. He came to Palo Alto eight
years ago and started business in a
small market in a small way on High
street. Today his business has ex
panded to such an extent that it has
outgrown the old market.
Mr. Wagner says he doesn't take the
credit for making his business what it
is in Palo Alto, but owes it to Mr. N.
Benson who has been with him ever
since he has located in this vicinity
and who will continue to manage the
local market. Mr. Benson has a great
many friends here in Palo Alto.
Mr. Wagnor owns the block of four
stores on the corner of University and
Florence streets, his new market being
the main Corner Store Room. This
wonder market is a palace of marble.
The counters are of marble and glass
and the latest word in modern sanita
tion. The woodwork is finished in
French gray and the walls in gray
with green trimmings. Cold storage
plant is of the latest modern auto
matic control and the best that money
can buy.
There is not a question in tlie
writer's mind but what this is one of
the most modern and finest equipped
markets in the state of California.
Mr. Wagner owns a chain of mar
kets extending to San Jose and Hol
lister and most of his time is con
fined to the purchasing end of the bus
iness. He has been in the meat bus
iness so long that he doesn't guess at
the quality of meat when he buys. He
knows that they are the best, so, when
purchasing the meat from him you
don't have to worry about its not being
of the best quality.
He is still going to be known as
"The Meat Man" in his new market
and will give the same service and
high quality meats that has made him
such a success.
It will pay you to watch for his ad
vertisements appearing in the daily
papers.
(42) This article is about one of the
liveliest spots in Palo Alto. There is
something doing here most all of the
time, and especially after dinner or on

Light, complete with battery for 89 cents.
The Palo Alto Hardware Company Car
rie sa complete stock of crockery ware,
dishes in plain and open sets and the
finest aluminum and enameled ware in
the city. How long has this store been
established? What is tie special price
on the 50-piece set of Gold Band Potter
Chinaware? What make of electric
washer do they sell?
(47) Fitting feet is a matter of no
little importance, for there .ire a very
few people that enjoy the fitting of a
n<iw pair of shoes, even when they fit
perfectly. However, Thoit's Shoe Store
is a firm that is noted all over the Coast
for its ability to produce shoes that
"feel just like the old ones." They are
the local distributors of Hanan Shoes
and other reputable makes of more mod
erate price. This store is a home store.
Its management is a good example to
follow, for courtesy and personal ser
vice is its aim. It is needless to speak
of the quality of their shoes, as this is
too well known, but we will say that they
carefully select as to quality, workman
ship and style. Their wearing qualities,
as well as looks, are second to none.
When you have met the proprietor of
the local firm you will have met a man
that is all for Stanford and Palo Alto.
Where is their modern shoe store lo
cated? How many members of the fam
ily can they fit in shoes? When was
this business established?
(48) There is one photographer in.
Palo Alto, "An Artistic Photographer,"'
who has gained a national reputation
and holds first prize in America for ex
cellency of work. He now has por
traits on exhibition in the National Salon.
Has also been awarded highest honors
in the states of New York, Ohio and
Michigan. He has probably photo
graphed more prominent and profes
sional people than any photographer in
America. Was with Hartsook Studios
for the past eleven years, specializing
principally in photographing moving pic
ture stars and theatricals in general. A
visit to his studio, 126 University ave
nue, which was formerly the Davey
Studio, will convince the most skeptical
of the superiority of his work. Who is
this artist who has made it possible for
the Palo Alto people to get something
different, something highly artistic*
without having to go to the larger
cities? And what makes a successful
artistic portrait? Remember Friend
ship's Perfect Gift—Your Photo.
(49) There is a wonderful industry
in this city that 1 belit*vo many do not
know about. Why is it so many people
go to San Francisco to purchase their
gifts when right here in Palo Alto there
is a shop that is known by exclusive
shops all over the United States and
whose goods have gone to England..
Australia, and Honolulu? Miss Herrick
conducts a shop the year round to servj;
you. When you are thinking of gifts,
go first to Miss Herrick's and you will
be surprised at the exclusive articles
you will find there and more reasonably
priced than elsewhere. This Studio must,
be seen to be appreciated. Give us the
names of two articles just received from
India. Tell us three articles made ex
clusively in Herrick Studios and sold
all over the United States.
(50) Here is one of the busiest stores
in Palo Alto. Segar Service Shop. Be
lieve me, the proprietor sure is popular
with the young fellows. There never is
a time but what you will see a bunch in
his store. The reason for that is his
service to every one, no matter if you
only buy a package of cigarette papers*
or if it is a brier pipe, you get the same
courteous treatment. A large assortment
of pipes have just arrived for the Christ
mas trade. Also jars of smoking to
bacco. A complete line of magazines
are carried here. In connection with this
modern Cigar Store we have a real Ser
vice Barber Shop, operated by Mr. Par
vin. They are all union barbers and ex
pert haircutters. This shop is the oldest
in town. If you only want a shave, don't
be afraid to come here. These barbers
don't bother the life out of you selling
you something else in the shop. Try
these boys the first chance you get. Get
an Almond Meal and Peroxide Steam
Facial Massage. Tell us Mr. Parvin's
first name. Tell us how many maga
zines Mr. Corns has for sale at the
Cigar Counter. Give us the exact loca
tion of these two establishments.
(1) Think of the countless obstacles
the pioneers of old had to overcome
as they journeyed forth to lay the
foundation for a future that might
hold some promise' for them. Some
achieved their goal, others failed. Then
consider your own environment and
chances for the future. Your lot is a
path of roses compared with that of
tho pioneers. jfist lay aside a small
amount each week and start an ac
count with the First National Bank of
Palo Alto. They have a capital of
$100,000.00, and $24,000 surplus, and
are members of the Federal Reserve
System of Banking. The officers and
everyone connected with this bank
have always practiced service and
courtesy to their patrons. You are
treated with consideration whether
you are a large or small depositor or
whether you are a temporary visitor in
this favored locality. A man putting
his money in a bank should always
make sure that the institution is finan
cially solid and this is just such a
bank. They pay 4 per cent interest on
Term Deposits. Name the directors of
this banking institution. What is the
margin of security including stock
holders' liability?

(2) In purchasing jewelry, the buyer
puts more faith in the seller than any
other commodity that men buy and
sell. This article is about a jewelry
store that has been in business in
Palo Alto for a number of years, and
their reputation for being dependable
is second to none. In addition to their
exceptional stock of watches, jewelry,
rings, SILVERWARE, cut glass, etc.,
they do expert watch and jewelry re
pairing. This is the store to select your
•"Gifts That Last." Nielsen and Culver
are the kind of fellows we like to men
tion in our columns, because they have
a sociable and intelligent personality
—ones who know how to make friends
and keep them. Go see this store and
look over their high class line of jew
elry and you are sure to make all of
your purchases in this line from them.
Every article they sell not only bears
the guarantee of the manufacturers,
but their personal guarantee goes with
it as well. If you have a broken piece
of jewelry, no matter how fine it is,
they will repair it for you. What are
Mr. Culver'? initials, and where is
their store located. Also what other
department do they conduct? What is
their leading line of Silverware?

(3) It ticV les everybody's vanity to
a certain dc pre e to have his friends
say how we ! his homo is furnished,
and perhaps many of these friends se
cretly wish they knew where they
could buy furniture of equal looks.
There is no secret of obtaining the
right kind cf furniture if one knows
the place to shop. The Palo Alto Fur
niture Company is such a place. They
not only hf nd!e high-class furniture
for the parlor, bofl-roora and dining
room, but their kitchen department is
well stocked with ranges and
utensils and for the floor they have
Linoleum of the latest designs and
patterns. It is easily cleaned and al-

Introducing to You the Live Progressive Firms and People Who Make
up the Business Interests of Palo Alto
First Prize —$10.00 Theatre Tickets contributed by
* VARSITY AND STANFORD THEATRES
Second Prize —One Dozen Photographs contributed by
SHATTUCK STUDIOS
Third Prize —One Hand Painted Oil Picture of Chapel
contributed by FREEMAN'S ART STORE
Fourth Prize —One Box of Chancellor (after dinner) Cigars
contributed by FRANKLIN'S SMOKE HOUSE

ways sanitary. Just go to this store !
once and let them show you their col
lection of home furnishings. They are
sure to suit your individual taste, no
matter how exacting. They are featur
ing a complete line of stoves and
ranges. The best in the world is
Wedgewood. Where is this large fur
niture store located? and what make
of water heaters do, they recommend?
How many square feet of Inlaid Lin
oleum are they now laying in the Rus
sel Cafeteria?

(4) No matter who you are and what
your life is, it can be made happier
and better through the influence of
music. This up-to-date store that we
are writing about is the home of the
best there is in music, and they are
representatives for Brunswick and
Columbia phonographs. The Music
Shop at 273 University Avenue is the
music house of Palo Alto, for they not
only carry and sell phonographs and
pianos, but they carry all kinds of
musical instruments, sheet music,
player rolls and records. If you are
fond of string instruments, they have
anything from the ukelele to the cello.
They are exclusive representatives in
Palo Alto for two well-known phono
graphs which are recognized for their ;
many exceptional qualities. These ma
chines play disc records of any make.
If you like a lot of noise moulded into
music, then they have drums for your
choice. The proprietor here is a music
loving man, himself, and he delights in
showing his line to patrons. A visit
from you will be appreciated. What
make of Band Instruments does he
carry? Who are the manufacturers of
the Victor and Brunswick? What is
the price of the Gretsch Sac., Melody
C, Finish No. 2?

(5) Two of the best places to eat in j
Palo Alto are home and here. That is
what the editor thought after trying
one of this restaurant home-cooked
meals. All of you people do not know
of this restaurant or you would be
Johnny on the spot every time Old
Man Hunger gripped your frame. They
not only cater to the man who is in a
hurry with counter service but they
have linen-covered tables for the
ladies. However, the same service is
had at both places and at the same
prices. If you have lots of time to sit
and enjoy your meal, then sit at the
tables, but if you are a business man
with only a few minutes to "grab"
your lunch, the counter service will be
most ideal. The location of this home
like place is 105 Alma Street. The
proprietor of this restaurant has a
most affable manner and he does all
in his power to please his patrons.;
Anything that you want is not too
much trouble for him to get. He uses
the best grade of meats and come
fresh from the meat market when he
needs them and not a week before, j
Who is the energetic proprietor of the
"Popular" restaurant? What is the
price of their noon lunch? What brand
of coffee do they use? How much are
their meal tickets?

(6) Clothes cost too much money to
be carelessly cleaned and pressed, i
Your tailor should be picked just as
your doctor or your grocer. It is just
as important. If you send your clothes
to first one cleaner and then anothf r,
in the ert'd your clothes will be ruined,
and with none to blame but yourself.
The Stanford Dyeing and Cleaning
Works commands a high position in
the cleaning and pressing business of
Palo Alto, and they always guarantee
their work. These people know how to
press a suit. They press it to its
natural form and not "against the
srain." They also use an odorless pro
cess in their cleaning and every meth
od of handling clothes that is modern
is used by them. They have a call and
delivery system and for them to keep
your wardrobe in prefect trim at all
times is no trouble for you. They will
call at your home at regular intervals
tor your clothes and return them
promptly. This prompt service is a
great item in their business. They also
do repairing. What does this firm
charge for cleaning and pressing a
suit, and where is their plant located?
What does 444 mean?

(7) Chiropractic was born 27 years
•,'Ko. The suspicion, distrust and re
sentful criticism aimed at it in the

beginning has been dispelled. Chiro
practors have proven their worth in
healing the sick and lame with their
chiropractic adjustments. With all of
this human service in California they
were held under the yoke of the med
ical board. But thanks to the fair
minded people of this state, that is
over.
Dr. Minor and Dr. Hall wish to thank
all Iheir friends for the support they
gave them. These two doctors are
graduates of the Palmer School of
Chiropractic in Davenport, lowa. They
have practiced Chiropractic for years.
People come for miles around to Doc
tors Minor and Hall.
They are located at 153 University
Avenue. Give both the 'doctors' first
names and give two reasons why Chi
ropractic is beneficial to one's health.

(8) Don't junk your old tires. Take
them to a reliable tire shop and get
their opinion on their condition. They
may be vulcanized and run for several
thcHtsand miles more. And if you want
an honest opinion as to this, take your
tires to Palo Alto Vulcanizing Works.
Tires are this man's sole business,
and we make no mistake when we say
that he knows his business thoroughly.
Vhen he has patched a tube or vul
canized a "shoe" for you, then he has
made a friend. A guarantee goes with
evefy job he does and this is a guar
antee of absolute satisfaction. There
is no money value set on it, but it is a
personal guarantee that you get what
you want and no matter what it cost
him, he'll see that you get it. In addi
tion to the vulcanizing and repair de
partment, this man also carries a stock
of Goodyear tires and he has y ur size.
You don't want to meet a more con
genial man than Mr. Bogges with a
smile for you. Where is the shop lo
cated? What is his price for a Good
year Ford all-weather fabric tire?
What is the price of the 40x10 solid
truck tire that Mr. Bogges has in his
window?

(9) It is a source of discomfort and
worry for some people to buy a new
pair of shoes, but if you are careful in
selecting the correct size in the right
grade of shoes, you will not have this
inconvenience to contend with. At the
Lentos Shoe Store they will not only
sell you a new pair of shoes, but they
will make your old ones like new for
you. They conduct a modern electrical
shoe repairing shop in connection with
the shoe store and they do the work
just like it is done at the factories.
Let your next pair of shoes come from
this store and they will last you much
longer, for when you have worn off
the original soles, just return them
and they will put new ones on at a
small cost. They use the very best
double wear genuine leather soles and
the name and trade mark is stamped
cn them. When you have work done
here, it is well guaranteed, and there
is something back of the guarantee.
Then if it is in the power of these
people to do you a good turn, they
certainly will take pleasure in doing
it. They work for others as well as
themselves. What brand of pure
leather do they use on their soles, and
where is the store located?

. (10) Is milk and cream an important
part of your daily meals? If not, you
are one out of a hundred. Then with
this in view, it is only natural for peo
ple to be sure that their milk and
cream is' absolutely light. And to be
"right" it should contain a certain per
cent of butterfat, as well as be clean
and free from all foreign matter. The
milk, cream, butter and dairy products
you get at the Altomont Creamery are
all that the name implies—sanitary.
They feature pasteurized and guaran
teed dairy products. You can ask for
no better merchandise in this line. So
the next time you need any dairy
products of any sort, whether it be
butter, milk, cream, or cottage cheese,
just go to the Altomont Creamery. It
will be filled with satisfaction.
These people will give you service, as
their business depends upon it. If they
did not give you good service on your
first trip, you would not return again,
and they want your future friendship
and business. What is the location of
this firm's retail store, and what do
they get per quart for their milk. What
does pasteurized mean? and what does
guaranteed milk mean?

(11) When the pioneers blazed a
trail across the continent in '49 there
was also organized a man that blazed
the way in the paint industry, W. T.
Floyd. Since that time, this firm has
been beautifying Palo Alto with its
products. In addition to paints, they
also sell oils, glass, and if you are
looking for a waterproof paint, this is
the place to go. The Hadle Stormtight
Roof Paint firm has a very modern and
up-to-date store, and they are known
for their neatness and complete stock
of goods they carry. This store is a
credit to any city. This store which
this writing is for has the agency for
Acme Quality Paints and Varnishes,
the world's higest standard in paints.
Not only do they retail their products,
but wholesale as well. If you are a
paint man, you will know what firm we
are referring to for they carry one of
the largest stocks in these parts. What

is the name of this firm and what do
they recommend for floor varnish?
Just call at the local store and their
salesmen will gladly assist you. How
many square feet will a gallon of Acme
Quality Paint cover two coats?

(12) Just up the street at Mr. Ethen's
is he liveliest spot in Palo Alto. There is
something doing there most all of the
time and especially so after supper. It
is a place where gentlemen congregate
and exchange experiences of the day
over a friendly game of pocket bil
liards. But, in addition to the billiard
parlor, they also conduct a large bowl
ing alley and soda fountain where they
will make you a creamy milk shake
that will certainly make you return for
another in a short while. They are also
local agents for the United Cigar
Stores and carry a line of cigars that
cannot be had in any other establish
ment in the city. If you are looking for
a friend, you are sure to find him here.
It is a place where practically every
man frequents once in a while just for
the gentlemanly company he is sure to
find. If it is a box of candy you wisn
for your girl, then this is the place for
you to seek. They carry several differ
ent makes and it is kept in a specially
equipped refrigerator which insures
you of freshness at any time. How
many pocket pool tables have they?
What line of pipes do they carry? How
many alleys are there and name what
team is leading in the bowling tourna
ment now being conducted?

(13) Now comes a renowned meat
market which sells fresh meats. In
deed their meats are fresh. They make
it a point to keep them so, which is
responsible for the popularity and
wonderful business gained in the past
months. There are mrny tricks em
ployed by the meat buyers in judging
duality, and the Stanford Meat Com
pany is perfectly willing to share its
secrets with you. They buy only the
best, but they want you to know at
the time of your purchase that you
are getting what you want. Cleanli
ness is the watchword of this market.
The business is so great that their
daily purchases keep their meats
fresh. They seldom carry much over
from one day to another. We enjoy
writing about this market and its
owner for several reasons. One is they
say "never mind about buying, just
come in and look the good things
over." Give exact address. How long
have they been established? What are
their phone numbers? How often do
they get fresu fish at this market?

(14) In buying drugs, you want the
best, including purity and service,
which are two essential things to con
s'der when selecting from which to
buy these needs. Impure drugs are
worse than none at all, and poor ser
vice means aggravation and annoy
ance. Only the best drugs are ever
handled at the Young Drug Company
at the corner of University avenue
and Florence street. The proprietor
is a registered pharmacist and he en
deavors to keep a stock that will
meet with all requirements and cus
tomers do not have to go elsewhere
for anything usually found in an up-to
date drug store. In addition to drugs,
they carry a large stock of perfumery,
toilet articles, safety razors, and if
you happen to have a sweet tooth,
their candies will be appealing to you.
This store has the agency for all of
the Owl products, so you may obtain
these goods right here at home. What
is Ihe proprietor's name? Also what
line of remedies do they handle? What
is "Pom Pom" Luster?

(15) We are now presenting a firm
where fresh staple and fancy groceries
can be secured. It is a concern with
a conscience, and has an aim to please
the hard-to-suit in their lines. In fact,
you can close your eyes and buy here,
and every sale carries a guarantee of
satisfaction, and a little profit is all
they ask. Now just stop a second and
say to yourself, "Where is the best
stock of fruits, vegetables and gro
ceries carried in Palo Alto?" The best
brands of everything are the distin
guishing characteristics of this store,
along with its sanitary aspect. It is a
source of personal satisfaction to the
writer to write about this "quality"
store and the proprietor, Mr. Earle,
Ever since he started, years ago, his
popularity has met with a steady in
crease. He is not only a popular mer
chant. but is an alert business man,
and his idea is to always make the
place home-like when you do business
with him or his clerks, and so far he
has succeeded, and if he can make
Palo Alto a better city you can depend
upon him to take off his coat, roll up
his sleeves and help put it over. He
has for those who need it, a smile,
and has won their business or confi
dence. No merchant in Palo Alto is
more popular with his customers than
the owner of this store. Name the
owner and give his first name in full,
location and phone.

(16) Here is a works that makes a
lot of noise in a legitimate way. It is a
sheet metal establishment. They have
been making a big noise
for some time. They make a
of tin and sheet iron, and a 112

cialties are tanks, and irrigating pipe,
.spouting, skylights, cornice as well as
tin and copper sheet metal specialties.
The expert tinner is a great necessity
i'or those owning homes or business
places, as they look to them for re
l airs and parts. To be efficient, they
must be skilled in their calling and
geniuses as well. And these things are
apparent at the Palo Alto Sheet Metal
Works. There are many ways of tin
ning that will not stand the test. These
people use the right way. The owners
of this shop believe it better to be on
the level with their customers than
to climb upward by a crooked path.
Such a firm as this we surely like to
include in our feature. In fact, we can
not say enough for them, for they de
serve much more than a mere word of
praise. They deserve sure success.
Who is the proprietor of this shop and
Low long have they been established
here. Where are they located? What
size Warm Air Heater does it take to
heat a 7-room house? and give the
price of it.

(17) When a business establish
ment has reached the heights of suc
cess and prominence, it is either cred
ited to the skillful management or to
the quality of merchandise they han
dle. At the enterprising store at 317
University Avenue both of these items
are responsible for their standing in
Palo Alto. The most prominent resi
dents of the city are among their cus
tomer list. Their costumes can always
be depended upon for beiug the latest
styles and the good quality never
varies. "Where there is quality, there
is style." The Style Shop is well
known for both. (The store is attrac
tively decorated and the merchandise
is displayed in such a manner that it
becomes a profound pleasure to shop
with them). Their courteous sales
women also render great assistance
with their timely suggestions of "what
is being worn" and you leave the store
pleased witn your visit, feeling that
you have wasted no time whatever.
What is the slogan of this enterpris
ing store. Tell name of this classy
store's proprietor. A Big Clearance
Sale is now going on at the Smart
Shop. Everything in the store is re
duced for this Sale.

(18) The most widely known and
recognized decorations for any and all
occasions are flowers. They are recog
nized internationally and more can be
said with a small bunch of flowers
than can be said with a dozen tele
grams or any other form of communi
cation. "Say it with flowers" is a fit
ting slogan for their usefulness and
worth. The one flower shop in Palo
Alto that has created a reputation for
having in stock all of the different
(lowers in season is known as the
Palo Alto Flower & Seed Shop. They
carry a complete line of flowers for
the dining room table, to ship to your
friends or pot flowers to decorate your
home and porches. When you desire
to remember yourself to a friend, this
is the one place to come for they will
make up a beautiful boquet for you.
The proprietor here likes flowers him
self, which is symbolic of happiness.
His disposition is also like that of a
flower, bright and full of cheer. Who
is this proprietor? What is the num
ber of the shop? What kind of seeds
does he carry? What are the names
of the jardiners that they are selling
that come from Japan?

(19) Who is there in this city en
gaged in correction and the conserva
tion of eyesight? Many have come to
him and received great relief when
troubled with eye defects. His strict
attention to his business has won for
him a host of friends and patrons. Dr.
Cochran will be found very busy at
his offices at 122 University avenue
and you will make no mistake in con
sulting him about your eyes. He has
passed the State Board of Optometry
examinations and is recognized for his
excellent work, and is also a graduate
Dr. of Optometry. In addition to
working on your eyes, he will replace
broken lenses or make you a complete
pair of glasses. The eyes are the win
dows of the soul and when they are
wrong, the body is handicapped, for,
without clear vision, we can't see the
world as it is. Eye troubles are often
started when young and your chil
dren's eyes should be examined before
it is too late. Make an appointment
•with Dr. Cochran and get his opinion.
His office is completely equipped with
all of the modern instruments used in
this work. What are Dr. Cochran's ini
tials, and what is the range of prices
for his glasses? What is the store
motto?

(20) Most men like to know where
they can find a good barber shop, as
they are very particular about per
sonal appearance. They demand satis
factory work. When I suggest Mar
quee's Barber Shop, I know what I'm
talking about. They have a very sani
tary little shop with all the modern
equipment, also including five modern
chairs. They specialize in all kinds of
shampooing, scalp and facial treat
ments. If you want your hair to have
jompadour cut, or any other kind,
t let Marquee's do it for you. If

you are having trouble with your
scalp, they can help you. Dixol is the
scalp treatment they recommend. They
also bob children's hair, so bring them
in the next time you are down town.
Just ask anyone who has visited Mar
quee's shop, and they will tell you
how well satisfied they were. Where
ic their shop located? What brands of
hair tonic do they use and recom
mend?

(21) A most important institution of
business in any city, town or commun
ity is the reliable drug store. Here it
is that we depend for our health. And
It ere is where we go when we want
toilet articles, kodak supplies, foun
tain pens and a hundred other luxuries
and necessities. The Kenyon & Crow
Store is known for its large and com
plete stock of all of these articles, and
in fact, anything found in a first-class
store. In addition to their general line
of pure drugs, assortments of high
class cosmetics and sundries, they are
tlie Penslar Store in Palo Alto. This
line of household remedies is com
plete. There is one for every possible
need or use. Now is the time to begin
to think about Christmas Gifts. A
large collection of hand-colored Christ
mas Cards have just arrived. They
are wonderful in design and color.
Fountain pens and Pen and Pencil sets
in Christmas Boxes make a very fine
pi esent to your student friends, or a
big box of gift stationery. At this store
they conduct the largest Kodak print
ing and developing business 011 the
Peninsula, handling a full line of East
man Kodaks and Cameras. One of
the big features of this store is their
framed pictures and mirrors. They
have a framing department and are
able to frame for you any size picture
with most any style mounting you
desire. What profit-sharing system do
they practice? Find out the four lead
ing perfumes they handle? In what
line do they excell all other concerns
in this locality? What are the pro
prietors' nicknames?

(22) There is a mail in this town
much wiser than his sires; he ran
into a bramble bush and punctured all
four tires. When he saw his tires
were wrecked, with all his might and
main, he went to this tire shop and
had them fixed again. One of the first
things to learn if you own an auto
mobile is to know what vulcanizing
nrm gives Service that Serves. The
Retread Shop is recognized for their
expert tire repairing. You should con
sult these doctors when your tires get
sick for they surely have the dope
that cures. You cannot help but like
this firm for those connected with it
make every effort possible to please
you. They will always go out of their
way to do a good turn for you, and if
you have tire trouble on the street,
just notify them and they will render
assistance People who do business
here are really proud .of ttie fact and
it is simply because they give what
the customers want and should have
—"Satisfaction." Go to this shop and
meet these tire men and then tell us
what make of tires they sell and what
their price for a Ford-size cord tire in
the make begins with "F." Give two
reasons why this tire is the best on
the market for its size.

(23) Pleasure of motoring is in
creased if your car is in good working
condition. It is, therefore, advisable to
have your car looked over before you
start on this trip and when you have
your car worked on, be sure of* your
garage. The Palo Alto Garage on Em
reson street is indeed a thoroughly
dependable establishment in regard to
their repairing. Mr. J. M. Blackburn
employs only expert mechanics. The
Palo Alto Garage has the agency for
the Durant car and many others such
as the Chandler, Cadillac, and Cleve
land. Have you seen the new 1923
model Durant. Just step in and let
them sTiow you what a wonderful mod
el it is. The proprietor of this garage,
Mr. J. M. Blackburn, personally super
vises the garage at all times, and as
sures you of prompt service whether
you are buying a spark plug or filling
your tank with gas. They have Ever-
Ready Battery service, and they also
carry Associated Gasoline. They want
satisfied customers at the Palo Alto
Garage. That is their motto. Give two
reasons why the Durant car is more
practical. What is Mr. Blackburn's
first jiame? How long have they been
established?

(24) In writing of the leading busi
ness firms and institutions of Palo
Alto, we have come across an inter
esting shop at 367 University Avenue,
that well deserves mentioning. No, it
won't interest you men, particularly—
but has an especial appeal to the wo
men of Palo Alio and vicinity who
are lovers of beautiful things. This at
tractive shop is fairly overflowing with
wonderful creations of Laces, Em
broideries, Frocks, and Sport Skirts,
Reads for the Miss and Mistress —at-
tractively displayed, and just a) at
tractively priced. These are only a
112» w of the many beautiful and useful
articles to be found in this modern,
up-to-date shop—and the proprietor
takes great pleasure in dispensing I
courteous and attentive service to
every patron. We want you to tell us
the name of this worth while shop—
also the proprietor's name and cor
rect address. What are their prices on
their dresses? What price on stamped
pillow cases? Also stamped dresser
scarfs which come in packages.
(25) Look prosperous and save
money at the same time. This is what
so many people are trying to do and |
cannot quite manage it. The reason is
that they do not know where to buy
economically and where to get goods
hat stand wear and look well. It is
not economy to buy a cheap "hand-me
down" suit of clothes. It is a waste of
money. If you have a suit made by
the tailor that this article is about,
you will get a suit of clothes that will
last. This tailor has been sixteen years
in Palo Alto and has the finest trade
on the Peninsula. Specialist on ladies'
tailoring and sport suits. He holds a
gold medal given to him at the Lewis
and Clark Exposition for designing.
You will be surprised at the chicness
as well as the exceedingly low price
he charges for a suit. And another fea
ture of this tailor, all of the tailoring
is done on the premises. He does not
take your order and send it to San
Francisco or New York. Who is this
progressive tailor? His establishment
is upstairs at 123 University avenue.
Better stop in and let him take your
measure and you select your pattern
and style at the same time.
(26) The best friend of womankingis
that which takes the grievous burdens
from her shoulders. No woman likes
to bend over washtubs or ironing
boards, and it is the mission of the
University French Laundry to per
form this highest physical service for
her. This laundry is almost our own
concern. It takes soiled linen and
turns it into attractive wearing ap
parel. It is an extensive industry, em
ploying many people. Wagons are sent
out in every direction in Palo Alto to
collect and deliver laundry and to keep
the various articles separated, so that
you don't get your neighbors' clothes,
is a job of a highly specialized order.
The methods used at this laundry are
thoroughly modern, and the machinery
equipment makes the work most satis
factory. The manager of this laundry
takes an active interest in the welfare
of Palo Alto and his absolute support
can be counted upon when anything
for the betterment of the city is in
progress. Who is this energetic man
ager, and where is the laundry lo
cated? How many employes has he?
What is the phone number?
(27) Well, here we are. Just what
interests all%women in Palo Alto. I
know when you go to that party or
dance you want to look charming. It
just requires a little personal atten
tion. You have often been to some pub
lic place and admired some ladies'
hair of the transparent texture of her
skin. The kind that is clear and
smooth. Well, you can have that charm
just the same as she. You go and see
Mrs. Marie Montgomery who has
charge of this exclusive Beauty Shop.
You will find every kind of modern
equipment desired in this shop, and
their work is very satisfactory. So
many girls have bobbed hair nowa
days, and they find it quite a task to
keep it looking well. Just drop into the
Montgomery Beauty Shop, and they
will marcelle your hair, and give the
ends a round curl which improves it
very much. You will find their egg
shampoo very invigorating. They spe
cialize in scalp and facial treatments.
They do hair waving and curling of
all kinds. What is one of the finest
scalp treatment? All kinds of facial
treatments are given by Mrs. Mont
gomery. Tell us the price of her
I'lactique Facial Treatment?
(28) What is the name of the store
that comes into your mind so clearly
when you speak of Art Goods? It is
Edwin R. Freeman's Art and Photo
Shop. There is no other place in the
city where they have such a large as
sortment of Wonderful Gifts to select
from. The writer cannot begin to tell
you of the hundreds of articles in this
store. The candlestick and framed and
unframed pictures are the best that
Mr Freeman could make and buy.
They have the largest picture fram
ing department on the Peninsula, giv
ing you the largest assortment of
frames to choose from. Christmas sea
son is nearing. Your motto is to do
your shopping early, and if you are
looking for gifts to give your friends
that will make them long remembered
to you, go to Freeman's Art Store. If
you have a picture that you cherish,
bring it here and let them frame it, or
a negative, enlarge it. They have a
complete service for films, kodaks, and
enlarging. How is it that Mr. Freeman
can sell his Foto Art Prints cheaper
than others?
(29) Palo Alto with its amazing
wealth and attractive terms and prices

when you are indebted to the wide
awake firm at 111 Circle. Their long
experience, knowledge of values and
expert advice in such matters have
won for them a large number of satis
fled customers. Through their devotion
to the business of their clients, Mr.
Helm has gained an enviable reputa
tion. Whether it be the buying of a
home or the selection of a lot or acre
age, you can be sure of finding just
what you want at attractive terms and
price when you are dealing with this
firm. This company also has many
ranch lands, both raw and improved.
In fact, their operations along this line
is, indeed, second to none in Palo Alto.
They are authorities on ranch lands
and if you name the location, they can
come pretty close to telling you the
value. Therefore, their advice and per
sonal service in such matters is indeed
important. Just drop in at their office
and they will gladly assist you. They
have just moved to 111 Circle, former
ly at 257 University avenue. What is
the name of this firm and what other
line of business do they follow? What
is Mr. Helm's first name? What is the
name of Mr. Helm's new assistant?
(30) Did you ever notice how you
admire the clothes of others and can
not understand why you never look as
well when you know personally that
you spend more money on your wear
ing apparel than this particular fel
low? The secret can easily be solved
if you do your shopping at the right
place. To test this out, the next time
you need a suit of clothes, a hat, or
anything in the gents' furnishing line,
go to Wideman & Son. This is one
exclusive haberdashery. Their stock is
composed of such well-known makes
as Kuppenheimer Clothes, Knapp Felt
Hats and Caps, handled by only the
best stores, and the fact of the matter
is, their entire stock bears names just
as well-known and highly recommend
ed as these few mentioned. Winter is
here and now is the time to see that
you are equipped for it. You certainly
need a new suit or a new hat. If you
don't think you do, come here and
look at the difference in the style of
your old one and their new stock.
You'll change your mind immediately.
And another thing about this store:
everyone is courteous, even the clerks
greet you with a smile, and are glad
to show you everything. How long has
this firm been established? Give exact
address. What is their business agree
ment with customers?
(31) Here is just the place to visit
for lunches and home-made pastry. It
is known as Kapps lunchroom. They
serve a nice little lunch there, and the
coffee is delicious. It is a very clean,
sanitary shop, and you get quick ser
vice. They have home-made pies,
cakes, and doughnuts. The doughnuts
are those world-wide known "Bake
Rite." They sell for twenty-five cents
per dozen. When you are down town
drop into this shop. There is nothing
more tasty than hot doughnuts and
coffee. The process- by which these
doughnuts are made makes them light
er and fluffier than the average dough
nut. And those home-made pies such as
pumpkin and mince, certainly are en
joyable at this time of year. They also
serve a noon-day lunch for the busi
ness man that is a dandy. How many
chairs do thew have in this shop? How
many meat pies do they make a day
and what do they sell for? Give the
exact location of this shop?
(32) There is at least one cigar
store in Palo Alto that caters to
smokers and men who want the best
merchandise for their money. The
Franklin Smoke House makes a spe
cialty of fine cigars, all kinds of cigar
ettes and they carry a large stock of
tobaccos, pipes and smokers' acces
sories. The proprietors believe in giv
ing the people what they want and if
you happen to want something that is
not ordinarily carried in stock, just
let him know and he will order it for
you. If it is in the world, he will come
near gettng it for you. A Soda Foun
tain in connection with the Cigar Store
gives you a cold drink at any time.
Malted milks a specialty. You could
not think of a more suitable present
for a man than a box of cigars and
when you buy them, they should be
chosen by a man who knows you. The
proprietor will assist you. What are
the initials of this energetic proprietor
and what make of candy does he sell?
The Franklin Smoke House is the
most popular place in town for card
games. Bring your friends and play a
friendly game of "rummy." How many
card tables in this establishment?
(33) Where is the bakery where you
can get fresh bread —any and all kinds
of it? Where can you get "bread that
is light, doughnuts that delight, and
pies just right." This is the tale of a
bakery whose products bring to mind
mother's baking day. They are so good
that people come for blocks just to
buy right out of the oven. Their prod
ucts are baked under the most strin
gent sanitary conditions. It is entirely
fitting that the "Who's Who" should
call your attention to this bakery, for
in patronizing the Golden Poppy
Bakery, you not only get the best baked

goods, but you save money as well.
The mention of this name In Palo Alto !
tells a tale of quality goods in this line |
and every housewife is familiar with |
the name and the goods. The big fea
ture with this shop is the making of
whole wheat bread, made from the
finest of wheats, The manager meets
his trade personally and his own per
sonality is responsible to a large de
gree for the patronage which they
have. Who is the manager of this
local bakery and what system do they
use in baking? What are the best
sellers in French Pastry?
(34) A man is as old as he feels, but
a woman is as old as she looks. I won
der how many women in Palo Alto
know the value of personal appear
ance. It is one of the many things
women neglect. If you will just drop
in and see Madame Musy in the Wil
son building, 132 University avenue,
you will receive the personal atten
tion you have so long desired. Madame
Musy is there to please her patrons
and she desires satisfied customers.
It is every woman's idea to be beauti
ful and Madame Musy wishes to help
you. She has a wonderful shop and
does the finest work. Madame Musy is
known for the wonderful marcels she
known for the wonderful marcells she
will say that this is the nearest to
a natural wave that you ever have
had. Years of experience in this busi
ness is the answer for her excellent
work. If you will just give her a trial
I am sure you will be one of her
steady customers. How much does she
charge for a marcell? What is her
phone number? What does Madame
Musy recommend for falling hair?
(35) It tickles everybody's vanity to
a certain degree to have his friends
say how well his home is furnished,
and perhaps many of these friends
secretly wish they knew where they
could buy furniture of equal looks.
There is no secret in obtaining the
right kind of furniture if one knows
the place to shop. The Warren Furni
ture Company is such a place. They
not only handle high-class furniture
for the parlor, bedroom and dining
room, but their kitchen department is
well stocked with ranges and cooking
utensils, and for the floor they have
the Congoleum. This is recognized for
its qualities of not bulging and crack
ing. It's easily cleaned and always
sanitary. Just go to this store once
and let them show you their collection
of home furnishings. They are sure to
suit your individual taste, no matter
how exacting. They are featuring at
this time their Occidental Ranges and
Stoves. Where is this large furniture
store located, and what make of mat
tress do they recommend for its com
fort? They also sell them. W T hat make
of beds do they carry?
(36) Think of something good to eat
and then think of the Stanford Cafe.
They are synonymous. Not only do
they conduct a counter service that is
most appealing to the man who is in a
hurry but they have attractive tables
for those who have time to sit and
enjoy the meal from all angles. The
food at this cafe is prepared just as it
is at home. They would not think
about serving anything to their pat
rons that they would not eat them
selves and this is proof enough of its
purity. Sanitation is one of the chief
objectives of the proprietors of this
restaurant and is everywhere evident.
The service is rendered in a prompt
manner and you are not left studying
the menu all day. They take your or
der when you first sit down. This is
one thing the proprietors find that ap
peals to their customers. They want im
mediate service and they get it. They
also serve the finest of ice cream and
home-made pastry. Who is the pro
gressive proprietor of this cafe and
how many stools have they at the
gressive proprietors of this cafe and
cated? What brand of coffee do they
use?
(37) The most conveniently and cen
trally located market in Palo Alto to
do your shopping is the Palo Alto
Market. This market caters to the dis
criminating buyers of fresh and cured
meats. To the people that are careful
of the meats they eat, these people
are their friends. They handle nothing
but the very best inspected meats, and
the proprietor does not depend upon
the Federal and State authorities al
together. He makes a personal inspec
tion of them when they enter his
store. If they are not right, bingo!
they are sent back. When you enter
this establishment you are confronted
with an air of absolute cleanliness and
sanitation. Clean sawdust protects the
floor and the glass show cases and
marble counters make it impossible
for bits of meat to "hide" from the
scrutinizing eye of the butchers. The
market on a whole is kept in a state
of cleanliness that will meet the ap
proval of anyone. In fact, sanitation is
their main objective. What is the
exact location of this modern market
and what is their,phone number? How
long have they been established? What
line of hams do they carry? Also what
is their buying rule?

a holiday. It is a gentlemen's billiard I
parlor, conducted for gentlemen by gen
tlemen. Mr. Mahaney sees that these
principles are carried out in detail. At
Mahaney's they have live pool tables,
one snooker table and two billiard
tables, which gives every one a chance
to play the game they like. When you
get thirsty they have a soda fountain in
connection serving the finest of cold
drinks. All the standard brands of
cigars are carried here, and, believe me,
they are fresh. At their store No. 2,
next to the Stanford Theater, you will
find Mr. Krebs in charge, who is asso
ciated with Mr. Mahaney. A full line
of smokers' needs are carried here and
a big supply of cigars in boxes of 10,
25 and 50 in Christmas boxes will be
featured. Ladies' patronage is socilited
at this store. Get your Christmas Gifts
here for the men folks. What is Mr.
Mahaney's first name? Give the location
of store No. 1. What is Mr. Kreb's first
name?
(43) A famous banker once gave a
young man this advice: "Save your
money and look prosperous." We have
known young men to fail because they
did not realize the importance of being
well dressed. A good suit is a dis
tinctive asset to any man. If he is well
dressed, he immediately commands at
tention. If you want the right suit at
the right price, patronize Frazer & Co.
They are the home of good clothes in
Palo Alto, and in addition to these high
grade clothes, they carry such standard
lines of furnishings as Manhattan shirts
and Everwear hosiery. In fact, their
stock borders along high-class lines, and
it is the store in which to do your fall
shopping. They have many new styles,
cuts and materials awaiting your in
spection and their prices are very low,
consistent with the quality. The whole
store commands a high position in the
mercantile establishments of Palo Alto
because of the quality of merchandise
they handle. Meet these people and you
have met twentieth century merchants.
What make of clothing do they sell, and
what is the slogan of these clothes? Give
location, of the store.
(44) Just say "His Master's Voice"
and you have immediately spoken of the
best-known phonograph on the market.
The Victrola is made by pioneer manu
facturers in the business. It is the choice
of the greatest artists who indorse its
unerring register of the original voice
or instrument. Ralph C. Dodson's Music
Store, 340 University avenue, has Vic-,
trolas in many styles and prices. In
addition to the Victrolas this shop also
carries a large line of Victor records,
and new ones are added as soon as they
are released from the factory. A good
tip to the student is to have a "portable"
Victrola with you. If you want to dance
it is always handy and will give you
the music you like the best whenever
you want it. Go in and let them show
you their selection of Victrolas. They
will be glad to play for you any record
you would like to hear. You will ap
preciate meeting these people and they
will appreciate your patronage. Where
are the machines manufactured and how
long has this music shop been established?
What is the price of the style 100 Vic
trola? Have you heard the best seller
in records this month, "I Found a Four-
Leaf Clover," and what is the price of
this record ?
(45) Let's go to the movies. This
expression often shakes away gloom and
dullness and you gladly join the happy
ries a complete stock of crockery ware,
see a regular show. By "movies" the
people of Palo Alto mean the Varsity
and Stanford theaters. They know that
at these playhouses they will see the
best of screen offerings at prices con
sistent with conditions. These two cozy
theaters give the patrons day in and day
out the best in film plays that money
can buy. To those few in Palo Alto
that have not had the pleasure of at
tending these two modern playhouses,
they are missing one of the great joys
of life. The products of the most gifted
imaginations of the world are beautifully
and artistically portrayed with an ac
companiment of the finest of organ
music. You should get their regular
weekly program, which gives you the
names of the shows and the nights upon
which they will be exhibited. Tell us
the manager's name of the Varsity The
ater and how many seats have they?
Give us the exact location of the Stan
ford Theater. What is the Big Special
picture coming there next Monday?
(46) You may say what you want,
but say "Hardware" and the minds of
the people of Palo Alto will revert
automatically to the Palo Alto Hard
ware Company, "The Winchester Store."
This firm carries a complete line of
hardware, consisting of carpenters' and
mechanics' tools of every description;
cutlery as well as builders' hardware,
sporting goods, Bass Hcuter Paints,
Pennsylvania Vacuum Cup Tires—in
fact, everything you would expcct to find
in a modern up-to-date hardware store.
The Palo Alto Hardware Company is
known as the "Winchester Store," carry
ing a full line of Winchester products.
The Winchester Company puts out one
article each month at a special price—
the public are looking forward each
month for these big specials. The special
for November is a Winchester Flash

(3S) Time is money. Save time and
money. Spend the ten minutes allowed
on your street car transfer, buying
Christmas Cards or forgotten station
ery supplies at llyde's, 370 University
avenue, right at the transfer point.
There are but two transfer points, the
depot and opposite Hyde's new store.
Tou can get a basket for your many
packages here or a beautifully decor
ated one to send as a Christmas gift.
If you want a Fountain Pen, which one
does Hyde's guarantee? If you want to
give stationery to your sister, which
of Hyde's brands would you choose?
Which will have the bigger sale at
Hyde's for the kiddies, "Kritters of the
Kitchen Kingdom," or "The Chickens
Eating Corn"? What line of goods is
being especially featured at Hyde's
besides sttftionery, school supplies,
fountain pens, pictures, picture frames,
baskets, candles, beads, games, toys,
favors, memory books, and albums?
Call at Hyde's at the transfer point,
and they can answer the above ques
tions and also give you many sugges
tions for charming and inexpensive
Christmas presets. Their new store is
one of the finest of its kind in P. A.
(39) It is every man's wish to own
his own home. It makes for family
contentment and happiness. It saves
paying rent.
The University Realty Company sp&-
j cializes in providing people with
homes. Consult them as you would any
specialist.
Years of experience in this com
munity stands back of the University
Realty Company.
This Company can serve you in the
purchase or sale of real estate, in writ
ing all kinds of insurance, in renting
and leasing, in fact, in all matters per
taining to real estate and insurance.
How long has this Company been in
business in Palo Alto? Name one in
surance company that it represents.
(40) If you want to make your
friends happy, present them with a
good photograph of yourself. A photo
graph is a token of real friendship,
and is highly appreciated by everyone.
And when you are in Palo Alto and
desire a portrait of yourself and are
not satisfied with just ordinary work,
go to the Shattuck Studio and you will
be pleased. This is one man who is
"behind the camera, but not behind
the times." His portrait work is indic
ative of this. In his little studio on
University avenue he will be found
very busy most every day snapping
and developing and then touching up,
putting the finishing touches on, which
removes all blemishes. The art of fin
ishing portraits is not possessed by
everyone, but this photographer is in
deed an expert. Then, too, his prices
are exceedingly moderate, considering
the beauty and quality of work turned
out. You are always sure of a success
ful picture here. Do you know that
your picture is the only present your
friends cannot buy? Where is the
exact location of this studio? What
other photographic work do they do?
(41) Everyone knows Wagner, "The
Meat Man." He is a master in the meat
business. He came to Palo Alto eight
years ago and started business in a
small market in a small way on High
street. Today his business has ex
panded to such an extent that it has
outgrown the old market.
Mr. Wagner says he doesn't take the
credit for making his business what it
is in Palo Alto, but owes it to Mr. N.
Benson who has been with him ever
since he has located in this vicinity
and who will continue to manage the
local market. Mr. Benson has a great
many friends here in Palo Alto.
Mr. Wagnor owns the block of four
stores on the corner of University and
Florence streets, his new market being
the main Corner Store Room. This
wonder market is a palace of marble.
The counters are of marble and glass
and the latest word in modern sanita
tion. The woodwork is finished in
French gray and the walls in gray
with green trimmings. Cold storage
plant is of the latest modern auto
matic control and the best that money
can buy.
There is not a question in tlie
writer's mind but what this is one of
the most modern and finest equipped
markets in the state of California.
Mr. Wagner owns a chain of mar
kets extending to San Jose and Hol
lister and most of his time is con
fined to the purchasing end of the bus
iness. He has been in the meat bus
iness so long that he doesn't guess at
the quality of meat when he buys. He
knows that they are the best, so, when
purchasing the meat from him you
don't have to worry about its not being
of the best quality.
He is still going to be known as
"The Meat Man" in his new market
and will give the same service and
high quality meats that has made him
such a success.
It will pay you to watch for his ad
vertisements appearing in the daily
papers.
(42) This article is about one of the
liveliest spots in Palo Alto. There is
something doing here most all of the
time, and especially after dinner or on

Light, complete with battery for 89 cents.
The Palo Alto Hardware Company Car
rie sa complete stock of crockery ware,
dishes in plain and open sets and the
finest aluminum and enameled ware in
the city. How long has this store been
established? What is tie special price
on the 50-piece set of Gold Band Potter
Chinaware? What make of electric
washer do they sell?
(47) Fitting feet is a matter of no
little importance, for there .ire a very
few people that enjoy the fitting of a
n<iw pair of shoes, even when they fit
perfectly. However, Thoit's Shoe Store
is a firm that is noted all over the Coast
for its ability to produce shoes that
"feel just like the old ones." They are
the local distributors of Hanan Shoes
and other reputable makes of more mod
erate price. This store is a home store.
Its management is a good example to
follow, for courtesy and personal ser
vice is its aim. It is needless to speak
of the quality of their shoes, as this is
too well known, but we will say that they
carefully select as to quality, workman
ship and style. Their wearing qualities,
as well as looks, are second to none.
When you have met the proprietor of
the local firm you will have met a man
that is all for Stanford and Palo Alto.
Where is their modern shoe store lo
cated? How many members of the fam
ily can they fit in shoes? When was
this business established?
(48) There is one photographer in.
Palo Alto, "An Artistic Photographer,"'
who has gained a national reputation
and holds first prize in America for ex
cellency of work. He now has por
traits on exhibition in the National Salon.
Has also been awarded highest honors
in the states of New York, Ohio and
Michigan. He has probably photo
graphed more prominent and profes
sional people than any photographer in
America. Was with Hartsook Studios
for the past eleven years, specializing
principally in photographing moving pic
ture stars and theatricals in general. A
visit to his studio, 126 University ave
nue, which was formerly the Davey
Studio, will convince the most skeptical
of the superiority of his work. Who is
this artist who has made it possible for
the Palo Alto people to get something
different, something highly artistic*
without having to go to the larger
cities? And what makes a successful
artistic portrait? Remember Friend
ship's Perfect Gift—Your Photo.
(49) There is a wonderful industry
in this city that 1 belit*vo many do not
know about. Why is it so many people
go to San Francisco to purchase their
gifts when right here in Palo Alto there
is a shop that is known by exclusive
shops all over the United States and
whose goods have gone to England..
Australia, and Honolulu? Miss Herrick
conducts a shop the year round to servj;
you. When you are thinking of gifts,
go first to Miss Herrick's and you will
be surprised at the exclusive articles
you will find there and more reasonably
priced than elsewhere. This Studio must,
be seen to be appreciated. Give us the
names of two articles just received from
India. Tell us three articles made ex
clusively in Herrick Studios and sold
all over the United States.
(50) Here is one of the busiest stores
in Palo Alto. Segar Service Shop. Be
lieve me, the proprietor sure is popular
with the young fellows. There never is
a time but what you will see a bunch in
his store. The reason for that is his
service to every one, no matter if you
only buy a package of cigarette papers*
or if it is a brier pipe, you get the same
courteous treatment. A large assortment
of pipes have just arrived for the Christ
mas trade. Also jars of smoking to
bacco. A complete line of magazines
are carried here. In connection with this
modern Cigar Store we have a real Ser
vice Barber Shop, operated by Mr. Par
vin. They are all union barbers and ex
pert haircutters. This shop is the oldest
in town. If you only want a shave, don't
be afraid to come here. These barbers
don't bother the life out of you selling
you something else in the shop. Try
these boys the first chance you get. Get
an Almond Meal and Peroxide Steam
Facial Massage. Tell us Mr. Parvin's
first name. Tell us how many maga
zines Mr. Corns has for sale at the
Cigar Counter. Give us the exact loca
tion of these two establishments.
(1) Think of the countless obstacles
the pioneers of old had to overcome
as they journeyed forth to lay the
foundation for a future that might
hold some promise' for them. Some
achieved their goal, others failed. Then
consider your own environment and
chances for the future. Your lot is a
path of roses compared with that of
tho pioneers. jfist lay aside a small
amount each week and start an ac
count with the First National Bank of
Palo Alto. They have a capital of
$100,000.00, and $24,000 surplus, and
are members of the Federal Reserve
System of Banking. The officers and
everyone connected with this bank
have always practiced service and
courtesy to their patrons. You are
treated with consideration whether
you are a large or small depositor or
whether you are a temporary visitor in
this favored locality. A man putting
his money in a bank should always
make sure that the institution is finan
cially solid and this is just such a
bank. They pay 4 per cent interest on
Term Deposits. Name the directors of
this banking institution. What is the
margin of security including stock
holders' liability?

(2) In purchasing jewelry, the buyer
puts more faith in the seller than any
other commodity that men buy and
sell. This article is about a jewelry
store that has been in business in
Palo Alto for a number of years, and
their reputation for being dependable
is second to none. In addition to their
exceptional stock of watches, jewelry,
rings, SILVERWARE, cut glass, etc.,
they do expert watch and jewelry re
pairing. This is the store to select your
•"Gifts That Last." Nielsen and Culver
are the kind of fellows we like to men
tion in our columns, because they have
a sociable and intelligent personality
—ones who know how to make friends
and keep them. Go see this store and
look over their high class line of jew
elry and you are sure to make all of
your purchases in this line from them.
Every article they sell not only bears
the guarantee of the manufacturers,
but their personal guarantee goes with
it as well. If you have a broken piece
of jewelry, no matter how fine it is,
they will repair it for you. What are
Mr. Culver'? initials, and where is
their store located. Also what other
department do they conduct? What is
their leading line of Silverware?

(3) It ticV les everybody's vanity to
a certain dc pre e to have his friends
say how we ! his homo is furnished,
and perhaps many of these friends se
cretly wish they knew where they
could buy furniture of equal looks.
There is no secret of obtaining the
right kind cf furniture if one knows
the place to shop. The Palo Alto Fur
niture Company is such a place. They
not only hf nd!e high-class furniture
for the parlor, bofl-roora and dining
room, but their kitchen department is
well stocked with ranges and
utensils and for the floor they have
Linoleum of the latest designs and
patterns. It is easily cleaned and al-

Introducing to You the Live Progressive Firms and People Who Make
up the Business Interests of Palo Alto
First Prize —$10.00 Theatre Tickets contributed by
* VARSITY AND STANFORD THEATRES
Second Prize —One Dozen Photographs contributed by
SHATTUCK STUDIOS
Third Prize —One Hand Painted Oil Picture of Chapel
contributed by FREEMAN'S ART STORE
Fourth Prize —One Box of Chancellor (after dinner) Cigars
contributed by FRANKLIN'S SMOKE HOUSE

ways sanitary. Just go to this store !
once and let them show you their col
lection of home furnishings. They are
sure to suit your individual taste, no
matter how exacting. They are featur
ing a complete line of stoves and
ranges. The best in the world is
Wedgewood. Where is this large fur
niture store located? and what make
of water heaters do, they recommend?
How many square feet of Inlaid Lin
oleum are they now laying in the Rus
sel Cafeteria?

(4) No matter who you are and what
your life is, it can be made happier
and better through the influence of
music. This up-to-date store that we
are writing about is the home of the
best there is in music, and they are
representatives for Brunswick and
Columbia phonographs. The Music
Shop at 273 University Avenue is the
music house of Palo Alto, for they not
only carry and sell phonographs and
pianos, but they carry all kinds of
musical instruments, sheet music,
player rolls and records. If you are
fond of string instruments, they have
anything from the ukelele to the cello.
They are exclusive representatives in
Palo Alto for two well-known phono
graphs which are recognized for their ;
many exceptional qualities. These ma
chines play disc records of any make.
If you like a lot of noise moulded into
music, then they have drums for your
choice. The proprietor here is a music
loving man, himself, and he delights in
showing his line to patrons. A visit
from you will be appreciated. What
make of Band Instruments does he
carry? Who are the manufacturers of
the Victor and Brunswick? What is
the price of the Gretsch Sac., Melody
C, Finish No. 2?

(5) Two of the best places to eat in j
Palo Alto are home and here. That is
what the editor thought after trying
one of this restaurant home-cooked
meals. All of you people do not know
of this restaurant or you would be
Johnny on the spot every time Old
Man Hunger gripped your frame. They
not only cater to the man who is in a
hurry with counter service but they
have linen-covered tables for the
ladies. However, the same service is
had at both places and at the same
prices. If you have lots of time to sit
and enjoy your meal, then sit at the
tables, but if you are a business man
with only a few minutes to "grab"
your lunch, the counter service will be
most ideal. The location of this home
like place is 105 Alma Street. The
proprietor of this restaurant has a
most affable manner and he does all
in his power to please his patrons.;
Anything that you want is not too
much trouble for him to get. He uses
the best grade of meats and come
fresh from the meat market when he
needs them and not a week before, j
Who is the energetic proprietor of the
"Popular" restaurant? What is the
price of their noon lunch? What brand
of coffee do they use? How much are
their meal tickets?

(6) Clothes cost too much money to
be carelessly cleaned and pressed, i
Your tailor should be picked just as
your doctor or your grocer. It is just
as important. If you send your clothes
to first one cleaner and then anothf r,
in the ert'd your clothes will be ruined,
and with none to blame but yourself.
The Stanford Dyeing and Cleaning
Works commands a high position in
the cleaning and pressing business of
Palo Alto, and they always guarantee
their work. These people know how to
press a suit. They press it to its
natural form and not "against the
srain." They also use an odorless pro
cess in their cleaning and every meth
od of handling clothes that is modern
is used by them. They have a call and
delivery system and for them to keep
your wardrobe in prefect trim at all
times is no trouble for you. They will
call at your home at regular intervals
tor your clothes and return them
promptly. This prompt service is a
great item in their business. They also
do repairing. What does this firm
charge for cleaning and pressing a
suit, and where is their plant located?
What does 444 mean?

(7) Chiropractic was born 27 years
•,'Ko. The suspicion, distrust and re
sentful criticism aimed at it in the

beginning has been dispelled. Chiro
practors have proven their worth in
healing the sick and lame with their
chiropractic adjustments. With all of
this human service in California they
were held under the yoke of the med
ical board. But thanks to the fair
minded people of this state, that is
over.
Dr. Minor and Dr. Hall wish to thank
all Iheir friends for the support they
gave them. These two doctors are
graduates of the Palmer School of
Chiropractic in Davenport, lowa. They
have practiced Chiropractic for years.
People come for miles around to Doc
tors Minor and Hall.
They are located at 153 University
Avenue. Give both the 'doctors' first
names and give two reasons why Chi
ropractic is beneficial to one's health.

(8) Don't junk your old tires. Take
them to a reliable tire shop and get
their opinion on their condition. They
may be vulcanized and run for several
thcHtsand miles more. And if you want
an honest opinion as to this, take your
tires to Palo Alto Vulcanizing Works.
Tires are this man's sole business,
and we make no mistake when we say
that he knows his business thoroughly.
Vhen he has patched a tube or vul
canized a "shoe" for you, then he has
made a friend. A guarantee goes with
evefy job he does and this is a guar
antee of absolute satisfaction. There
is no money value set on it, but it is a
personal guarantee that you get what
you want and no matter what it cost
him, he'll see that you get it. In addi
tion to the vulcanizing and repair de
partment, this man also carries a stock
of Goodyear tires and he has y ur size.
You don't want to meet a more con
genial man than Mr. Bogges with a
smile for you. Where is the shop lo
cated? What is his price for a Good
year Ford all-weather fabric tire?
What is the price of the 40x10 solid
truck tire that Mr. Bogges has in his
window?

(9) It is a source of discomfort and
worry for some people to buy a new
pair of shoes, but if you are careful in
selecting the correct size in the right
grade of shoes, you will not have this
inconvenience to contend with. At the
Lentos Shoe Store they will not only
sell you a new pair of shoes, but they
will make your old ones like new for
you. They conduct a modern electrical
shoe repairing shop in connection with
the shoe store and they do the work
just like it is done at the factories.
Let your next pair of shoes come from
this store and they will last you much
longer, for when you have worn off
the original soles, just return them
and they will put new ones on at a
small cost. They use the very best
double wear genuine leather soles and
the name and trade mark is stamped
cn them. When you have work done
here, it is well guaranteed, and there
is something back of the guarantee.
Then if it is in the power of these
people to do you a good turn, they
certainly will take pleasure in doing
it. They work for others as well as
themselves. What brand of pure
leather do they use on their soles, and
where is the store located?

. (10) Is milk and cream an important
part of your daily meals? If not, you
are one out of a hundred. Then with
this in view, it is only natural for peo
ple to be sure that their milk and
cream is' absolutely light. And to be
"right" it should contain a certain per
cent of butterfat, as well as be clean
and free from all foreign matter. The
milk, cream, butter and dairy products
you get at the Altomont Creamery are
all that the name implies—sanitary.
They feature pasteurized and guaran
teed dairy products. You can ask for
no better merchandise in this line. So
the next time you need any dairy
products of any sort, whether it be
butter, milk, cream, or cottage cheese,
just go to the Altomont Creamery. It
will be filled with satisfaction.
These people will give you service, as
their business depends upon it. If they
did not give you good service on your
first trip, you would not return again,
and they want your future friendship
and business. What is the location of
this firm's retail store, and what do
they get per quart for their milk. What
does pasteurized mean? and what does
guaranteed milk mean?

(11) When the pioneers blazed a
trail across the continent in '49 there
was also organized a man that blazed
the way in the paint industry, W. T.
Floyd. Since that time, this firm has
been beautifying Palo Alto with its
products. In addition to paints, they
also sell oils, glass, and if you are
looking for a waterproof paint, this is
the place to go. The Hadle Stormtight
Roof Paint firm has a very modern and
up-to-date store, and they are known
for their neatness and complete stock
of goods they carry. This store is a
credit to any city. This store which
this writing is for has the agency for
Acme Quality Paints and Varnishes,
the world's higest standard in paints.
Not only do they retail their products,
but wholesale as well. If you are a
paint man, you will know what firm we
are referring to for they carry one of
the largest stocks in these parts. What

is the name of this firm and what do
they recommend for floor varnish?
Just call at the local store and their
salesmen will gladly assist you. How
many square feet will a gallon of Acme
Quality Paint cover two coats?

(12) Just up the street at Mr. Ethen's
is he liveliest spot in Palo Alto. There is
something doing there most all of the
time and especially so after supper. It
is a place where gentlemen congregate
and exchange experiences of the day
over a friendly game of pocket bil
liards. But, in addition to the billiard
parlor, they also conduct a large bowl
ing alley and soda fountain where they
will make you a creamy milk shake
that will certainly make you return for
another in a short while. They are also
local agents for the United Cigar
Stores and carry a line of cigars that
cannot be had in any other establish
ment in the city. If you are looking for
a friend, you are sure to find him here.
It is a place where practically every
man frequents once in a while just for
the gentlemanly company he is sure to
find. If it is a box of candy you wisn
for your girl, then this is the place for
you to seek. They carry several differ
ent makes and it is kept in a specially
equipped refrigerator which insures
you of freshness at any time. How
many pocket pool tables have they?
What line of pipes do they carry? How
many alleys are there and name what
team is leading in the bowling tourna
ment now being conducted?

(13) Now comes a renowned meat
market which sells fresh meats. In
deed their meats are fresh. They make
it a point to keep them so, which is
responsible for the popularity and
wonderful business gained in the past
months. There are mrny tricks em
ployed by the meat buyers in judging
duality, and the Stanford Meat Com
pany is perfectly willing to share its
secrets with you. They buy only the
best, but they want you to know at
the time of your purchase that you
are getting what you want. Cleanli
ness is the watchword of this market.
The business is so great that their
daily purchases keep their meats
fresh. They seldom carry much over
from one day to another. We enjoy
writing about this market and its
owner for several reasons. One is they
say "never mind about buying, just
come in and look the good things
over." Give exact address. How long
have they been established? What are
their phone numbers? How often do
they get fresu fish at this market?

(14) In buying drugs, you want the
best, including purity and service,
which are two essential things to con
s'der when selecting from which to
buy these needs. Impure drugs are
worse than none at all, and poor ser
vice means aggravation and annoy
ance. Only the best drugs are ever
handled at the Young Drug Company
at the corner of University avenue
and Florence street. The proprietor
is a registered pharmacist and he en
deavors to keep a stock that will
meet with all requirements and cus
tomers do not have to go elsewhere
for anything usually found in an up-to
date drug store. In addition to drugs,
they carry a large stock of perfumery,
toilet articles, safety razors, and if
you happen to have a sweet tooth,
their candies will be appealing to you.
This store has the agency for all of
the Owl products, so you may obtain
these goods right here at home. What
is Ihe proprietor's name? Also what
line of remedies do they handle? What
is "Pom Pom" Luster?

(15) We are now presenting a firm
where fresh staple and fancy groceries
can be secured. It is a concern with
a conscience, and has an aim to please
the hard-to-suit in their lines. In fact,
you can close your eyes and buy here,
and every sale carries a guarantee of
satisfaction, and a little profit is all
they ask. Now just stop a second and
say to yourself, "Where is the best
stock of fruits, vegetables and gro
ceries carried in Palo Alto?" The best
brands of everything are the distin
guishing characteristics of this store,
along with its sanitary aspect. It is a
source of personal satisfaction to the
writer to write about this "quality"
store and the proprietor, Mr. Earle,
Ever since he started, years ago, his
popularity has met with a steady in
crease. He is not only a popular mer
chant. but is an alert business man,
and his idea is to always make the
place home-like when you do business
with him or his clerks, and so far he
has succeeded, and if he can make
Palo Alto a better city you can depend
upon him to take off his coat, roll up
his sleeves and help put it over. He
has for those who need it, a smile,
and has won their business or confi
dence. No merchant in Palo Alto is
more popular with his customers than
the owner of this store. Name the
owner and give his first name in full,
location and phone.

(16) Here is a works that makes a
lot of noise in a legitimate way. It is a
sheet metal establishment. They have
been making a big noise
for some time. They make a
of tin and sheet iron, and a 112

cialties are tanks, and irrigating pipe,
.spouting, skylights, cornice as well as
tin and copper sheet metal specialties.
The expert tinner is a great necessity
i'or those owning homes or business
places, as they look to them for re
l airs and parts. To be efficient, they
must be skilled in their calling and
geniuses as well. And these things are
apparent at the Palo Alto Sheet Metal
Works. There are many ways of tin
ning that will not stand the test. These
people use the right way. The owners
of this shop believe it better to be on
the level with their customers than
to climb upward by a crooked path.
Such a firm as this we surely like to
include in our feature. In fact, we can
not say enough for them, for they de
serve much more than a mere word of
praise. They deserve sure success.
Who is the proprietor of this shop and
Low long have they been established
here. Where are they located? What
size Warm Air Heater does it take to
heat a 7-room house? and give the
price of it.

(17) When a business establish
ment has reached the heights of suc
cess and prominence, it is either cred
ited to the skillful management or to
the quality of merchandise they han
dle. At the enterprising store at 317
University Avenue both of these items
are responsible for their standing in
Palo Alto. The most prominent resi
dents of the city are among their cus
tomer list. Their costumes can always
be depended upon for beiug the latest
styles and the good quality never
varies. "Where there is quality, there
is style." The Style Shop is well
known for both. (The store is attrac
tively decorated and the merchandise
is displayed in such a manner that it
becomes a profound pleasure to shop
with them). Their courteous sales
women also render great assistance
with their timely suggestions of "what
is being worn" and you leave the store
pleased witn your visit, feeling that
you have wasted no time whatever.
What is the slogan of this enterpris
ing store. Tell name of this classy
store's proprietor. A Big Clearance
Sale is now going on at the Smart
Shop. Everything in the store is re
duced for this Sale.

(18) The most widely known and
recognized decorations for any and all
occasions are flowers. They are recog
nized internationally and more can be
said with a small bunch of flowers
than can be said with a dozen tele
grams or any other form of communi
cation. "Say it with flowers" is a fit
ting slogan for their usefulness and
worth. The one flower shop in Palo
Alto that has created a reputation for
having in stock all of the different
(lowers in season is known as the
Palo Alto Flower & Seed Shop. They
carry a complete line of flowers for
the dining room table, to ship to your
friends or pot flowers to decorate your
home and porches. When you desire
to remember yourself to a friend, this
is the one place to come for they will
make up a beautiful boquet for you.
The proprietor here likes flowers him
self, which is symbolic of happiness.
His disposition is also like that of a
flower, bright and full of cheer. Who
is this proprietor? What is the num
ber of the shop? What kind of seeds
does he carry? What are the names
of the jardiners that they are selling
that come from Japan?

(19) Who is there in this city en
gaged in correction and the conserva
tion of eyesight? Many have come to
him and received great relief when
troubled with eye defects. His strict
attention to his business has won for
him a host of friends and patrons. Dr.
Cochran will be found very busy at
his offices at 122 University avenue
and you will make no mistake in con
sulting him about your eyes. He has
passed the State Board of Optometry
examinations and is recognized for his
excellent work, and is also a graduate
Dr. of Optometry. In addition to
working on your eyes, he will replace
broken lenses or make you a complete
pair of glasses. The eyes are the win
dows of the soul and when they are
wrong, the body is handicapped, for,
without clear vision, we can't see the
world as it is. Eye troubles are often
started when young and your chil
dren's eyes should be examined before
it is too late. Make an appointment
•with Dr. Cochran and get his opinion.
His office is completely equipped with
all of the modern instruments used in
this work. What are Dr. Cochran's ini
tials, and what is the range of prices
for his glasses? What is the store
motto?

(20) Most men like to know where
they can find a good barber shop, as
they are very particular about per
sonal appearance. They demand satis
factory work. When I suggest Mar
quee's Barber Shop, I know what I'm
talking about. They have a very sani
tary little shop with all the modern
equipment, also including five modern
chairs. They specialize in all kinds of
shampooing, scalp and facial treat
ments. If you want your hair to have
jompadour cut, or any other kind,
t let Marquee's do it for you. If

you are having trouble with your
scalp, they can help you. Dixol is the
scalp treatment they recommend. They
also bob children's hair, so bring them
in the next time you are down town.
Just ask anyone who has visited Mar
quee's shop, and they will tell you
how well satisfied they were. Where
ic their shop located? What brands of
hair tonic do they use and recom
mend?

(21) A most important institution of
business in any city, town or commun
ity is the reliable drug store. Here it
is that we depend for our health. And
It ere is where we go when we want
toilet articles, kodak supplies, foun
tain pens and a hundred other luxuries
and necessities. The Kenyon & Crow
Store is known for its large and com
plete stock of all of these articles, and
in fact, anything found in a first-class
store. In addition to their general line
of pure drugs, assortments of high
class cosmetics and sundries, they are
tlie Penslar Store in Palo Alto. This
line of household remedies is com
plete. There is one for every possible
need or use. Now is the time to begin
to think about Christmas Gifts. A
large collection of hand-colored Christ
mas Cards have just arrived. They
are wonderful in design and color.
Fountain pens and Pen and Pencil sets
in Christmas Boxes make a very fine
pi esent to your student friends, or a
big box of gift stationery. At this store
they conduct the largest Kodak print
ing and developing business 011 the
Peninsula, handling a full line of East
man Kodaks and Cameras. One of
the big features of this store is their
framed pictures and mirrors. They
have a framing department and are
able to frame for you any size picture
with most any style mounting you
desire. What profit-sharing system do
they practice? Find out the four lead
ing perfumes they handle? In what
line do they excell all other concerns
in this locality? What are the pro
prietors' nicknames?

(22) There is a mail in this town
much wiser than his sires; he ran
into a bramble bush and punctured all
four tires. When he saw his tires
were wrecked, with all his might and
main, he went to this tire shop and
had them fixed again. One of the first
things to learn if you own an auto
mobile is to know what vulcanizing
nrm gives Service that Serves. The
Retread Shop is recognized for their
expert tire repairing. You should con
sult these doctors when your tires get
sick for they surely have the dope
that cures. You cannot help but like
this firm for those connected with it
make every effort possible to please
you. They will always go out of their
way to do a good turn for you, and if
you have tire trouble on the street,
just notify them and they will render
assistance People who do business
here are really proud .of ttie fact and
it is simply because they give what
the customers want and should have
—"Satisfaction." Go to this shop and
meet these tire men and then tell us
what make of tires they sell and what
their price for a Ford-size cord tire in
the make begins with "F." Give two
reasons why this tire is the best on
the market for its size.

(23) Pleasure of motoring is in
creased if your car is in good working
condition. It is, therefore, advisable to
have your car looked over before you
start on this trip and when you have
your car worked on, be sure of* your
garage. The Palo Alto Garage on Em
reson street is indeed a thoroughly
dependable establishment in regard to
their repairing. Mr. J. M. Blackburn
employs only expert mechanics. The
Palo Alto Garage has the agency for
the Durant car and many others such
as the Chandler, Cadillac, and Cleve
land. Have you seen the new 1923
model Durant. Just step in and let
them sTiow you what a wonderful mod
el it is. The proprietor of this garage,
Mr. J. M. Blackburn, personally super
vises the garage at all times, and as
sures you of prompt service whether
you are buying a spark plug or filling
your tank with gas. They have Ever-
Ready Battery service, and they also
carry Associated Gasoline. They want
satisfied customers at the Palo Alto
Garage. That is their motto. Give two
reasons why the Durant car is more
practical. What is Mr. Blackburn's
first jiame? How long have they been
established?

(24) In writing of the leading busi
ness firms and institutions of Palo
Alto, we have come across an inter
esting shop at 367 University Avenue,
that well deserves mentioning. No, it
won't interest you men, particularly—
but has an especial appeal to the wo
men of Palo Alio and vicinity who
are lovers of beautiful things. This at
tractive shop is fairly overflowing with
wonderful creations of Laces, Em
broideries, Frocks, and Sport Skirts,
Reads for the Miss and Mistress —at-
tractively displayed, and just a) at
tractively priced. These are only a
112» w of the many beautiful and useful
articles to be found in this modern,
up-to-date shop—and the proprietor
takes great pleasure in dispensing I
courteous and attentive service to
every patron. We want you to tell us
the name of this worth while shop—
also the proprietor's name and cor
rect address. What are their prices on
their dresses? What price on stamped
pillow cases? Also stamped dresser
scarfs which come in packages.
(25) Look prosperous and save
money at the same time. This is what
so many people are trying to do and |
cannot quite manage it. The reason is
that they do not know where to buy
economically and where to get goods
hat stand wear and look well. It is
not economy to buy a cheap "hand-me
down" suit of clothes. It is a waste of
money. If you have a suit made by
the tailor that this article is about,
you will get a suit of clothes that will
last. This tailor has been sixteen years
in Palo Alto and has the finest trade
on the Peninsula. Specialist on ladies'
tailoring and sport suits. He holds a
gold medal given to him at the Lewis
and Clark Exposition for designing.
You will be surprised at the chicness
as well as the exceedingly low price
he charges for a suit. And another fea
ture of this tailor, all of the tailoring
is done on the premises. He does not
take your order and send it to San
Francisco or New York. Who is this
progressive tailor? His establishment
is upstairs at 123 University avenue.
Better stop in and let him take your
measure and you select your pattern
and style at the same time.
(26) The best friend of womankingis
that which takes the grievous burdens
from her shoulders. No woman likes
to bend over washtubs or ironing
boards, and it is the mission of the
University French Laundry to per
form this highest physical service for
her. This laundry is almost our own
concern. It takes soiled linen and
turns it into attractive wearing ap
parel. It is an extensive industry, em
ploying many people. Wagons are sent
out in every direction in Palo Alto to
collect and deliver laundry and to keep
the various articles separated, so that
you don't get your neighbors' clothes,
is a job of a highly specialized order.
The methods used at this laundry are
thoroughly modern, and the machinery
equipment makes the work most satis
factory. The manager of this laundry
takes an active interest in the welfare
of Palo Alto and his absolute support
can be counted upon when anything
for the betterment of the city is in
progress. Who is this energetic man
ager, and where is the laundry lo
cated? How many employes has he?
What is the phone number?
(27) Well, here we are. Just what
interests all%women in Palo Alto. I
know when you go to that party or
dance you want to look charming. It
just requires a little personal atten
tion. You have often been to some pub
lic place and admired some ladies'
hair of the transparent texture of her
skin. The kind that is clear and
smooth. Well, you can have that charm
just the same as she. You go and see
Mrs. Marie Montgomery who has
charge of this exclusive Beauty Shop.
You will find every kind of modern
equipment desired in this shop, and
their work is very satisfactory. So
many girls have bobbed hair nowa
days, and they find it quite a task to
keep it looking well. Just drop into the
Montgomery Beauty Shop, and they
will marcelle your hair, and give the
ends a round curl which improves it
very much. You will find their egg
shampoo very invigorating. They spe
cialize in scalp and facial treatments.
They do hair waving and curling of
all kinds. What is one of the finest
scalp treatment? All kinds of facial
treatments are given by Mrs. Mont
gomery. Tell us the price of her
I'lactique Facial Treatment?
(28) What is the name of the store
that comes into your mind so clearly
when you speak of Art Goods? It is
Edwin R. Freeman's Art and Photo
Shop. There is no other place in the
city where they have such a large as
sortment of Wonderful Gifts to select
from. The writer cannot begin to tell
you of the hundreds of articles in this
store. The candlestick and framed and
unframed pictures are the best that
Mr Freeman could make and buy.
They have the largest picture fram
ing department on the Peninsula, giv
ing you the largest assortment of
frames to choose from. Christmas sea
son is nearing. Your motto is to do
your shopping early, and if you are
looking for gifts to give your friends
that will make them long remembered
to you, go to Freeman's Art Store. If
you have a picture that you cherish,
bring it here and let them frame it, or
a negative, enlarge it. They have a
complete service for films, kodaks, and
enlarging. How is it that Mr. Freeman
can sell his Foto Art Prints cheaper
than others?
(29) Palo Alto with its amazing
wealth and attractive terms and prices

when you are indebted to the wide
awake firm at 111 Circle. Their long
experience, knowledge of values and
expert advice in such matters have
won for them a large number of satis
fled customers. Through their devotion
to the business of their clients, Mr.
Helm has gained an enviable reputa
tion. Whether it be the buying of a
home or the selection of a lot or acre
age, you can be sure of finding just
what you want at attractive terms and
price when you are dealing with this
firm. This company also has many
ranch lands, both raw and improved.
In fact, their operations along this line
is, indeed, second to none in Palo Alto.
They are authorities on ranch lands
and if you name the location, they can
come pretty close to telling you the
value. Therefore, their advice and per
sonal service in such matters is indeed
important. Just drop in at their office
and they will gladly assist you. They
have just moved to 111 Circle, former
ly at 257 University avenue. What is
the name of this firm and what other
line of business do they follow? What
is Mr. Helm's first name? What is the
name of Mr. Helm's new assistant?
(30) Did you ever notice how you
admire the clothes of others and can
not understand why you never look as
well when you know personally that
you spend more money on your wear
ing apparel than this particular fel
low? The secret can easily be solved
if you do your shopping at the right
place. To test this out, the next time
you need a suit of clothes, a hat, or
anything in the gents' furnishing line,
go to Wideman & Son. This is one
exclusive haberdashery. Their stock is
composed of such well-known makes
as Kuppenheimer Clothes, Knapp Felt
Hats and Caps, handled by only the
best stores, and the fact of the matter
is, their entire stock bears names just
as well-known and highly recommend
ed as these few mentioned. Winter is
here and now is the time to see that
you are equipped for it. You certainly
need a new suit or a new hat. If you
don't think you do, come here and
look at the difference in the style of
your old one and their new stock.
You'll change your mind immediately.
And another thing about this store:
everyone is courteous, even the clerks
greet you with a smile, and are glad
to show you everything. How long has
this firm been established? Give exact
address. What is their business agree
ment with customers?
(31) Here is just the place to visit
for lunches and home-made pastry. It
is known as Kapps lunchroom. They
serve a nice little lunch there, and the
coffee is delicious. It is a very clean,
sanitary shop, and you get quick ser
vice. They have home-made pies,
cakes, and doughnuts. The doughnuts
are those world-wide known "Bake
Rite." They sell for twenty-five cents
per dozen. When you are down town
drop into this shop. There is nothing
more tasty than hot doughnuts and
coffee. The process- by which these
doughnuts are made makes them light
er and fluffier than the average dough
nut. And those home-made pies such as
pumpkin and mince, certainly are en
joyable at this time of year. They also
serve a noon-day lunch for the busi
ness man that is a dandy. How many
chairs do thew have in this shop? How
many meat pies do they make a day
and what do they sell for? Give the
exact location of this shop?
(32) There is at least one cigar
store in Palo Alto that caters to
smokers and men who want the best
merchandise for their money. The
Franklin Smoke House makes a spe
cialty of fine cigars, all kinds of cigar
ettes and they carry a large stock of
tobaccos, pipes and smokers' acces
sories. The proprietors believe in giv
ing the people what they want and if
you happen to want something that is
not ordinarily carried in stock, just
let him know and he will order it for
you. If it is in the world, he will come
near gettng it for you. A Soda Foun
tain in connection with the Cigar Store
gives you a cold drink at any time.
Malted milks a specialty. You could
not think of a more suitable present
for a man than a box of cigars and
when you buy them, they should be
chosen by a man who knows you. The
proprietor will assist you. What are
the initials of this energetic proprietor
and what make of candy does he sell?
The Franklin Smoke House is the
most popular place in town for card
games. Bring your friends and play a
friendly game of "rummy." How many
card tables in this establishment?
(33) Where is the bakery where you
can get fresh bread —any and all kinds
of it? Where can you get "bread that
is light, doughnuts that delight, and
pies just right." This is the tale of a
bakery whose products bring to mind
mother's baking day. They are so good
that people come for blocks just to
buy right out of the oven. Their prod
ucts are baked under the most strin
gent sanitary conditions. It is entirely
fitting that the "Who's Who" should
call your attention to this bakery, for
in patronizing the Golden Poppy
Bakery, you not only get the best baked

goods, but you save money as well.
The mention of this name In Palo Alto !
tells a tale of quality goods in this line |
and every housewife is familiar with |
the name and the goods. The big fea
ture with this shop is the making of
whole wheat bread, made from the
finest of wheats, The manager meets
his trade personally and his own per
sonality is responsible to a large de
gree for the patronage which they
have. Who is the manager of this
local bakery and what system do they
use in baking? What are the best
sellers in French Pastry?
(34) A man is as old as he feels, but
a woman is as old as she looks. I won
der how many women in Palo Alto
know the value of personal appear
ance. It is one of the many things
women neglect. If you will just drop
in and see Madame Musy in the Wil
son building, 132 University avenue,
you will receive the personal atten
tion you have so long desired. Madame
Musy is there to please her patrons
and she desires satisfied customers.
It is every woman's idea to be beauti
ful and Madame Musy wishes to help
you. She has a wonderful shop and
does the finest work. Madame Musy is
known for the wonderful marcels she
known for the wonderful marcells she
will say that this is the nearest to
a natural wave that you ever have
had. Years of experience in this busi
ness is the answer for her excellent
work. If you will just give her a trial
I am sure you will be one of her
steady customers. How much does she
charge for a marcell? What is her
phone number? What does Madame
Musy recommend for falling hair?
(35) It tickles everybody's vanity to
a certain degree to have his friends
say how well his home is furnished,
and perhaps many of these friends
secretly wish they knew where they
could buy furniture of equal looks.
There is no secret in obtaining the
right kind of furniture if one knows
the place to shop. The Warren Furni
ture Company is such a place. They
not only handle high-class furniture
for the parlor, bedroom and dining
room, but their kitchen department is
well stocked with ranges and cooking
utensils, and for the floor they have
the Congoleum. This is recognized for
its qualities of not bulging and crack
ing. It's easily cleaned and always
sanitary. Just go to this store once
and let them show you their collection
of home furnishings. They are sure to
suit your individual taste, no matter
how exacting. They are featuring at
this time their Occidental Ranges and
Stoves. Where is this large furniture
store located, and what make of mat
tress do they recommend for its com
fort? They also sell them. W T hat make
of beds do they carry?
(36) Think of something good to eat
and then think of the Stanford Cafe.
They are synonymous. Not only do
they conduct a counter service that is
most appealing to the man who is in a
hurry but they have attractive tables
for those who have time to sit and
enjoy the meal from all angles. The
food at this cafe is prepared just as it
is at home. They would not think
about serving anything to their pat
rons that they would not eat them
selves and this is proof enough of its
purity. Sanitation is one of the chief
objectives of the proprietors of this
restaurant and is everywhere evident.
The service is rendered in a prompt
manner and you are not left studying
the menu all day. They take your or
der when you first sit down. This is
one thing the proprietors find that ap
peals to their customers. They want im
mediate service and they get it. They
also serve the finest of ice cream and
home-made pastry. Who is the pro
gressive proprietor of this cafe and
how many stools have they at the
gressive proprietors of this cafe and
cated? What brand of coffee do they
use?
(37) The most conveniently and cen
trally located market in Palo Alto to
do your shopping is the Palo Alto
Market. This market caters to the dis
criminating buyers of fresh and cured
meats. To the people that are careful
of the meats they eat, these people
are their friends. They handle nothing
but the very best inspected meats, and
the proprietor does not depend upon
the Federal and State authorities al
together. He makes a personal inspec
tion of them when they enter his
store. If they are not right, bingo!
they are sent back. When you enter
this establishment you are confronted
with an air of absolute cleanliness and
sanitation. Clean sawdust protects the
floor and the glass show cases and
marble counters make it impossible
for bits of meat to "hide" from the
scrutinizing eye of the butchers. The
market on a whole is kept in a state
of cleanliness that will meet the ap
proval of anyone. In fact, sanitation is
their main objective. What is the
exact location of this modern market
and what is their,phone number? How
long have they been established? What
line of hams do they carry? Also what
is their buying rule?

a holiday. It is a gentlemen's billiard I
parlor, conducted for gentlemen by gen
tlemen. Mr. Mahaney sees that these
principles are carried out in detail. At
Mahaney's they have live pool tables,
one snooker table and two billiard
tables, which gives every one a chance
to play the game they like. When you
get thirsty they have a soda fountain in
connection serving the finest of cold
drinks. All the standard brands of
cigars are carried here, and, believe me,
they are fresh. At their store No. 2,
next to the Stanford Theater, you will
find Mr. Krebs in charge, who is asso
ciated with Mr. Mahaney. A full line
of smokers' needs are carried here and
a big supply of cigars in boxes of 10,
25 and 50 in Christmas boxes will be
featured. Ladies' patronage is socilited
at this store. Get your Christmas Gifts
here for the men folks. What is Mr.
Mahaney's first name? Give the location
of store No. 1. What is Mr. Kreb's first
name?
(43) A famous banker once gave a
young man this advice: "Save your
money and look prosperous." We have
known young men to fail because they
did not realize the importance of being
well dressed. A good suit is a dis
tinctive asset to any man. If he is well
dressed, he immediately commands at
tention. If you want the right suit at
the right price, patronize Frazer & Co.
They are the home of good clothes in
Palo Alto, and in addition to these high
grade clothes, they carry such standard
lines of furnishings as Manhattan shirts
and Everwear hosiery. In fact, their
stock borders along high-class lines, and
it is the store in which to do your fall
shopping. They have many new styles,
cuts and materials awaiting your in
spection and their prices are very low,
consistent with the quality. The whole
store commands a high position in the
mercantile establishments of Palo Alto
because of the quality of merchandise
they handle. Meet these people and you
have met twentieth century merchants.
What make of clothing do they sell, and
what is the slogan of these clothes? Give
location, of the store.
(44) Just say "His Master's Voice"
and you have immediately spoken of the
best-known phonograph on the market.
The Victrola is made by pioneer manu
facturers in the business. It is the choice
of the greatest artists who indorse its
unerring register of the original voice
or instrument. Ralph C. Dodson's Music
Store, 340 University avenue, has Vic-,
trolas in many styles and prices. In
addition to the Victrolas this shop also
carries a large line of Victor records,
and new ones are added as soon as they
are released from the factory. A good
tip to the student is to have a "portable"
Victrola with you. If you want to dance
it is always handy and will give you
the music you like the best whenever
you want it. Go in and let them show
you their selection of Victrolas. They
will be glad to play for you any record
you would like to hear. You will ap
preciate meeting these people and they
will appreciate your patronage. Where
are the machines manufactured and how
long has this music shop been established?
What is the price of the style 100 Vic
trola? Have you heard the best seller
in records this month, "I Found a Four-
Leaf Clover," and what is the price of
this record ?
(45) Let's go to the movies. This
expression often shakes away gloom and
dullness and you gladly join the happy
ries a complete stock of crockery ware,
see a regular show. By "movies" the
people of Palo Alto mean the Varsity
and Stanford theaters. They know that
at these playhouses they will see the
best of screen offerings at prices con
sistent with conditions. These two cozy
theaters give the patrons day in and day
out the best in film plays that money
can buy. To those few in Palo Alto
that have not had the pleasure of at
tending these two modern playhouses,
they are missing one of the great joys
of life. The products of the most gifted
imaginations of the world are beautifully
and artistically portrayed with an ac
companiment of the finest of organ
music. You should get their regular
weekly program, which gives you the
names of the shows and the nights upon
which they will be exhibited. Tell us
the manager's name of the Varsity The
ater and how many seats have they?
Give us the exact location of the Stan
ford Theater. What is the Big Special
picture coming there next Monday?
(46) You may say what you want,
but say "Hardware" and the minds of
the people of Palo Alto will revert
automatically to the Palo Alto Hard
ware Company, "The Winchester Store."
This firm carries a complete line of
hardware, consisting of carpenters' and
mechanics' tools of every description;
cutlery as well as builders' hardware,
sporting goods, Bass Hcuter Paints,
Pennsylvania Vacuum Cup Tires—in
fact, everything you would expcct to find
in a modern up-to-date hardware store.
The Palo Alto Hardware Company is
known as the "Winchester Store," carry
ing a full line of Winchester products.
The Winchester Company puts out one
article each month at a special price—
the public are looking forward each
month for these big specials. The special
for November is a Winchester Flash

(3S) Time is money. Save time and
money. Spend the ten minutes allowed
on your street car transfer, buying
Christmas Cards or forgotten station
ery supplies at llyde's, 370 University
avenue, right at the transfer point.
There are but two transfer points, the
depot and opposite Hyde's new store.
Tou can get a basket for your many
packages here or a beautifully decor
ated one to send as a Christmas gift.
If you want a Fountain Pen, which one
does Hyde's guarantee? If you want to
give stationery to your sister, which
of Hyde's brands would you choose?
Which will have the bigger sale at
Hyde's for the kiddies, "Kritters of the
Kitchen Kingdom," or "The Chickens
Eating Corn"? What line of goods is
being especially featured at Hyde's
besides sttftionery, school supplies,
fountain pens, pictures, picture frames,
baskets, candles, beads, games, toys,
favors, memory books, and albums?
Call at Hyde's at the transfer point,
and they can answer the above ques
tions and also give you many sugges
tions for charming and inexpensive
Christmas presets. Their new store is
one of the finest of its kind in P. A.
(39) It is every man's wish to own
his own home. It makes for family
contentment and happiness. It saves
paying rent.
The University Realty Company sp&-
j cializes in providing people with
homes. Consult them as you would any
specialist.
Years of experience in this com
munity stands back of the University
Realty Company.
This Company can serve you in the
purchase or sale of real estate, in writ
ing all kinds of insurance, in renting
and leasing, in fact, in all matters per
taining to real estate and insurance.
How long has this Company been in
business in Palo Alto? Name one in
surance company that it represents.
(40) If you want to make your
friends happy, present them with a
good photograph of yourself. A photo
graph is a token of real friendship,
and is highly appreciated by everyone.
And when you are in Palo Alto and
desire a portrait of yourself and are
not satisfied with just ordinary work,
go to the Shattuck Studio and you will
be pleased. This is one man who is
"behind the camera, but not behind
the times." His portrait work is indic
ative of this. In his little studio on
University avenue he will be found
very busy most every day snapping
and developing and then touching up,
putting the finishing touches on, which
removes all blemishes. The art of fin
ishing portraits is not possessed by
everyone, but this photographer is in
deed an expert. Then, too, his prices
are exceedingly moderate, considering
the beauty and quality of work turned
out. You are always sure of a success
ful picture here. Do you know that
your picture is the only present your
friends cannot buy? Where is the
exact location of this studio? What
other photographic work do they do?
(41) Everyone knows Wagner, "The
Meat Man." He is a master in the meat
business. He came to Palo Alto eight
years ago and started business in a
small market in a small way on High
street. Today his business has ex
panded to such an extent that it has
outgrown the old market.
Mr. Wagner says he doesn't take the
credit for making his business what it
is in Palo Alto, but owes it to Mr. N.
Benson who has been with him ever
since he has located in this vicinity
and who will continue to manage the
local market. Mr. Benson has a great
many friends here in Palo Alto.
Mr. Wagnor owns the block of four
stores on the corner of University and
Florence streets, his new market being
the main Corner Store Room. This
wonder market is a palace of marble.
The counters are of marble and glass
and the latest word in modern sanita
tion. The woodwork is finished in
French gray and the walls in gray
with green trimmings. Cold storage
plant is of the latest modern auto
matic control and the best that money
can buy.
There is not a question in tlie
writer's mind but what this is one of
the most modern and finest equipped
markets in the state of California.
Mr. Wagner owns a chain of mar
kets extending to San Jose and Hol
lister and most of his time is con
fined to the purchasing end of the bus
iness. He has been in the meat bus
iness so long that he doesn't guess at
the quality of meat when he buys. He
knows that they are the best, so, when
purchasing the meat from him you
don't have to worry about its not being
of the best quality.
He is still going to be known as
"The Meat Man" in his new market
and will give the same service and
high quality meats that has made him
such a success.
It will pay you to watch for his ad
vertisements appearing in the daily
papers.
(42) This article is about one of the
liveliest spots in Palo Alto. There is
something doing here most all of the
time, and especially after dinner or on

Light, complete with battery for 89 cents.
The Palo Alto Hardware Company Car
rie sa complete stock of crockery ware,
dishes in plain and open sets and the
finest aluminum and enameled ware in
the city. How long has this store been
established? What is tie special price
on the 50-piece set of Gold Band Potter
Chinaware? What make of electric
washer do they sell?
(47) Fitting feet is a matter of no
little importance, for there .ire a very
few people that enjoy the fitting of a
n<iw pair of shoes, even when they fit
perfectly. However, Thoit's Shoe Store
is a firm that is noted all over the Coast
for its ability to produce shoes that
"feel just like the old ones." They are
the local distributors of Hanan Shoes
and other reputable makes of more mod
erate price. This store is a home store.
Its management is a good example to
follow, for courtesy and personal ser
vice is its aim. It is needless to speak
of the quality of their shoes, as this is
too well known, but we will say that they
carefully select as to quality, workman
ship and style. Their wearing qualities,
as well as looks, are second to none.
When you have met the proprietor of
the local firm you will have met a man
that is all for Stanford and Palo Alto.
Where is their modern shoe store lo
cated? How many members of the fam
ily can they fit in shoes? When was
this business established?
(48) There is one photographer in.
Palo Alto, "An Artistic Photographer,"'
who has gained a national reputation
and holds first prize in America for ex
cellency of work. He now has por
traits on exhibition in the National Salon.
Has also been awarded highest honors
in the states of New York, Ohio and
Michigan. He has probably photo
graphed more prominent and profes
sional people than any photographer in
America. Was with Hartsook Studios
for the past eleven years, specializing
principally in photographing moving pic
ture stars and theatricals in general. A
visit to his studio, 126 University ave
nue, which was formerly the Davey
Studio, will convince the most skeptical
of the superiority of his work. Who is
this artist who has made it possible for
the Palo Alto people to get something
different, something highly artistic*
without having to go to the larger
cities? And what makes a successful
artistic portrait? Remember Friend
ship's Perfect Gift—Your Photo.
(49) There is a wonderful industry
in this city that 1 belit*vo many do not
know about. Why is it so many people
go to San Francisco to purchase their
gifts when right here in Palo Alto there
is a shop that is known by exclusive
shops all over the United States and
whose goods have gone to England..
Australia, and Honolulu? Miss Herrick
conducts a shop the year round to servj;
you. When you are thinking of gifts,
go first to Miss Herrick's and you will
be surprised at the exclusive articles
you will find there and more reasonably
priced than elsewhere. This Studio must,
be seen to be appreciated. Give us the
names of two articles just received from
India. Tell us three articles made ex
clusively in Herrick Studios and sold
all over the United States.
(50) Here is one of the busiest stores
in Palo Alto. Segar Service Shop. Be
lieve me, the proprietor sure is popular
with the young fellows. There never is
a time but what you will see a bunch in
his store. The reason for that is his
service to every one, no matter if you
only buy a package of cigarette papers*
or if it is a brier pipe, you get the same
courteous treatment. A large assortment
of pipes have just arrived for the Christ
mas trade. Also jars of smoking to
bacco. A complete line of magazines
are carried here. In connection with this
modern Cigar Store we have a real Ser
vice Barber Shop, operated by Mr. Par
vin. They are all union barbers and ex
pert haircutters. This shop is the oldest
in town. If you only want a shave, don't
be afraid to come here. These barbers
don't bother the life out of you selling
you something else in the shop. Try
these boys the first chance you get. Get
an Almond Meal and Peroxide Steam
Facial Massage. Tell us Mr. Parvin's
first name. Tell us how many maga
zines Mr. Corns has for sale at the
Cigar Counter. Give us the exact loca
tion of these two establishments.
(1) Think of the countless obstacles
the pioneers of old had to overcome
as they journeyed forth to lay the
foundation for a future that might
hold some promise' for them. Some
achieved their goal, others failed. Then
consider your own environment and
chances for the future. Your lot is a
path of roses compared with that of
tho pioneers. jfist lay aside a small
amount each week and start an ac
count with the First National Bank of
Palo Alto. They have a capital of
$100,000.00, and $24,000 surplus, and
are members of the Federal Reserve
System of Banking. The officers and
everyone connected with this bank
have always practiced service and
courtesy to their patrons. You are
treated with consideration whether
you are a large or small depositor or
whether you are a temporary visitor in
this favored locality. A man putting
his money in a bank should always
make sure that the institution is finan
cially solid and this is just such a
bank. They pay 4 per cent interest on
Term Deposits. Name the directors of
this banking institution. What is the
margin of security including stock
holders' liability?

(2) In purchasing jewelry, the buyer
puts more faith in the seller than any
other commodity that men buy and
sell. This article is about a jewelry
store that has been in business in
Palo Alto for a number of years, and
their reputation for being dependable
is second to none. In addition to their
exceptional stock of watches, jewelry,
rings, SILVERWARE, cut glass, etc.,
they do expert watch and jewelry re
pairing. This is the store to select your
•"Gifts That Last." Nielsen and Culver
are the kind of fellows we like to men
tion in our columns, because they have
a sociable and intelligent personality
—ones who know how to make friends
and keep them. Go see this store and
look over their high class line of jew
elry and you are sure to make all of
your purchases in this line from them.
Every article they sell not only bears
the guarantee of the manufacturers,
but their personal guarantee goes with
it as well. If you have a broken piece
of jewelry, no matter how fine it is,
they will repair it for you. What are
Mr. Culver'? initials, and where is
their store located. Also what other
department do they conduct? What is
their leading line of Silverware?

(3) It ticV les everybody's vanity to
a certain dc pre e to have his friends
say how we ! his homo is furnished,
and perhaps many of these friends se
cretly wish they knew where they
could buy furniture of equal looks.
There is no secret of obtaining the
right kind cf furniture if one knows
the place to shop. The Palo Alto Fur
niture Company is such a place. They
not only hf nd!e high-class furniture
for the parlor, bofl-roora and dining
room, but their kitchen department is
well stocked with ranges and
utensils and for the floor they have
Linoleum of the latest designs and
patterns. It is easily cleaned and al-

Introducing to You the Live Progressive Firms and People Who Make
up the Business Interests of Palo Alto
First Prize —$10.00 Theatre Tickets contributed by
* VARSITY AND STANFORD THEATRES
Second Prize —One Dozen Photographs contributed by
SHATTUCK STUDIOS
Third Prize —One Hand Painted Oil Picture of Chapel
contributed by FREEMAN'S ART STORE
Fourth Prize —One Box of Chancellor (after dinner) Cigars
contributed by FRANKLIN'S SMOKE HOUSE

ways sanitary. Just go to this store !
once and let them show you their col
lection of home furnishings. They are
sure to suit your individual taste, no
matter how exacting. They are featur
ing a complete line of stoves and
ranges. The best in the world is
Wedgewood. Where is this large fur
niture store located? and what make
of water heaters do, they recommend?
How many square feet of Inlaid Lin
oleum are they now laying in the Rus
sel Cafeteria?

(4) No matter who you are and what
your life is, it can be made happier
and better through the influence of
music. This up-to-date store that we
are writing about is the home of the
best there is in music, and they are
representatives for Brunswick and
Columbia phonographs. The Music
Shop at 273 University Avenue is the
music house of Palo Alto, for they not
only carry and sell phonographs and
pianos, but they carry all kinds of
musical instruments, sheet music,
player rolls and records. If you are
fond of string instruments, they have
anything from the ukelele to the cello.
They are exclusive representatives in
Palo Alto for two well-known phono
graphs which are recognized for their ;
many exceptional qualities. These ma
chines play disc records of any make.
If you like a lot of noise moulded into
music, then they have drums for your
choice. The proprietor here is a music
loving man, himself, and he delights in
showing his line to patrons. A visit
from you will be appreciated. What
make of Band Instruments does he
carry? Who are the manufacturers of
the Victor and Brunswick? What is
the price of the Gretsch Sac., Melody
C, Finish No. 2?

(5) Two of the best places to eat in j
Palo Alto are home and here. That is
what the editor thought after trying
one of this restaurant home-cooked
meals. All of you people do not know
of this restaurant or you would be
Johnny on the spot every time Old
Man Hunger gripped your frame. They
not only cater to the man who is in a
hurry with counter service but they
have linen-covered tables for the
ladies. However, the same service is
had at both places and at the same
prices. If you have lots of time to sit
and enjoy your meal, then sit at the
tables, but if you are a business man
with only a few minutes to "grab"
your lunch, the counter service will be
most ideal. The location of this home
like place is 105 Alma Street. The
proprietor of this restaurant has a
most affable manner and he does all
in his power to please his patrons.;
Anything that you want is not too
much trouble for him to get. He uses
the best grade of meats and come
fresh from the meat market when he
needs them and not a week before, j
Who is the energetic proprietor of the
"Popular" restaurant? What is the
price of their noon lunch? What brand
of coffee do they use? How much are
their meal tickets?

(6) Clothes cost too much money to
be carelessly cleaned and pressed, i
Your tailor should be picked just as
your doctor or your grocer. It is just
as important. If you send your clothes
to first one cleaner and then anothf r,
in the ert'd your clothes will be ruined,
and with none to blame but yourself.
The Stanford Dyeing and Cleaning
Works commands a high position in
the cleaning and pressing business of
Palo Alto, and they always guarantee
their work. These people know how to
press a suit. They press it to its
natural form and not "against the
srain." They also use an odorless pro
cess in their cleaning and every meth
od of handling clothes that is modern
is used by them. They have a call and
delivery system and for them to keep
your wardrobe in prefect trim at all
times is no trouble for you. They will
call at your home at regular intervals
tor your clothes and return them
promptly. This prompt service is a
great item in their business. They also
do repairing. What does this firm
charge for cleaning and pressing a
suit, and where is their plant located?
What does 444 mean?

(7) Chiropractic was born 27 years
•,'Ko. The suspicion, distrust and re
sentful criticism aimed at it in the

beginning has been dispelled. Chiro
practors have proven their worth in
healing the sick and lame with their
chiropractic adjustments. With all of
this human service in California they
were held under the yoke of the med
ical board. But thanks to the fair
minded people of this state, that is
over.
Dr. Minor and Dr. Hall wish to thank
all Iheir friends for the support they
gave them. These two doctors are
graduates of the Palmer School of
Chiropractic in Davenport, lowa. They
have practiced Chiropractic for years.
People come for miles around to Doc
tors Minor and Hall.
They are located at 153 University
Avenue. Give both the 'doctors' first
names and give two reasons why Chi
ropractic is beneficial to one's health.

(8) Don't junk your old tires. Take
them to a reliable tire shop and get
their opinion on their condition. They
may be vulcanized and run for several
thcHtsand miles more. And if you want
an honest opinion as to this, take your
tires to Palo Alto Vulcanizing Works.
Tires are this man's sole business,
and we make no mistake when we say
that he knows his business thoroughly.
Vhen he has patched a tube or vul
canized a "shoe" for you, then he has
made a friend. A guarantee goes with
evefy job he does and this is a guar
antee of absolute satisfaction. There
is no money value set on it, but it is a
personal guarantee that you get what
you want and no matter what it cost
him, he'll see that you get it. In addi
tion to the vulcanizing and repair de
partment, this man also carries a stock
of Goodyear tires and he has y ur size.
You don't want to meet a more con
genial man than Mr. Bogges with a
smile for you. Where is the shop lo
cated? What is his price for a Good
year Ford all-weather fabric tire?
What is the price of the 40x10 solid
truck tire that Mr. Bogges has in his
window?

(9) It is a source of discomfort and
worry for some people to buy a new
pair of shoes, but if you are careful in
selecting the correct size in the right
grade of shoes, you will not have this
inconvenience to contend with. At the
Lentos Shoe Store they will not only
sell you a new pair of shoes, but they
will make your old ones like new for
you. They conduct a modern electrical
shoe repairing shop in connection with
the shoe store and they do the work
just like it is done at the factories.
Let your next pair of shoes come from
this store and they will last you much
longer, for when you have worn off
the original soles, just return them
and they will put new ones on at a
small cost. They use the very best
double wear genuine leather soles and
the name and trade mark is stamped
cn them. When you have work done
here, it is well guaranteed, and there
is something back of the guarantee.
Then if it is in the power of these
people to do you a good turn, they
certainly will take pleasure in doing
it. They work for others as well as
themselves. What brand of pure
leather do they use on their soles, and
where is the store located?

. (10) Is milk and cream an important
part of your daily meals? If not, you
are one out of a hundred. Then with
this in view, it is only natural for peo
ple to be sure that their milk and
cream is' absolutely light. And to be
"right" it should contain a certain per
cent of butterfat, as well as be clean
and free from all foreign matter. The
milk, cream, butter and dairy products
you get at the Altomont Creamery are
all that the name implies—sanitary.
They feature pasteurized and guaran
teed dairy products. You can ask for
no better merchandise in this line. So
the next time you need any dairy
products of any sort, whether it be
butter, milk, cream, or cottage cheese,
just go to the Altomont Creamery. It
will be filled with satisfaction.
These people will give you service, as
their business depends upon it. If they
did not give you good service on your
first trip, you would not return again,
and they want your future friendship
and business. What is the location of
this firm's retail store, and what do
they get per quart for their milk. What
does pasteurized mean? and what does
guaranteed milk mean?

(11) When the pioneers blazed a
trail across the continent in '49 there
was also organized a man that blazed
the way in the paint industry, W. T.
Floyd. Since that time, this firm has
been beautifying Palo Alto with its
products. In addition to paints, they
also sell oils, glass, and if you are
looking for a waterproof paint, this is
the place to go. The Hadle Stormtight
Roof Paint firm has a very modern and
up-to-date store, and they are known
for their neatness and complete stock
of goods they carry. This store is a
credit to any city. This store which
this writing is for has the agency for
Acme Quality Paints and Varnishes,
the world's higest standard in paints.
Not only do they retail their products,
but wholesale as well. If you are a
paint man, you will know what firm we
are referring to for they carry one of
the largest stocks in these parts. What

is the name of this firm and what do
they recommend for floor varnish?
Just call at the local store and their
salesmen will gladly assist you. How
many square feet will a gallon of Acme
Quality Paint cover two coats?

(12) Just up the street at Mr. Ethen's
is he liveliest spot in Palo Alto. There is
something doing there most all of the
time and especially so after supper. It
is a place where gentlemen congregate
and exchange experiences of the day
over a friendly game of pocket bil
liards. But, in addition to the billiard
parlor, they also conduct a large bowl
ing alley and soda fountain where they
will make you a creamy milk shake
that will certainly make you return for
another in a short while. They are also
local agents for the United Cigar
Stores and carry a line of cigars that
cannot be had in any other establish
ment in the city. If you are looking for
a friend, you are sure to find him here.
It is a place where practically every
man frequents once in a while just for
the gentlemanly company he is sure to
find. If it is a box of candy you wisn
for your girl, then this is the place for
you to seek. They carry several differ
ent makes and it is kept in a specially
equipped refrigerator which insures
you of freshness at any time. How
many pocket pool tables have they?
What line of pipes do they carry? How
many alleys are there and name what
team is leading in the bowling tourna
ment now being conducted?

(13) Now comes a renowned meat
market which sells fresh meats. In
deed their meats are fresh. They make
it a point to keep them so, which is
responsible for the popularity and
wonderful business gained in the past
months. There are mrny tricks em
ployed by the meat buyers in judging
duality, and the Stanford Meat Com
pany is perfectly willing to share its
secrets with you. They buy only the
best, but they want you to know at
the time of your purchase that you
are getting what you want. Cleanli
ness is the watchword of this market.
The business is so great that their
daily purchases keep their meats
fresh. They seldom carry much over
from one day to another. We enjoy
writing about this market and its
owner for several reasons. One is they
say "never mind about buying, just
come in and look the good things
over." Give exact address. How long
have they been established? What are
their phone numbers? How often do
they get fresu fish at this market?

(14) In buying drugs, you want the
best, including purity and service,
which are two essential things to con
s'der when selecting from which to
buy these needs. Impure drugs are
worse than none at all, and poor ser
vice means aggravation and annoy
ance. Only the best drugs are ever
handled at the Young Drug Company
at the corner of University avenue
and Florence street. The proprietor
is a registered pharmacist and he en
deavors to keep a stock that will
meet with all requirements and cus
tomers do not have to go elsewhere
for anything usually found in an up-to
date drug store. In addition to drugs,
they carry a large stock of perfumery,
toilet articles, safety razors, and if
you happen to have a sweet tooth,
their candies will be appealing to you.
This store has the agency for all of
the Owl products, so you may obtain
these goods right here at home. What
is Ihe proprietor's name? Also what
line of remedies do they handle? What
is "Pom Pom" Luster?

(15) We are now presenting a firm
where fresh staple and fancy groceries
can be secured. It is a concern with
a conscience, and has an aim to please
the hard-to-suit in their lines. In fact,
you can close your eyes and buy here,
and every sale carries a guarantee of
satisfaction, and a little profit is all
they ask. Now just stop a second and
say to yourself, "Where is the best
stock of fruits, vegetables and gro
ceries carried in Palo Alto?" The best
brands of everything are the distin
guishing characteristics of this store,
along with its sanitary aspect. It is a
source of personal satisfaction to the
writer to write about this "quality"
store and the proprietor, Mr. Earle,
Ever since he started, years ago, his
popularity has met with a steady in
crease. He is not only a popular mer
chant. but is an alert business man,
and his idea is to always make the
place home-like when you do business
with him or his clerks, and so far he
has succeeded, and if he can make
Palo Alto a better city you can depend
upon him to take off his coat, roll up
his sleeves and help put it over. He
has for those who need it, a smile,
and has won their business or confi
dence. No merchant in Palo Alto is
more popular with his customers than
the owner of this store. Name the
owner and give his first name in full,
location and phone.

(16) Here is a works that makes a
lot of noise in a legitimate way. It is a
sheet metal establishment. They have
been making a big noise
for some time. They make a
of tin and sheet iron, and a 112

cialties are tanks, and irrigating pipe,
.spouting, skylights, cornice as well as
tin and copper sheet metal specialties.
The expert tinner is a great necessity
i'or those owning homes or business
places, as they look to them for re
l airs and parts. To be efficient, they
must be skilled in their calling and
geniuses as well. And these things are
apparent at the Palo Alto Sheet Metal
Works. There are many ways of tin
ning that will not stand the test. These
people use the right way. The owners
of this shop believe it better to be on
the level with their customers than
to climb upward by a crooked path.
Such a firm as this we surely like to
include in our feature. In fact, we can
not say enough for them, for they de
serve much more than a mere word of
praise. They deserve sure success.
Who is the proprietor of this shop and
Low long have they been established
here. Where are they located? What
size Warm Air Heater does it take to
heat a 7-room house? and give the
price of it.

(17) When a business establish
ment has reached the heights of suc
cess and prominence, it is either cred
ited to the skillful management or to
the quality of merchandise they han
dle. At the enterprising store at 317
University Avenue both of these items
are responsible for their standing in
Palo Alto. The most prominent resi
dents of the city are among their cus
tomer list. Their costumes can always
be depended upon for beiug the latest
styles and the good quality never
varies. "Where there is quality, there
is style." The Style Shop is well
known for both. (The store is attrac
tively decorated and the merchandise
is displayed in such a manner that it
becomes a profound pleasure to shop
with them). Their courteous sales
women also render great assistance
with their timely suggestions of "what
is being worn" and you leave the store
pleased witn your visit, feeling that
you have wasted no time whatever.
What is the slogan of this enterpris
ing store. Tell name of this classy
store's proprietor. A Big Clearance
Sale is now going on at the Smart
Shop. Everything in the store is re
duced for this Sale.

(18) The most widely known and
recognized decorations for any and all
occasions are flowers. They are recog
nized internationally and more can be
said with a small bunch of flowers
than can be said with a dozen tele
grams or any other form of communi
cation. "Say it with flowers" is a fit
ting slogan for their usefulness and
worth. The one flower shop in Palo
Alto that has created a reputation for
having in stock all of the different
(lowers in season is known as the
Palo Alto Flower & Seed Shop. They
carry a complete line of flowers for
the dining room table, to ship to your
friends or pot flowers to decorate your
home and porches. When you desire
to remember yourself to a friend, this
is the one place to come for they will
make up a beautiful boquet for you.
The proprietor here likes flowers him
self, which is symbolic of happiness.
His disposition is also like that of a
flower, bright and full of cheer. Who
is this proprietor? What is the num
ber of the shop? What kind of seeds
does he carry? What are the names
of the jardiners that they are selling
that come from Japan?

(19) Who is there in this city en
gaged in correction and the conserva
tion of eyesight? Many have come to
him and received great relief when
troubled with eye defects. His strict
attention to his business has won for
him a host of friends and patrons. Dr.
Cochran will be found very busy at
his offices at 122 University avenue
and you will make no mistake in con
sulting him about your eyes. He has
passed the State Board of Optometry
examinations and is recognized for his
excellent work, and is also a graduate
Dr. of Optometry. In addition to
working on your eyes, he will replace
broken lenses or make you a complete
pair of glasses. The eyes are the win
dows of the soul and when they are
wrong, the body is handicapped, for,
without clear vision, we can't see the
world as it is. Eye troubles are often
started when young and your chil
dren's eyes should be examined before
it is too late. Make an appointment
•with Dr. Cochran and get his opinion.
His office is completely equipped with
all of the modern instruments used in
this work. What are Dr. Cochran's ini
tials, and what is the range of prices
for his glasses? What is the store
motto?

(20) Most men like to know where
they can find a good barber shop, as
they are very particular about per
sonal appearance. They demand satis
factory work. When I suggest Mar
quee's Barber Shop, I know what I'm
talking about. They have a very sani
tary little shop with all the modern
equipment, also including five modern
chairs. They specialize in all kinds of
shampooing, scalp and facial treat
ments. If you want your hair to have
jompadour cut, or any other kind,
t let Marquee's do it for you. If

you are having trouble with your
scalp, they can help you. Dixol is the
scalp treatment they recommend. They
also bob children's hair, so bring them
in the next time you are down town.
Just ask anyone who has visited Mar
quee's shop, and they will tell you
how well satisfied they were. Where
ic their shop located? What brands of
hair tonic do they use and recom
mend?

(21) A most important institution of
business in any city, town or commun
ity is the reliable drug store. Here it
is that we depend for our health. And
It ere is where we go when we want
toilet articles, kodak supplies, foun
tain pens and a hundred other luxuries
and necessities. The Kenyon & Crow
Store is known for its large and com
plete stock of all of these articles, and
in fact, anything found in a first-class
store. In addition to their general line
of pure drugs, assortments of high
class cosmetics and sundries, they are
tlie Penslar Store in Palo Alto. This
line of household remedies is com
plete. There is one for every possible
need or use. Now is the time to begin
to think about Christmas Gifts. A
large collection of hand-colored Christ
mas Cards have just arrived. They
are wonderful in design and color.
Fountain pens and Pen and Pencil sets
in Christmas Boxes make a very fine
pi esent to your student friends, or a
big box of gift stationery. At this store
they conduct the largest Kodak print
ing and developing business 011 the
Peninsula, handling a full line of East
man Kodaks and Cameras. One of
the big features of this store is their
framed pictures and mirrors. They
have a framing department and are
able to frame for you any size picture
with most any style mounting you
desire. What profit-sharing system do
they practice? Find out the four lead
ing perfumes they handle? In what
line do they excell all other concerns
in this locality? What are the pro
prietors' nicknames?

(22) There is a mail in this town
much wiser than his sires; he ran
into a bramble bush and punctured all
four tires. When he saw his tires
were wrecked, with all his might and
main, he went to this tire shop and
had them fixed again. One of the first
things to learn if you own an auto
mobile is to know what vulcanizing
nrm gives Service that Serves. The
Retread Shop is recognized for their
expert tire repairing. You should con
sult these doctors when your tires get
sick for they surely have the dope
that cures. You cannot help but like
this firm for those connected with it
make every effort possible to please
you. They will always go out of their
way to do a good turn for you, and if
you have tire trouble on the street,
just notify them and they will render
assistance People who do business
here are really proud .of ttie fact and
it is simply because they give what
the customers want and should have
—"Satisfaction." Go to this shop and
meet these tire men and then tell us
what make of tires they sell and what
their price for a Ford-size cord tire in
the make begins with "F." Give two
reasons why this tire is the best on
the market for its size.

(23) Pleasure of motoring is in
creased if your car is in good working
condition. It is, therefore, advisable to
have your car looked over before you
start on this trip and when you have
your car worked on, be sure of* your
garage. The Palo Alto Garage on Em
reson street is indeed a thoroughly
dependable establishment in regard to
their repairing. Mr. J. M. Blackburn
employs only expert mechanics. The
Palo Alto Garage has the agency for
the Durant car and many others such
as the Chandler, Cadillac, and Cleve
land. Have you seen the new 1923
model Durant. Just step in and let
them sTiow you what a wonderful mod
el it is. The proprietor of this garage,
Mr. J. M. Blackburn, personally super
vises the garage at all times, and as
sures you of prompt service whether
you are buying a spark plug or filling
your tank with gas. They have Ever-
Ready Battery service, and they also
carry Associated Gasoline. They want
satisfied customers at the Palo Alto
Garage. That is their motto. Give two
reasons why the Durant car is more
practical. What is Mr. Blackburn's
first jiame? How long have they been
established?

(24) In writing of the leading busi
ness firms and institutions of Palo
Alto, we have come across an inter
esting shop at 367 University Avenue,
that well deserves mentioning. No, it
won't interest you men, particularly—
but has an especial appeal to the wo
men of Palo Alio and vicinity who
are lovers of beautiful things. This at
tractive shop is fairly overflowing with
wonderful creations of Laces, Em
broideries, Frocks, and Sport Skirts,
Reads for the Miss and Mistress —at-
tractively displayed, and just a) at
tractively priced. These are only a
112» w of the many beautiful and useful
articles to be found in this modern,
up-to-date shop—and the proprietor
takes great pleasure in dispensing I
courteous and attentive service to
every patron. We want you to tell us
the name of this worth while shop—
also the proprietor's name and cor
rect address. What are their prices on
their dresses? What price on stamped
pillow cases? Also stamped dresser
scarfs which come in packages.
(25) Look prosperous and save
money at the same time. This is what
so many people are trying to do and |
cannot quite manage it. The reason is
that they do not know where to buy
economically and where to get goods
hat stand wear and look well. It is
not economy to buy a cheap "hand-me
down" suit of clothes. It is a waste of
money. If you have a suit made by
the tailor that this article is about,
you will get a suit of clothes that will
last. This tailor has been sixteen years
in Palo Alto and has the finest trade
on the Peninsula. Specialist on ladies'
tailoring and sport suits. He holds a
gold medal given to him at the Lewis
and Clark Exposition for designing.
You will be surprised at the chicness
as well as the exceedingly low price
he charges for a suit. And another fea
ture of this tailor, all of the tailoring
is done on the premises. He does not
take your order and send it to San
Francisco or New York. Who is this
progressive tailor? His establishment
is upstairs at 123 University avenue.
Better stop in and let him take your
measure and you select your pattern
and style at the same time.
(26) The best friend of womankingis
that which takes the grievous burdens
from her shoulders. No woman likes
to bend over washtubs or ironing
boards, and it is the mission of the
University French Laundry to per
form this highest physical service for
her. This laundry is almost our own
concern. It takes soiled linen and
turns it into attractive wearing ap
parel. It is an extensive industry, em
ploying many people. Wagons are sent
out in every direction in Palo Alto to
collect and deliver laundry and to keep
the various articles separated, so that
you don't get your neighbors' clothes,
is a job of a highly specialized order.
The methods used at this laundry are
thoroughly modern, and the machinery
equipment makes the work most satis
factory. The manager of this laundry
takes an active interest in the welfare
of Palo Alto and his absolute support
can be counted upon when anything
for the betterment of the city is in
progress. Who is this energetic man
ager, and where is the laundry lo
cated? How many employes has he?
What is the phone number?
(27) Well, here we are. Just what
interests all%women in Palo Alto. I
know when you go to that party or
dance you want to look charming. It
just requires a little personal atten
tion. You have often been to some pub
lic place and admired some ladies'
hair of the transparent texture of her
skin. The kind that is clear and
smooth. Well, you can have that charm
just the same as she. You go and see
Mrs. Marie Montgomery who has
charge of this exclusive Beauty Shop.
You will find every kind of modern
equipment desired in this shop, and
their work is very satisfactory. So
many girls have bobbed hair nowa
days, and they find it quite a task to
keep it looking well. Just drop into the
Montgomery Beauty Shop, and they
will marcelle your hair, and give the
ends a round curl which improves it
very much. You will find their egg
shampoo very invigorating. They spe
cialize in scalp and facial treatments.
They do hair waving and curling of
all kinds. What is one of the finest
scalp treatment? All kinds of facial
treatments are given by Mrs. Mont
gomery. Tell us the price of her
I'lactique Facial Treatment?
(28) What is the name of the store
that comes into your mind so clearly
when you speak of Art Goods? It is
Edwin R. Freeman's Art and Photo
Shop. There is no other place in the
city where they have such a large as
sortment of Wonderful Gifts to select
from. The writer cannot begin to tell
you of the hundreds of articles in this
store. The candlestick and framed and
unframed pictures are the best that
Mr Freeman could make and buy.
They have the largest picture fram
ing department on the Peninsula, giv
ing you the largest assortment of
frames to choose from. Christmas sea
son is nearing. Your motto is to do
your shopping early, and if you are
looking for gifts to give your friends
that will make them long remembered
to you, go to Freeman's Art Store. If
you have a picture that you cherish,
bring it here and let them frame it, or
a negative, enlarge it. They have a
complete service for films, kodaks, and
enlarging. How is it that Mr. Freeman
can sell his Foto Art Prints cheaper
than others?
(29) Palo Alto with its amazing
wealth and attractive terms and prices

when you are indebted to the wide
awake firm at 111 Circle. Their long
experience, knowledge of values and
expert advice in such matters have
won for them a large number of satis
fled customers. Through their devotion
to the business of their clients, Mr.
Helm has gained an enviable reputa
tion. Whether it be the buying of a
home or the selection of a lot or acre
age, you can be sure of finding just
what you want at attractive terms and
price when you are dealing with this
firm. This company also has many
ranch lands, both raw and improved.
In fact, their operations along this line
is, indeed, second to none in Palo Alto.
They are authorities on ranch lands
and if you name the location, they can
come pretty close to telling you the
value. Therefore, their advice and per
sonal service in such matters is indeed
important. Just drop in at their office
and they will gladly assist you. They
have just moved to 111 Circle, former
ly at 257 University avenue. What is
the name of this firm and what other
line of business do they follow? What
is Mr. Helm's first name? What is the
name of Mr. Helm's new assistant?
(30) Did you ever notice how you
admire the clothes of others and can
not understand why you never look as
well when you know personally that
you spend more money on your wear
ing apparel than this particular fel
low? The secret can easily be solved
if you do your shopping at the right
place. To test this out, the next time
you need a suit of clothes, a hat, or
anything in the gents' furnishing line,
go to Wideman & Son. This is one
exclusive haberdashery. Their stock is
composed of such well-known makes
as Kuppenheimer Clothes, Knapp Felt
Hats and Caps, handled by only the
best stores, and the fact of the matter
is, their entire stock bears names just
as well-known and highly recommend
ed as these few mentioned. Winter is
here and now is the time to see that
you are equipped for it. You certainly
need a new suit or a new hat. If you
don't think you do, come here and
look at the difference in the style of
your old one and their new stock.
You'll change your mind immediately.
And another thing about this store:
everyone is courteous, even the clerks
greet you with a smile, and are glad
to show you everything. How long has
this firm been established? Give exact
address. What is their business agree
ment with customers?
(31) Here is just the place to visit
for lunches and home-made pastry. It
is known as Kapps lunchroom. They
serve a nice little lunch there, and the
coffee is delicious. It is a very clean,
sanitary shop, and you get quick ser
vice. They have home-made pies,
cakes, and doughnuts. The doughnuts
are those world-wide known "Bake
Rite." They sell for twenty-five cents
per dozen. When you are down town
drop into this shop. There is nothing
more tasty than hot doughnuts and
coffee. The process- by which these
doughnuts are made makes them light
er and fluffier than the average dough
nut. And those home-made pies such as
pumpkin and mince, certainly are en
joyable at this time of year. They also
serve a noon-day lunch for the busi
ness man that is a dandy. How many
chairs do thew have in this shop? How
many meat pies do they make a day
and what do they sell for? Give the
exact location of this shop?
(32) There is at least one cigar
store in Palo Alto that caters to
smokers and men who want the best
merchandise for their money. The
Franklin Smoke House makes a spe
cialty of fine cigars, all kinds of cigar
ettes and they carry a large stock of
tobaccos, pipes and smokers' acces
sories. The proprietors believe in giv
ing the people what they want and if
you happen to want something that is
not ordinarily carried in stock, just
let him know and he will order it for
you. If it is in the world, he will come
near gettng it for you. A Soda Foun
tain in connection with the Cigar Store
gives you a cold drink at any time.
Malted milks a specialty. You could
not think of a more suitable present
for a man than a box of cigars and
when you buy them, they should be
chosen by a man who knows you. The
proprietor will assist you. What are
the initials of this energetic proprietor
and what make of candy does he sell?
The Franklin Smoke House is the
most popular place in town for card
games. Bring your friends and play a
friendly game of "rummy." How many
card tables in this establishment?
(33) Where is the bakery where you
can get fresh bread —any and all kinds
of it? Where can you get "bread that
is light, doughnuts that delight, and
pies just right." This is the tale of a
bakery whose products bring to mind
mother's baking day. They are so good
that people come for blocks just to
buy right out of the oven. Their prod
ucts are baked under the most strin
gent sanitary conditions. It is entirely
fitting that the "Who's Who" should
call your attention to this bakery, for
in patronizing the Golden Poppy
Bakery, you not only get the best baked

goods, but you save money as well.
The mention of this name In Palo Alto !
tells a tale of quality goods in this line |
and every housewife is familiar with |
the name and the goods. The big fea
ture with this shop is the making of
whole wheat bread, made from the
finest of wheats, The manager meets
his trade personally and his own per
sonality is responsible to a large de
gree for the patronage which they
have. Who is the manager of this
local bakery and what system do they
use in baking? What are the best
sellers in French Pastry?
(34) A man is as old as he feels, but
a woman is as old as she looks. I won
der how many women in Palo Alto
know the value of personal appear
ance. It is one of the many things
women neglect. If you will just drop
in and see Madame Musy in the Wil
son building, 132 University avenue,
you will receive the personal atten
tion you have so long desired. Madame
Musy is there to please her patrons
and she desires satisfied customers.
It is every woman's idea to be beauti
ful and Madame Musy wishes to help
you. She has a wonderful shop and
does the finest work. Madame Musy is
known for the wonderful marcels she
known for the wonderful marcells she
will say that this is the nearest to
a natural wave that you ever have
had. Years of experience in this busi
ness is the answer for her excellent
work. If you will just give her a trial
I am sure you will be one of her
steady customers. How much does she
charge for a marcell? What is her
phone number? What does Madame
Musy recommend for falling hair?
(35) It tickles everybody's vanity to
a certain degree to have his friends
say how well his home is furnished,
and perhaps many of these friends
secretly wish they knew where they
could buy furniture of equal looks.
There is no secret in obtaining the
right kind of furniture if one knows
the place to shop. The Warren Furni
ture Company is such a place. They
not only handle high-class furniture
for the parlor, bedroom and dining
room, but their kitchen department is
well stocked with ranges and cooking
utensils, and for the floor they have
the Congoleum. This is recognized for
its qualities of not bulging and crack
ing. It's easily cleaned and always
sanitary. Just go to this store once
and let them show you their collection
of home furnishings. They are sure to
suit your individual taste, no matter
how exacting. They are featuring at
this time their Occidental Ranges and
Stoves. Where is this large furniture
store located, and what make of mat
tress do they recommend for its com
fort? They also sell them. W T hat make
of beds do they carry?
(36) Think of something good to eat
and then think of the Stanford Cafe.
They are synonymous. Not only do
they conduct a counter service that is
most appealing to the man who is in a
hurry but they have attractive tables
for those who have time to sit and
enjoy the meal from all angles. The
food at this cafe is prepared just as it
is at home. They would not think
about serving anything to their pat
rons that they would not eat them
selves and this is proof enough of its
purity. Sanitation is one of the chief
objectives of the proprietors of this
restaurant and is everywhere evident.
The service is rendered in a prompt
manner and you are not left studying
the menu all day. They take your or
der when you first sit down. This is
one thing the proprietors find that ap
peals to their customers. They want im
mediate service and they get it. They
also serve the finest of ice cream and
home-made pastry. Who is the pro
gressive proprietor of this cafe and
how many stools have they at the
gressive proprietors of this cafe and
cated? What brand of coffee do they
use?
(37) The most conveniently and cen
trally located market in Palo Alto to
do your shopping is the Palo Alto
Market. This market caters to the dis
criminating buyers of fresh and cured
meats. To the people that are careful
of the meats they eat, these people
are their friends. They handle nothing
but the very best inspected meats, and
the proprietor does not depend upon
the Federal and State authorities al
together. He makes a personal inspec
tion of them when they enter his
store. If they are not right, bingo!
they are sent back. When you enter
this establishment you are confronted
with an air of absolute cleanliness and
sanitation. Clean sawdust protects the
floor and the glass show cases and
marble counters make it impossible
for bits of meat to "hide" from the
scrutinizing eye of the butchers. The
market on a whole is kept in a state
of cleanliness that will meet the ap
proval of anyone. In fact, sanitation is
their main objective. What is the
exact location of this modern market
and what is their,phone number? How
long have they been established? What
line of hams do they carry? Also what
is their buying rule?

a holiday. It is a gentlemen's billiard I
parlor, conducted for gentlemen by gen
tlemen. Mr. Mahaney sees that these
principles are carried out in detail. At
Mahaney's they have live pool tables,
one snooker table and two billiard
tables, which gives every one a chance
to play the game they like. When you
get thirsty they have a soda fountain in
connection serving the finest of cold
drinks. All the standard brands of
cigars are carried here, and, believe me,
they are fresh. At their store No. 2,
next to the Stanford Theater, you will
find Mr. Krebs in charge, who is asso
ciated with Mr. Mahaney. A full line
of smokers' needs are carried here and
a big supply of cigars in boxes of 10,
25 and 50 in Christmas boxes will be
featured. Ladies' patronage is socilited
at this store. Get your Christmas Gifts
here for the men folks. What is Mr.
Mahaney's first name? Give the location
of store No. 1. What is Mr. Kreb's first
name?
(43) A famous banker once gave a
young man this advice: "Save your
money and look prosperous." We have
known young men to fail because they
did not realize the importance of being
well dressed. A good suit is a dis
tinctive asset to any man. If he is well
dressed, he immediately commands at
tention. If you want the right suit at
the right price, patronize Frazer & Co.
They are the home of good clothes in
Palo Alto, and in addition to these high
grade clothes, they carry such standard
lines of furnishings as Manhattan shirts
and Everwear hosiery. In fact, their
stock borders along high-class lines, and
it is the store in which to do your fall
shopping. They have many new styles,
cuts and materials awaiting your in
spection and their prices are very low,
consistent with the quality. The whole
store commands a high position in the
mercantile establishments of Palo Alto
because of the quality of merchandise
they handle. Meet these people and you
have met twentieth century merchants.
What make of clothing do they sell, and
what is the slogan of these clothes? Give
location, of the store.
(44) Just say "His Master's Voice"
and you have immediately spoken of the
best-known phonograph on the market.
The Victrola is made by pioneer manu
facturers in the business. It is the choice
of the greatest artists who indorse its
unerring register of the original voice
or instrument. Ralph C. Dodson's Music
Store, 340 University avenue, has Vic-,
trolas in many styles and prices. In
addition to the Victrolas this shop also
carries a large line of Victor records,
and new ones are added as soon as they
are released from the factory. A good
tip to the student is to have a "portable"
Victrola with you. If you want to dance
it is always handy and will give you
the music you like the best whenever
you want it. Go in and let them show
you their selection of Victrolas. They
will be glad to play for you any record
you would like to hear. You will ap
preciate meeting these people and they
will appreciate your patronage. Where
are the machines manufactured and how
long has this music shop been established?
What is the price of the style 100 Vic
trola? Have you heard the best seller
in records this month, "I Found a Four-
Leaf Clover," and what is the price of
this record ?
(45) Let's go to the movies. This
expression often shakes away gloom and
dullness and you gladly join the happy
ries a complete stock of crockery ware,
see a regular show. By "movies" the
people of Palo Alto mean the Varsity
and Stanford theaters. They know that
at these playhouses they will see the
best of screen offerings at prices con
sistent with conditions. These two cozy
theaters give the patrons day in and day
out the best in film plays that money
can buy. To those few in Palo Alto
that have not had the pleasure of at
tending these two modern playhouses,
they are missing one of the great joys
of life. The products of the most gifted
imaginations of the world are beautifully
and artistically portrayed with an ac
companiment of the finest of organ
music. You should get their regular
weekly program, which gives you the
names of the shows and the nights upon
which they will be exhibited. Tell us
the manager's name of the Varsity The
ater and how many seats have they?
Give us the exact location of the Stan
ford Theater. What is the Big Special
picture coming there next Monday?
(46) You may say what you want,
but say "Hardware" and the minds of
the people of Palo Alto will revert
automatically to the Palo Alto Hard
ware Company, "The Winchester Store."
This firm carries a complete line of
hardware, consisting of carpenters' and
mechanics' tools of every description;
cutlery as well as builders' hardware,
sporting goods, Bass Hcuter Paints,
Pennsylvania Vacuum Cup Tires—in
fact, everything you would expcct to find
in a modern up-to-date hardware store.
The Palo Alto Hardware Company is
known as the "Winchester Store," carry
ing a full line of Winchester products.
The Winchester Company puts out one
article each month at a special price—
the public are looking forward each
month for these big specials. The special
for November is a Winchester Flash

(3S) Time is money. Save time and
money. Spend the ten minutes allowed
on your street car transfer, buying
Christmas Cards or forgotten station
ery supplies at llyde's, 370 University
avenue, right at the transfer point.
There are but two transfer points, the
depot and opposite Hyde's new store.
Tou can get a basket for your many
packages here or a beautifully decor
ated one to send as a Christmas gift.
If you want a Fountain Pen, which one
does Hyde's guarantee? If you want to
give stationery to your sister, which
of Hyde's brands would you choose?
Which will have the bigger sale at
Hyde's for the kiddies, "Kritters of the
Kitchen Kingdom," or "The Chickens
Eating Corn"? What line of goods is
being especially featured at Hyde's
besides sttftionery, school supplies,
fountain pens, pictures, picture frames,
baskets, candles, beads, games, toys,
favors, memory books, and albums?
Call at Hyde's at the transfer point,
and they can answer the above ques
tions and also give you many sugges
tions for charming and inexpensive
Christmas presets. Their new store is
one of the finest of its kind in P. A.
(39) It is every man's wish to own
his own home. It makes for family
contentment and happiness. It saves
paying rent.
The University Realty Company sp&-
j cializes in providing people with
homes. Consult them as you would any
specialist.
Years of experience in this com
munity stands back of the University
Realty Company.
This Company can serve you in the
purchase or sale of real estate, in writ
ing all kinds of insurance, in renting
and leasing, in fact, in all matters per
taining to real estate and insurance.
How long has this Company been in
business in Palo Alto? Name one in
surance company that it represents.
(40) If you want to make your
friends happy, present them with a
good photograph of yourself. A photo
graph is a token of real friendship,
and is highly appreciated by everyone.
And when you are in Palo Alto and
desire a portrait of yourself and are
not satisfied with just ordinary work,
go to the Shattuck Studio and you will
be pleased. This is one man who is
"behind the camera, but not behind
the times." His portrait work is indic
ative of this. In his little studio on
University avenue he will be found
very busy most every day snapping
and developing and then touching up,
putting the finishing touches on, which
removes all blemishes. The art of fin
ishing portraits is not possessed by
everyone, but this photographer is in
deed an expert. Then, too, his prices
are exceedingly moderate, considering
the beauty and quality of work turned
out. You are always sure of a success
ful picture here. Do you know that
your picture is the only present your
friends cannot buy? Where is the
exact location of this studio? What
other photographic work do they do?
(41) Everyone knows Wagner, "The
Meat Man." He is a master in the meat
business. He came to Palo Alto eight
years ago and started business in a
small market in a small way on High
street. Today his business has ex
panded to such an extent that it has
outgrown the old market.
Mr. Wagner says he doesn't take the
credit for making his business what it
is in Palo Alto, but owes it to Mr. N.
Benson who has been with him ever
since he has located in this vicinity
and who will continue to manage the
local market. Mr. Benson has a great
many friends here in Palo Alto.
Mr. Wagnor owns the block of four
stores on the corner of University and
Florence streets, his new market being
the main Corner Store Room. This
wonder market is a palace of marble.
The counters are of marble and glass
and the latest word in modern sanita
tion. The woodwork is finished in
French gray and the walls in gray
with green trimmings. Cold storage
plant is of the latest modern auto
matic control and the best that money
can buy.
There is not a question in tlie
writer's mind but what this is one of
the most modern and finest equipped
markets in the state of California.
Mr. Wagner owns a chain of mar
kets extending to San Jose and Hol
lister and most of his time is con
fined to the purchasing end of the bus
iness. He has been in the meat bus
iness so long that he doesn't guess at
the quality of meat when he buys. He
knows that they are the best, so, when
purchasing the meat from him you
don't have to worry about its not being
of the best quality.
He is still going to be known as
"The Meat Man" in his new market
and will give the same service and
high quality meats that has made him
such a success.
It will pay you to watch for his ad
vertisements appearing in the daily
papers.
(42) This article is about one of the
liveliest spots in Palo Alto. There is
something doing here most all of the
time, and especially after dinner or on

Light, complete with battery for 89 cents.
The Palo Alto Hardware Company Car
rie sa complete stock of crockery ware,
dishes in plain and open sets and the
finest aluminum and enameled ware in
the city. How long has this store been
established? What is tie special price
on the 50-piece set of Gold Band Potter
Chinaware? What make of electric
washer do they sell?
(47) Fitting feet is a matter of no
little importance, for there .ire a very
few people that enjoy the fitting of a
n<iw pair of shoes, even when they fit
perfectly. However, Thoit's Shoe Store
is a firm that is noted all over the Coast
for its ability to produce shoes that
"feel just like the old ones." They are
the local distributors of Hanan Shoes
and other reputable makes of more mod
erate price. This store is a home store.
Its management is a good example to
follow, for courtesy and personal ser
vice is its aim. It is needless to speak
of the quality of their shoes, as this is
too well known, but we will say that they
carefully select as to quality, workman
ship and style. Their wearing qualities,
as well as looks, are second to none.
When you have met the proprietor of
the local firm you will have met a man
that is all for Stanford and Palo Alto.
Where is their modern shoe store lo
cated? How many members of the fam
ily can they fit in shoes? When was
this business established?
(48) There is one photographer in.
Palo Alto, "An Artistic Photographer,"'
who has gained a national reputation
and holds first prize in America for ex
cellency of work. He now has por
traits on exhibition in the National Salon.
Has also been awarded highest honors
in the states of New York, Ohio and
Michigan. He has probably photo
graphed more prominent and profes
sional people than any photographer in
America. Was with Hartsook Studios
for the past eleven years, specializing
principally in photographing moving pic
ture stars and theatricals in general. A
visit to his studio, 126 University ave
nue, which was formerly the Davey
Studio, will convince the most skeptical
of the superiority of his work. Who is
this artist who has made it possible for
the Palo Alto people to get something
different, something highly artistic*
without having to go to the larger
cities? And what makes a successful
artistic portrait? Remember Friend
ship's Perfect Gift—Your Photo.
(49) There is a wonderful industry
in this city that 1 belit*vo many do not
know about. Why is it so many people
go to San Francisco to purchase their
gifts when right here in Palo Alto there
is a shop that is known by exclusive
shops all over the United States and
whose goods have gone to England..
Australia, and Honolulu? Miss Herrick
conducts a shop the year round to servj;
you. When you are thinking of gifts,
go first to Miss Herrick's and you will
be surprised at the exclusive articles
you will find there and more reasonably
priced than elsewhere. This Studio must,
be seen to be appreciated. Give us the
names of two articles just received from
India. Tell us three articles made ex
clusively in Herrick Studios and sold
all over the United States.
(50) Here is one of the busiest stores
in Palo Alto. Segar Service Shop. Be
lieve me, the proprietor sure is popular
with the young fellows. There never is
a time but what you will see a bunch in
his store. The reason for that is his
service to every one, no matter if you
only buy a package of cigarette papers*
or if it is a brier pipe, you get the same
courteous treatment. A large assortment
of pipes have just arrived for the Christ
mas trade. Also jars of smoking to
bacco. A complete line of magazines
are carried here. In connection with this
modern Cigar Store we have a real Ser
vice Barber Shop, operated by Mr. Par
vin. They are all union barbers and ex
pert haircutters. This shop is the oldest
in town. If you only want a shave, don't
be afraid to come here. These barbers
don't bother the life out of you selling
you something else in the shop. Try
these boys the first chance you get. Get
an Almond Meal and Peroxide Steam
Facial Massage. Tell us Mr. Parvin's
first name. Tell us how many maga
zines Mr. Corns has for sale at the
Cigar Counter. Give us the exact loca
tion of these two establishments.
