# Report Of The Freshman Year Committee
## 
### 
Doubts of the ability of Stanford's
present educational system to provide
for the needs of its students, and speci
fic questions about the relevance of
the residence program in its present
form, have stimulated students, faculty,
and staff to seek more appropriate
solutions.
The A.S.S.U., concerned about the
quality of residential experience at
Stanford — particularly in contrast to
that at the Overseas Campuses —
created through its Legislature a Hous
ing Commission, one task of which was
to review and make recommendations
concerning the freshman residence
program in its relation to education.
At about the same time, Associate
Dean of Students Robert Gordon was
asked to present proposals for a new
model of freshman residential educa
tion.
Both A.S.S.U. and Dean Gordon al
most simultaneously appointed com
mittees in the early Fall of 1966 to ad
vise them in the making of recommen
dations in this important area, and
rather than continue a too-familiar pat
tern of separate committees working
independently (and often divergently)
it was decided to merge the two.
In the merger, the Dean's Advisory
Committee agreed to accept the A.S.S.U.
invitation to become an integral part,
of its group. Dean Gordon agreed to
accept the report of the entire group
in the same light as he would have the
recommendations of his originally ap
pointed committee, and the merged
group in turn agreed to attempt in
good faith to assist him in meeting his
deadlines and obligations as best it
could.
Despite particular questions existing
about the Sponsor system, the Commit
tee felt from the outset that to limit
its discussions and report to such par
ticulars, or to start out with them,
would be to avoid the main Issues sur
rounding ,the quality and meaning of

residential education at Stanford, par
ticularly the freshman program.
The Committee thus firmly decided
that it would start from a fresh con
sideration of the issues and principles
involved, relating its recommendations
to them. It was recognized that such
an approach would be time consuming,
that it might seem Utopian to some;
yet a critque and basic statement about
the ideas of a residence university
seemed vital for future planning and
growth.
At the same time, the practical ne
cessity for more immediate recommen
dations and action was realized. The
present report is in this sense a pre
liminary, or interim report, which at
tempts to set forth and justify some
practical recommendations for residence
programs that could be adopted in
1967-68 — steps within the framework
of progression towards a more ideal
situation.
The Case for the Residential Commu
nity — The Personal Committment to
Learning
The impossibility of considering the
freshman experience in isolation from
the life and purposes of the entire un
dergraduate program has been a ma
jor premise in the subcommittee's
study of the Freshman Residence Pro
gram. Two main assumptions underlie
this approach.
One is that the university experience,
as a whole, is only one part of the con
tinuum of the educational process, a
process which neither begins nor ends
at the university gates. The educational
ideals should be the same for all four
undergraduate years in terms of what
they declare for the growth of persons.
The freshman year is only a step in
a span of development, having a spe
cial function as the first step but not
a separate one.
The second is a new conception which
views the university as a community
for learning through personal, interac
,tjon, find development,. .nsp, of

all its facilities for education. This view
emphasizes that the classroom, library
or laboratory cannot — indeed does not
even now — have a monopoly on pro
viding for the education and develop
ment of students. Else, why a residen
tial university? Why not subcontract
all residential arrangements and avoid
hotel problems?
The Committee felt strongly that
there was urgent need for institutional
endorsement of the fact that without
growth and development in personal,
social, and emotional dimensions, the
achievements of intellect are shallow
and stand in isolation from the indivi
dual and his world. The conviction that
gives personal meaning to knowledge
is a product of direct human relation
ship, and we make far too little use
of its potential.
In a more settled and comfortable
past, with much greater mutuality of
expectations and values both between
peers and between generations, the ur
gency of such questions was less, the
scope more limited and the answers
more predictable. The bull-session quite
effectively handled many aspects of
this personal-social side of development.
For this, and other reasons, relatively
little formal attention to it was felt
to be necessary, aside from some for
mal lectures on hygiene, the evils of
sex and booze, and the Fundamental
Standard. After all, boys were (and
would be) boys, and pretty soon they'd
grow up into men, producers and fa
thers. Home and society would take
care somehow that they grew up right,
and the college would provide an ac
cepted transition station on the way,
some academic input, and try to keep
the lid on boyish spirit getting out of
hand.
By contrast today, for many students
questions about one's nature, and about
one's relationship to an uncertain
world, and about this world itself are
more insistent, and more pre-occupying
.before The V&iefttipns a#?, -real,

and require believable answers from
within the individual. And, until he can
find them, this quest, this preoccupa
tion has top priority, while academics
suffer through seeming less relevant.
And though there are many students
who are relatively unconcerned about
such questions, we feel their total edu
cation would be enriched if they could
be purposefully involved.
The history of formal didactic at
tempts to speak to these burning ques
tions is rather dismal, and all over the
country, there has been a steady atro
phy of required, and even of voluntary
courses relative to personal hygiene,
sex, morals, and behavior. Both stu
dents and educators sense that because
a viable set of personal ethics and
values just grow within the individual,
attempts simply to impose them from
without are relatively futile.
Not only have curricular approaches
to such questions atrophied (happi
ly!), but American education is nearing
the end of a decade in which the entire
necessity of addressing itself to the
problem of personal growth has been
quite deliberately rejected. Sputnik was
the symbol, and such spokesmen as
Hyman Rickover took up the cudgels,
with articulate and seathing denuncia
tions of "Education for Living" — of
concepts of "adjustment," and insisted,
along with many others, on intellectual
excellence (for "excellence" read "a
chievement") as the right, and only
purpose of education.
Growth of population; of national
wealth with its stimulus to upward so
cial mobility; increasing complexity
and diversity of knowledge with its
concommitant of faculty pre-occupa
tion and relatively-narrower fields; and
increased competition have sharpened
the pressures for achievement, leaving
even loss time, thought, or energy for
development as a person.
The need to pay most serious atten
tion to this is most keenly felt by many
studetitfi hy their eldprs.
There has been some re-emergence of
an expressed need for leadership and
cooperation in working out better ways
to assist and support the individual in
his personal education and develop
ment, and when students do not raise
these questions, their education should
raise them, and speak to them.
Unstructured and spontaneous stu
dent discussion, particularly at the
freshman level, is heavily-flavored with
the need to sort oneself out, but as it
now operates, it tends less to growth
than to its more traditional social func
tion of settling into "bird-of-a-feather"
groupings in which the individual
can find comfort and support for his
own sets of values and seekings. With
in this spontaneously-forming group
ings, the dialogue tends to become in
creasingly circular, the values increas
ingly exclusive, and there is decreased
permeability to fresh ideas and ex
perience.
In an educational situation where
concentration is placed on the formal
aspects of education there is an imbal
ance which produces distortion, which
too often takes the form of rejection
of the academic sphere as "irrelevant."
Another consequence is the dangerous
polarization of university life into two
worlds; that of the classroom, and that
of social life, setting them to work
against each other instead of with each
other toward the individual's goals. The
acceptance of the residence university
ideal as being vital to education can
be one important factor in keeping
the two worlds together and moving in
the same direction, whereas the pres
ent residence program presents too
many forces that divide living from
learning.
The Committee takes as self-evident
that a truly liberal education is in fact
liberating — in making both wider and
deeper the individual's ability to per
ceive, absorb, analyze, and choose in a
vastly-increasing array of people,
events, and issues, and not in forcing
the premature adoption of limited, and
constricting attitudes. In effect this
seems the necessity of the student's
continuous and repeated exposure to
and challenge by diversity of ideas, of
values, styles, and of course people.
It is here that the meaning of residen
tial education springs to life, for it of
fers potentially the best milieu for
daily face-to-face interaction with peers,
with older students, and faculty mem
bers of both sexes — offering diversity
of age, sex, discipline and values in
the highly personal way so necessary
for exposure to lead to involvement,
and knowledge to become commitment.
The necessity of direct personal in
teraction is most strongly endorsed by
the Committee, for it is the set of
values and mental attitudes formed in
such day-in, day-out exchange that set
tle most deeply into one's fiber. Thus
to narrow the range, or dilute the qual
ity of this exchange seems antiethical
to education. Kenneth Benne, in his
article "The Uses of Fraternity" states
in this regard, "People learn value sys
tems in the first instance as they form
relations with others. These relations
in turn develop norms with corres
ponding rationales which the individual
then internalizes. If people, young or
old, can build groups with standards
that reward and strengthen honest
self - expression and self - acceptance,
creativity, mutual helpfulness and the
capacity to cope with conflict, then the
members of such groups will assimilate
these values as conditions of member
ship."
Choice, and learning to choose ra
tionally, are important educational
tasks, but should not be forced on the
individual too hurriedly, without
enough exposure to a wide range of
choices, nor without some room for
trial and error.
In summary then, the Committee
firmly believes that:
1. As education is, or should be, a con
tinuum, the freshman year cannot
be considered in isolation from the
entire undergraduate program, and al
though it has a special function as
the first step, it is an integral part
of the whole.
2. There is a grave imbalance in the
university's educational emphasis,
which tends to widen the needless,
and in our view harmful, gap be
tween the getting of knowledge and
the important business of living.
3. The deepest personal and intellectual
cpncems of students — their rela
tionships to themselves, and to an

uncertain world, — are not receiving
the institutional recognition and ef
fort they deserve.
4. That people learn most deeply by
living, and by forming personal re
lationships, and that when the resi
dence program, as at present, is
oriented to bed, board, and social
needs, the opportunities for inter
nalizing intellectual knowledge and
values are meager, and the tenden
cies to reject academic values as per
sonally-irrelevant are reinforced.
5. That choice, and learning to choose
critically are central educational
goals, but that it must depend on
close and repeated exposure to a
wide range of ideas, values, styles,
and people — people of different
ages, disciplines, sexes, and back
grounds, — and not be prematurely
forced into constricting channels
based primarily on social and not in
tellectual values.
6. Such close exposure to diversity, over
sufficient time, and if taken as the
norm, would go far in preventing
the formation of narrowed and
sterotypic attitudes and thought —
the surest signs of the ill-educated
man.
7. The way in which students live very
directly affects the whole quality of
their education: this single principle
underpins the whole concept of the
residential university.
"THE FRESHMAN CONDITION"
The paraphrase above in intentional,
— and designed to point out that being
a freshman at Stanford, or anywhere,
is an intensely personal experience of
transition. Although the general ideals
of education apply equally, — and es
pecially, — to him, the freshman also
has attributes which make him special,
but not separate.
It is the feeling of this committee
that freshmen can and should receive
the benefit of special experiences de
signed for their particular problems.
The assumption that we would like to
question is whether this need for some
special orientation experiences necessi
tates their living in a segragated fash
ion. Although it is expedient from an
"efficiency" point of view, it may gen
erate excessive anxiety over perfor
mance in freshman courses and a rein
forcement for essentially juvenile
modes of facing college stresses. His
special attributes can be summed up as
follows:
A. He obviously needs early and reli
able information about his new com
munity — where things are, what he
is to do, and so forth.
B. He is making the transition most
traditionally accepted in America as
the line between family dependency
and personal autonomy.
In actuality, the line, if there is one,
is blurred, and varies greatly from one
freshman to another. In general, the
freshman comes equipped with the cre
dentials of previous achievement and
approval — hoping he will be accepted
in his new college world, and fearing
that he may not. At the same time he
hopes that his performance and life
will be freer and larger than before.
The freshman, more poignantly than
any other undergraduate, in his transi
tion from a narrower to a hopefully
wider identity, wants the understand
ing of his old world, personal accep
tance by the new — and fears he may
have neither.
He is thus enormously vulnerable,
and as Steve Hurlbut has written in
his excellent paper, is characterized by
a "pervasive anxiety." Until he has as
similated workable norms, he feels he's
got to satisfy some kind of external
standard, and is anxious until he does.
Some more specific stresses that tend
to promote anxiety are:
I.The sudden change of status that
comes from being taken out of a
high school situation where one is
enormously successful and being put
in a class of similar big frogs from
small ponds, and feeling that they
are tougher frogs than he is:
2. The doubt about being able to live up
to tough academic demands:
3. Doubts about his being accepted by
his peers — of both sexes;
4. Being away from home;
5. Confrontation with different reli
gious and social values than those
the student has learned in his family
and home community;
6. Ambivalence about authority, and
older peopje in general.
This araciety and vulnerability are by

no means bad in themselves — and in
deed offer the most fertile soil for cul
tivation of the seeking young mind.
But the thrust of this searching anxiety
is in essence social, and approval-seek
ing — and therefore related to persons
and social groups, or the winning of ac
ceptable symbols of achievement.
The Committee feels that the perva
sive, and expectable freshman anxiety
and search for some group identity is
a double-edged sword, with potential
for both regression and for growth.
On one side, if there is failure of
approval from home, or personal ac
ceptance at college, or fewer grade
points "in the bank" than expected,
anxiety may well become dysfunction
al, with consequences such as neurotic
disturbance, refusal to compete aca
demically, and even regressive and
anti-social group-adolescent behavior,
and the reinforcement of pre-college
values.
CRITIQUE OF THE PRESENT
FRESHMAN RESIDENCE PROGRAM
The Committee feels that too many
features of the present freshman resi
dence program serve:
1. To reinforce natural anxieties among
the newest members of the Univer
sity, and
2. To promote the seeking of solutions
to this anxiety that have little if any
thing to do with educational pur
poses, but tend to promote prema
ture and mutually exclusive social
groupings.
As he moves into a freshman resi
dence, he is thrown into close contact
with a large peer-group of greater
diversity in background, attitudes, and
talent than he is likely to have known.
And, because competition and fears of
failure are keenest among peers (par
ticularly of neophytes performing simi
lar tasks,) these differences within the
larger peer-group tend to move the stu
dent into protective subgroups of
peers with attitudes and pre-college
backgrounds similar to his own, within
which he finds support. In such mutual
ly-supportive social groups, the student
can arm himself and defend himself
psychologically against any new ideas
to which he is being exposed, from fel
low students, members of the opposite
sex, and his professors. Studies will
never be taken at all seriously but will
be dealt with in a purely cognitive
fashion, ingested for the purpose of
passing exams and discarded soon af
terwards. Under these conditions, we
may have done away with the prob
lems of anxiety, but are faced with the
possibility of at least two other un
desirable consequences, 1) His atti
tudes and values may remain totally
unquestioned throughout his college
career; and 2) a group devoted to de
fending itself against the climate of an
institution may exhibit anti-social char
acteristics of alienated people every
where.
That present groups formed for mu
tual support emerge after a limited
exposure to new, and possible better
models, is certainly true, and groupings
tend to occur along pre-college lines
and values, or in rebellion against
them.
The present segregated freshman
residence situation also tends:
3. To promote the seeking of achieve
ment symbols (i.e. grades) rather
than knowledge of self or substance;
4. By a residence administration seen
as primarily regulatory and manger
ial, to aggravate the natural ambi
valence of freshmen towards author
ity with results ranging from thought
less docility to destructive rebellion;
or apathetic alienation;
5. To provide too much pressure for
distortion and ritualization of rela
tionships between the sexes — the
"dating syndrome" — and a poverty
of opportunities for simple, friendly
interaction of people, a lack fre
quently deplored by both freshmen
and upperclassmen.
Both architecture and group pres
sures, as well as well-institutionalized
pressures for achieving good grades
in a heavy curriculum conspire to rob
the freshman of privacy — both physi
cal privacy, and temporal privacy; i.e.
some time simply to be himself, to spin
his wheels, and to think, with room for
trial and error.
There is, at least in Wilbur, no at
mosphere in the dining halls in the
least conducive to conversation — and
for some reason, plastic and formica
encourage one to get In and out fast,

with emphasis on feeding the face, but
none on nourishing friendship.
All of these (observable) results are
Inimical to the purposes of stimulating
interest in new subjects, of promoting
constructive reaction to diversity, of
the discouragement of stereotypic
thinking and behavior, and of trust in
older people as human beings.
More importantly, the positive po
tentials of freshman vulnerability go
relatively untapped — or are being tap
ped for outworn purposes. For this
vulnerability is personal, and if pro
vided with daily personal interaction
with a wide range of interesting
people of different ages and different
disciplines, there is more than a good
chance that Stanford freshmen would
attach their enthusiasms and their
hearts to the new models they need
and seek — models of greater depth
and diversity, but providing the identi
ty and security they need.
The interaction between freshman
men in Wilbur and the Faculty Resi
dents has varied greatly in its intensity
and impact — with instances of great
fruitfulness, or relative neutrality and
harmony, and a very few of a truly
negative quality.
Faculty Associates to freshman resi
dences have often provided important
personal interactions between fresh
men and the faculty — but just as
often these contacts have been super
ficial and ritualized.
Sponsors, while providing the great
est impact in personal exchange, pre
sent, because of their small number,
relatively limited contact with upper
classmen's values and experiences.
While all these personal contacts in
the freshman residences do in fact en
rich the education of many freshmen,
the other fact remains that there are
simply not enough such contacts, nor
sufficient support and time for these
few people to give residential educa
tion the emphasis it deserves.
EVOLUTION OF THE PRESENT
FRESHMAN RESIDENCE PROGRAM
Whatever rationalizations may be
adduced in support of the present
freshman residence program, it ap
pears to the Committee that it is in
large measure a holdover from an
earlier set of norms — norms that re
ceived wide acceptance and support in
those times, but that are under serious
question *oday.
In the Teens, the Twenties, and even
well into the Thirties, there was more
general acceptance (in society at large
as well as in the university commu
nity) of a particular hierarchical order,
and the particular authority structure
such an order implies. One tended to
know where one stood in relation to
the order at any given period, and to
be confident that one would ascend the
ladder by predictable steps.
Perhaps because of the relative sta
bility of the social order, personal de
velopment was thought of more along
the lines of advancement within that
order — with of course the acquisition
of enough "knowledge" and academic
polish to secure preference in vocations
and the status of a college-educated
man. It was important in itself to be
a senior, or for that matter an upper
classman, and the class structure had
in itself real meaning to the student.
Hence, the development of class spirit
and cohesiveness was valued, encour
aged, and ritualized. Even the major
steps in progression along the well
worn rungs were ritualized in such
rites of passage as the annual "Frosh-
Soph War," a ritual which would have
been impossible had there been no such
open class distinction.
The residence arrangements prob
ably reflected an accept? e of this
order according to social and culture
values of the day, and were aimed at
initiating the freshman into them. A
deliberate segration of the neophyte —
either by residence, by distinguishing
badges (viz. the "Beanie"), by restric
tion of privilege, or by combinations
of these has in many human organiza
tions, served to reinforce acculturation
to desired social and behavioral norms,
and whether anyone was purposefully
aware of this or not, such considera
tions surely operated in freshman resi
dential segragation. Aside from "home
work" performed in a dorm, there was
a rather strict geographic separation
of intellectual-academic concerns and
the personal-social sphere. The class
room and laboratory (and one's closed
~oom or the stacks) were meant for
the'one — while the dorm was really
for the other, and largely designed for
it.
The early history of the sponsor
program, when Encina Hall was the
freshman men's dorm, illustrates well
its use as an instrument for indoctri
nation of the "hapless Frosh" into pre
vailing upperclassmen's values.
Most sponsors wore a block "S", and
embodied a prevailing ideal of social
and athletic prowess, coupled with a
sense of loyalty to the group, respect
for authority, and an obligation to be
exemplary to their potential succes
sors. As recently as 1955, the effective
ness of a sponsor was measured, among
other things, by the percentage of his
charges attending the pregame rallies
and intercollegiate games.
Most sponsors were also fraternity
men, and another measure of his suc
cess as a sponsor was the number of
his freshmen pledged. For the spon
sors, there was little conflict involved
in serving simultaneously the fresh
men, one's own upperclassman values,
and those of the institution and its
authorities, for all constituents had
pretty much the same understanding
of the system, and of each of their
places within it.
In the intervening years, particularly
those since World War 11, there have
been profound changes in the social
order — a disruption of settled commu
nity, sharpened preoccupations with
material competition, and a culture less
and less sure of where it stood, or what
it believed in. Particularly among those
intelligent enough to attend such col
leges as Stanford, there has been in
creasing criticism of existing institu
tions which seem to them to produce
as leaders men with narrowed vision,
preoccupation with power, and too
little time or love for people. In this
climate of malaise, and in the absence
of once tacitly-held assurances, the
young person's search for personal
identity, relevance, and belief has
emerged as a very important difference
between many students of today and
of the previous generation, and again
underscores the vital importance of the
living group experience.
Despite some expressed dissatisfac
tions with the existing sponsor system,
the sponsors and a few feculty resi
dents at Wilbur were quite probably
the first to sense both this new and
urgent need among the freshmen (and
of course in themselves,) and that the
approach to it had to be met at the
level of day-in, day-out personal inter
action.
The evolution of the present sponsor
system has been a response both to
the growing need for attention to per
sonal education and development, and
to the need to substitute a drive for
continuous search and openness for the
more comfortable, but rather water
tight, social groupings which they saw
taking place.
For the past few years, the sponsors
have been the real pioneers in residen
ital education in the freshman resi
dence program. To condemn them as
"politically motivated" or irresponsible
seems a rather defensive and negative
reaction to the admitted mistakes of
a few members, and more importantly
fails to recognize that, without much
help or understanding, they are on the
track of something very important.
There have, to be sure, been other
efforts in the direction of residential
education for freshmen — relatively
cautious additions which have been in
the general direction of enriching per
sonal experience and contact in the.
residences, and may represent an in
choate recognition of this need.
Such additions have been the Facul
ty Residents, the Faculty Associates,
the Student Associates — at first men,
later women — and later, more free
dom for dining exchanges. More for
mally, in-residence seminars, guests-in
residence, panel discussions, and even
classes have been introduced.
But the former additions (with the
exception of a few Faculty Residents)
have in general provided only super
ficial interactions, while the latter
(again with a few notable exceptions)
have borne little relation to life and
living education other than physical
proximity. There is a heavy implica
tion of the mere introduction of more
academics into residences — while the
.ru#ot iT.nortant questions to students
go, for the most part, unanswered.
Th< present freshmen residence pro
gram, in its segregation by class, by

sex, by its continued reinforcement of
separation of living from learning, is
anachronistic, and reflects values that
have become less relevant and ideas that
are no longer true — such as assump
tions that satisfactory personal devel
opment takes care of itself within an
accepted and orderly framework, (of
which the freshman class is one clear
step, houses and all); that personal
education and development are irrele
vant to, or at least peripheral to the
purposes of "Higher Education"; that
mutually-deaf social groupings are ac
ceptable parts of the social mosaic —
when the fact of the matter is that we
are badly failing to meet these now
paramount questions. Despite our be
ginning attentions to this need, the
main thrust of the freshman resi
dence program and the academic pro
gram, still tends to leave the freshman
alone in his search and to force him
into protective groupings.
FRESHMAN IN3PEORATION INTO
UNIVERSITY IJFE
As discussed above, the Committee
feels strongly that the present segre
gation of freshmen reflects values no
longer taken seriously, reinforces the
separation of learning from living
(with impoverishment of both), height
ens some dysfunctional anxieties, and
tends to force premature and relative
ly narrow security groupings, rein
forces the artificiality of contact be
tween the sexes, and alienates students
from the faculty.
Thus, segregation is in itself a cen
tral problem, and, of course, the alter
natives must be aimed at integration
of the freshman in one or more ways.
A. Coeducational Housing
As noted earlier, a major problem
for freshmen is the difficulty of estab
lishing relationships with members of
the opposite sex on any basis other
than a social or dating level. For fresh
man men, the problem is especially
acute, manifesting itself in a heighten
ing anxiety, increased insecurity, and
frustration. The institution of a sys
tem of coeducational housing would
not only ameliorate the undesirable so
cial position of freshman men but also
provide an atmosphere conducive to
more natural (spontaneous) and per
sonal relationships. Upperclassmen al
so face similar problems as the results
of a segragated housing system, and
they too could gain much from having
the option of a coeducational residence
program.
That such a program is both prac
tical and desirable is supported by the
acknowledged success of the overseas
campus program as a living and learn
ing experience. In addition, the appar
ent success of the Grove Project as a
coeducational residence suggests that
coeducation can be successful on the
home campus.
The committee believes that, in the
long run, coeducational housing should
be the prevailing, although not exclu
sive, pattern for residential education
at Stanford, and that significant steps
can and should be taken toward this
goal during the coming year, 1967-68.
Although some houses segregated by
sex should be retained for these stu
dents who do not wish to live in a co
educational residence, a major effort
should be directed toward providing
coeducational housing in its most sig
nificant sense, men and women living
in the same house. Even these houses
which remain segregated could be
placed in juxtaposition to increase the
interaction among men and women.
The goal of a residence housing both
men and women would be most effect
ively realized if the ratio is approxi
mately 1:1. Although the 1:1 ratio Is
most desirable, a ratio of 2:1 would,
we feel, be successful.
As a long range goal the Committee
recommends changing of th« admis
sions ratio to one that is closer to 1:1
as a step towards this ideal.
B. Integration of classes:
As discussed more fully in Section
111 of this report, the freshman year is
a period of growth in which freshmen
must adjust to what for many of them
is a totally new culture, with new and
demanding standards. This situation re
quires a certain amount of social sup
port to prevent excessive and destruc
tive anxiety.
The committee is convinced that the
freshman residence program too often
promotes a seeurity that reduces expo
sure to challenging and growth-moti
vating aspects of university life, there
by retarding development, rather than

preparing the freshman to meet the
challenges which are in a large mea
sure responsible for his insecurity. In
addition, individual anxieties often re
inforce each other to the detriment of
all concerned.
While it is agreed that there is val
uable support and learning through
contact with others engaged in the
same experience, this by no means re
quires that most of one's contacts be
freshmen, nor does it exclude the pos
sibility or desirability of living in con
tact with others.
In a maximally integrated system in
which freshmen constitute approxi
mately 30 per cent of the population,
reinforcement of pre-college values
would be healthily reduced, while
freshmen, still pursuing similar curri
cula, would not suffer from a dearth of
contact and interaction with other
freshmen. In a fully integrated system,
the freshman could contribute to the
atmosphere of the residence, but could
not dominate it. Social support would
be provided not only by contact with
other freshmen, but also by the pres
ence of upperclassmen who have gone
through similar experiences and who
can contribute to the freshman's sense
of social support both by advice or ex
ample and by providing living evidence
that students actually survive the
freshmen year. This system would, of
course, have the further advantage of
more fully orienting freshmen to the
challenges and opportunities of the
university, a need which can be only
partially fulfilled by the present spon
sor system.
C. Partial Integration
In the preceding discussion the mini
mum ratio of upperclassmen to fresh
men in an integrated residence is as
sumed to be well in excess of 1:1. Any
system of partial integration with ra
tios well below this minimum faces se
vere difficulties:
1. Although the population would be
enriched by the addition of more ex
perienced upperclass models, fresh
men would still dominate the dormi
tory; the balance between security
and growth would not be significant
ly changed.
2. Under one suggestion for partial in
tegration offered by Dean Gordon's
staff, upperclassmen would essential
ly be guests whose rooms happened
to be in a freshman dormitory. It is
difficult to understand what would
motivate 147 upperclassmen to accept
such a position, or why they would
feel any dedication to close personal
interaction with the freshmen in an
educational sense.
3. The sponsor system is successful
largely because a few individuals are
committed to making the best of an
unfortunate living situation for
freshmen. It is not clear that the sub
stitution of five guests for one spon
sor dedicated to working with fresh
men is desirable.
4. Partial integration in itself has never
been suggested as an optimal resi
dence system, and it is not clear that
it is a desirable step toward total
integration. The committee is con
vinced that change for its own sake
is an unsound policy at any stage in
the development of a more viable
residence system.
Freshmen have the most to gain in
a campus-wide residence program
founded on the principles of co-educa
tion and integration. The institution of
this program requires not only the
support of freshmen, but also that of
upperclassmen. It could be argued that
upperclassmen would not want to give
up their present housing system. In
answer to this objection three points
can be made:
1. It is not clear that upperclassmen
are satisfied with the present sys
tem. Every spring quarter freshmen
express dissatisfaction with the hous
ing alternatives open to them: the
success of the overseas program as
a living experience has prompted
many to call for a more desirable
program at Stanford at-Stanford;
there were five applicants for each
place in the Grove Project, and if
the seminar hadn't been required
there would have been more upper
classmen seeking this exciting new
living alternative.
2. Tn our model of a fully integrated,
coeducational house, the percentage
of freshmen living in should be kept
well below 50 per cent. Freshmen
could contribute their real enthusi
asm and the challenge of their ques
tions without dominating the houses,

so that integration would benefit
both freshmen and upperclassmen.
3. In our residence program some inde
pendent npperclass houses would re
main, if there were a demand for
them. We believe that most students
would choose to live in a coed, inte
grated house, however, if some stu
dents wished something akin to the
present system such alternatives
would be open to them. The assump
tion we are making is that the new
residenco opportunities will sell them
selves.
E. Diversity and Self-Selection
Diversity among housing alternatives
is desirable. In addition, diversity with
in each house must be maintained to
avoid provincialism within the various
alternatives. Free choice, particularly
too early in the college career, among
various living styles will eventually
produce self-selective, provincial group
ings which will contradict the ideal
of developing acceptance of individual
differences within the residence. Three
points can be made to this problem:
1. No house needs to represent a cross
section of the student body. When
too great diversity exists in a living
group, cohesiveness is lost and frag
mentation takes the form of break
ing up into small sub-groups between
which little communication exists.
Therefore, some commonality, espe
cially by interests, is desirable.
2. It may not be the case that giving
students free choice among really
worthwhile alternatives will result
in serious problems of self-selection.
At any rate, it will take time for this
to happen and if indeed problems do
arise, we should be able to deal with
them early.
3. Assuming that such problems do
arise and call for some restriction of
free choice, one possible solution
would be to limit the amount of time
that an individual could live in a par
ticular residence. By encouraging
switching and moving among stu
dents, no system would be allowed
to lock itself in and stagnate.
VII. The Tone and Character of the
Living Group: Staff and Program
The residential components of most
universities are now basically eating
and sleeping facilities, structurally like
barracks, motels, or high-rise Hiltons,
surrounded by parking lots. To become
a truly residential university, the resi
dence hall must become a center of
learning and development equal in im
portance to the lecture hall. Ideally
their staffing, planning, and adminis
tration should be the responsibility of
faculty members rather than housing
directors or business offices.
While Stanford now is a far cry from
the suggested ideal of a residence uni
versity, many steps have been pro
posed which work toward the ideal. In
tegration by class and co-education are
two strong recommendations made by
the committee, which as discussed
above have considerable value in them
selves.
However, these steps will not by
themselves result in genuine centers
for learning. The mechanical bod>
shuffling is only one step in preparing
a more conducive atmosphere for total
education; the other is the purposeful
stimulation of intellectual activities
within the residence. The character and
quality of such activities, and their
relevance to students' concerns will be
come a crucial measure and determi
ned of the contribution that residence
is providing for its component mem
bers. The program for each residence
would decide for itself what input to
organize as a stimulus for the desired
enrichment of the quality of living that
contributes to the total education of
the individual and of the group's stu
dents, faculty, ideas, and the unending
list of resources of a university com
munity are all potential and powerful
inputs. The interaction of these compo
nents now creates the particular ex
citement of a university, but these
components are being comparatively
wasted in one of the areas in which
they could be the most effective ... the
living situation. The challenge of a
idential program is to organize and
bring the components together in the
most imaginative ways to utilize the
potential to the lullest.
One of the major areas of waste Is
student-faculty relations. Both the stu
donts and the faculty complain about
the distance and seeming disinterest of
the two groups. The section in the re
port which* deals with the faculty rol£
in the residence university is only a
very small start on the road to killing
this unhealthy and unproductive gap.
(See section on faculty residents.)
Too often students miss out on much
of the university experience because of
communication gaps. A face-to-face liv
ing unit is the most obvious place for
communication and contact between
students and faculty. Often the pre
vailing ethos of a dormitory can work
against this ground level communica
tion and antithetically to the explora
tory ventures of the individual. A dorm
which is oriented around a strictly so
cial purpose may even squelch the mo
tivation branding it as "intellectual," a
word that has been mistreated from all
directions in our society. While many
houses do not fall into this trap, there
is another pitfall of ruts and habit that
restricts the growing of experience in
a different way. The entire responsi
bility of taking advantage of the under
graduate experience is on the individ
ual. and some people find themselves
vorking against odds that would dis
courage the most aggressive. Fresh
man in particular belong to this cate
gory. They need to be exposed to the
broad ranges of opportunity but also
need help to make use of them. An
adolescent peer culture reinforcing high
school anti-intellectualism is not one
)f the best possible ways to meet this
need. The outside stimulus and help
will not best be provided by authority
figures who tell people what to do. or
beat off the anti-intellectual bullies. The
best assurance that free exchange and
.sharing of experience will occur will
be found in the atmosphere of the liv
ing group and in the character of its
leadership. A lively house where there
is a constant influx of new and differ
ent stimuli where all things that need
expression can find it, has the best
chance against apathy or unspoken
social taboos. House organized activi
ties such as art exhibits, musical per
formances, seminars, or small scale
lecture series suffer the same fate as
the individual's struggle for expres
sion and exploration. Not everyone
would want to participate and now
many of those who do want to can,
"but to those who find it difficult, en
couragement, not brick walls, should
be present in the tone of the house.
The possibility of organizing houses
around special interests has been sug
gested; experimentation is in order.
Houses with distinctive interests—fine
arts, social issues, foreign policy—may
well bring together students and fac
ulty from various disciplines who
could more meaningfully and readily
develop a learning community than a
house whose residents and loosely
affiliated faculty can only share pleas
antries. There would still be ample
diversity by virtue of differences in
personality, background, majors, ca
reer plans and so on, but there would
also be a major intellectual and social
oncern they all share. More detail
for this kind of program is discussed
in the specific proposal for next year.
The program of input is just the
beginning to what happens to the life
n a particular house. It provides pos
sibly a focus or direction as well as the
important underlying communication
and resource network of faculty, tutor,
and student. It must be emphasized
that what is going to happen in every
house is going to be determined most
by the people who live there. There
is a give-and-take natural exchange
between the program of ideas for the
living group and the group's response.
Reuniting the sphere of living as a
meaningful and integral part of a stu
dent's education in no way signifies
the creation of a twenty-four-hour
classroom. The residential education
urogram is not an extension of the
formal academic structure; it is its
complement. Although the opportun
,fy for experimenting with courses
given for credit should be open, it is
only one of the myriad of possibilities
with residential education. While
proper planning, particularly in the
■'election of good faculty, is necessary
it would be unrealistic to lose sight
of the interaction from the other di
rection. A structure too rigid would
kill the potential of a residential pro
gram just as the naive assumption
that body shuffling is the whole
answer.
Flexibility and spontaneity are key
<*ords in the concept of what a pro
gram should be prepared to provide.
Fvrit the program should be externally

flexible. The development of the house
spirit would depend upon the inter
action between the particular members
and particular faculty and tutors. This
matter of orientation or direction for
the house could bow with the interest
and demand for a particular living sit
uation. Some programs would last
longer than others, some undoubtedly
will be less successful, some would
evolve of themselves into a new area.
There is flexibility to let the good pro
grams grow and let the bad ones kill
themselves without bringing the entire
system to ruin. A diversity of choice
between residences could be main
tained.
There should in addition be an in
ternal flexibility within each group.
There must be room for growth and
change within the group. If topics were
to be the basis for a house, they would
always have to be picked with enough
latitude to allow each member of the
house to approach it in his own way.
This casua', unstructured opportunity
for close faculty contact speaks directly
to the need of students who are con
cerned with relevance as a criterion of
education, relevance to themselves or
to the contemporary world. There is
much opportunity for the student to
become very involved in the formation
and execution of his own education.
People who are involved and interested
in their own work tend to be more in
terested and able to contribute to the
work of others.
Another possibility that should be
included in the program is the oppor
tunity for experimentation with self
government. All sorts of opportunities
exist outside of the adoption of a hier
archy handed from above of president,
social chairman, etc. . .
There is much to be said for the edu
cationally valuable experience of learn
ing to live with ambiguity and without
automatically following tradition or
the dictates of an authority figure to
create the quality of life of a house
out of what is there ... to create an
educationally meaningful experience.
"The ideas sound great on paper!" is
the old comment at the outset of any
innovation with the rejoiner "But how
do you make it work in reality?" usu
ally not far behind. Why doesn't this
all happen now? Wilbur, the recom
mended site for next year's project,
already has many of the features out
lined in this report. "Is there really
going to be any significant difference?"
might be one question. The answer is
twofold. Some of the kinds of things
this report talks about are already
happening. If they weren't then there
would really be no use in trying to
maximize the interaction. But so much
more could be happening, and many of
the detrimental currents that run con
trary to the purpose of attending a
university could be reduced. All sys
tems are implemented by men. There
is not any system of law, morality or
of a residence university which can
overcome the fallibility of man. There
is not a magical formula implied in this
program, it rests very heavily on the
people who participate but so does
every other system. Good systems help
him along and the committee firmly
feels that a true residential university,
is a better system than one which only
claims to be and is somewhere in the
middle.
The people involved therefore are at
the core of the program. But their
effectiveness will depend to a large
degree upon how they see their role.
Their conception of their role in this
new system must undergo as much
fundamental reinterpretation as the
system itself.
How will the inertia of the present
resident conditions be overcome? Who
will set the tone, provide the mo
mentum, and contribute the leader
ship? Our first answer to these ques
tions is the students themselves. In any
residence system students will unde
niably be the major constituency.. But
how the resident staff can contribute
is also an important issue. At the pres
ent time Stanford has faculty residents,
tutors, resident assistants, and spon
sors. The role of each should be re
viewed.
Faculty Resident*
The committee would certainly not
deny the valuable contribution of the
faculty residents toward improving the
living situation at Stanford, but in
general, the faculty resident program
simply is not given the support neces
sary to tree Its members from -other

tasks and to allow them to devote
more time, thought and emphasis to
the residence education program. The
basic change would be that of increased
commitment to the living situation. The
primary responsibility of the faculty
resident should not be to the dorm di
rector or the administration, but to the
student within the living group or com
plex. To be effective, the faculty resi
dent must be willing to accept a de
manding and time consuming involve
ment in the living situation. His pres
ence there will be much more than a
face at meals or even that of a good
friend. Presumably the resident would
be a full time member of the faculty,
for the success of the residence pro
gram would greatly depend upon his
response to the intellectual needs of the
students. Doctoral candidates, coaches,
university officials, and administrators,
however, could still participate if they
would be willing to make the same
kind of commitment to the ideal of a
residence university. The interpersonal
factor is extremely important in this
kind of situation. Most every student
complains about the brilliant man who
can't give a good lecture. The same
argument will have to be taken into
account that not everyone can fulfill
this particular kind of a role. The fac
ulty resident must, above all, be sensi
tive to the interaction among students
in the group.
The things a faculty member could
contribute are bounded only by their
individual creativity but a few sug
gestions are in order.
1. In certain living units, seminars for
academic credit could be offered.
2. Directed reading could be made avail
able to certain students under the
resident.
3. Informal and noncredit seminars
should be encourage by the faculty
resident or when an idea came out
of the group he or some of his col
leagues could serve as resource per
son.
4. A student chairman and the faculty
resident could set up a meaningful
faculty associate program. The resi
dent can draw upon close friends and
colleagues which would supply an
internal identification missing in the
present program.
What would bring the faculty to par
ticipate in this program? Much of the
same dissatisfaction with student-fac
ulty relations that would bring the
students. Where something lively is
going on, something which the faculty
member is part there would not be
the embarassed ordeals that now take
place in dormitories on campus where
everyone involved is on their best and
most strained behavior. The living con
ditions would be similar to that of an
overseas campus though the professor
would not be required to drop his own
work or leave the center of his re
search. Class loads could be lessened
for the faculty participating because
they would be in essence only relocat
ing their teaching commitments, not
dropping them. They would have a
more flexible time schedule that might
be convenient to their purposes. This
position would also be in effect on a
rotating basis.
Resident Assistants and Tutors
The role of resident assistant should
be eliminated. In other words, we
would eliminate the role of the nice
guy disciplinarian, the liaison between
the administration and the students
who has been for too long forced into
an unfortunate position of hypocrisy.
As he is employed by the administra
tion he has an obligation to enforce
University policies, but if he is to be
at all effective with the students his
identification is with them. Too often
he has resolved the conflict by the
statement, "I don't care what you do,
just do it quietly so I don't see it."
Caught in this bind he has been in
effective as a man playing to two mas
ters. It is not enough to react to stu
dent needs and problems, for the role
we see must be one of creative action —
one of initiative and not merely re
sponse. Similarly, the present tutor
system is limited because its goal is
only to answer questions, not raise
them.
The present role of tutor, however,
is closer to our purpose than the RA's.
But this role must be expanded to be
effective. Thus, the idea of tutors
should be maintained, but its purpose
significantly broadened. Like faculty
residents > (and unlike RA's)' tutors

must have autonomy from primarily ad
ministrative policy and must be respon
sible primarily to the students below.
They should be linked to the resident
director, who is then responsible to the
administration. Although academic
assistance is undeniably important, tu
tors must do more than merely toot.
Their role should be to stimulate dis
cussion, to promote all types of inter
change, and to actively work towards
an educational atmosphere. At present
RA's and tutors tend to preserve rather
than promote and to be problem
solvers, rather than catalysts. The
tutor, like the faculty resident, must
approach his job with a new vitality
and commitment.
Sponsors
When the freshman class has been
entirely integrated into the university
community then the sponsor system
will become an anachronism. But until
that point the need remains and the
present system of sponsors and tutors
should be maintained.
There are two more important con
siderations before any system is put
Into operation. How will the faculty
and tutors be selected? And what are
the costs for the program as a whole?
These problems become relevant and
solvable only after the initial commit
ment and go ahead has been made.
Therefore discussion of these aspects
of the program will be included in
the proposal for next year.
VIII. Brief Assessment of Experience
At Other Institutions
While it is not our intention to base
the justification for our proposals on
the successes and failures of other in
stitutions with their necessarily dif
ferent circumstances, it is interesting
to note the results of a study con
ducted by the Faculty Committee on
Student Residences at Stanford in 1959.
Studying twenty-one similar universities
in this country they found that they
were about equally divided between
integrated and segregated freshman
living facilities. In general each school
seem satisfied with the system it then
had. However, while all of these with
the integrated system found it the most
workable, about 25 per cent of those
with segregated freshmen replied that
they were dissatisfied with their situ
ation and it certainly increases the
noisy freshman atmosphere which is
inimical to good study habits and con
ditions." Some schools reported that
the only reason for maintaining fresh
man segregation was pressure from
the fraternities who "objected stren
uously to placing their pledges under
the influence of hard bitten rugged in
dependents."
The many success of coeducational
housing on other campuses are too well
known to require documentation.
The institutions interviewed were
Cal Tech, Reed, Pembroke, Swarth
more, Oberlin, Pomona, Carleton, Rad
clifTe, Occidental, Ohio Wesleyan, Chi
cago, Brown, Dartmouth, Princeton,
Yale, Harvard, Northwestern, Washing
ton State, Oregon, Cornell, and Ohio
State.
IX. A Proposal:
The Wilbur Experiment
The committee has set forth its ar
guments for coeducational and inte
grated residences. It has suggested that
the residence should be a center of
intellectual life, and through residence
education the rigid separation of the
student's social and intellectual lives
could be ended. It remains for the com
mittee to propose how these aims can
be fulfilled at Stanford.
It is the feeling of the committee
that significant experimentation in resi
dence education is altogether feasible
for next year. There is a wide range
of possibilities. The committee initially
considered a massive scrambling of the
university residence pattern, convert
ing most dormitories on campus to
coeducation and integration. This pro
posal was rejected for two reasons:
(1) Full integration, or anything ap
proaching it, would at this time pro
duce an undesirable ratio of freshmen
to upperclass men. (2) It would be im
possible to supply the staff necessary
to introduce residence education in any
meaningful way if the scope of the
housing experiment is so broad.
The committee decided that its aims
could best be fulfilled by an experiment
of more limited scope. Instead of dras
tically overhauling the university resi
dence pattern, one dormitory complex
could be used as a rather large "pilot"
project, in which * Integratiorr and • eo
education could be complete and intel
lectual life could be given the proper
attention. Wilbur Hall is ideal for this
purpose. It is the largest complex on
campus, with space for approximately
720 people. It is divided into eight
houses, each of which constitutes a
separate identity unit. Each house has
an adjacent cottage for a faculty resi
dent and a tutorial room where semin
ars can be held.
The committee recommends that
next fall each Wilbur house be occu
pied by two floors of men and one
floor of women, and that each house
be integrated by class at a rate of one
freshman to three upperclassmen. Con
stituted as such, Wilbur Hall would be
the site of meaningful experimentation
in residential education.
The Wilbur experiment will of neces
sity affect some of the other university
residences. Freshman men will move to
Stern and Branner, retaining the spon
sor system in its present form. Fresh
man women will remain in Roble, with
sponsors, and those living in neither
Roble or Wilbur will be integrated with
upperclass women in Florence Moore.
Lagunita, Hoskins, and Toyon will be
unaffected. The remaining upperclass
men will live in three of the row
houses. The statistical breakdown is
as follows.
Total Frosh Upcl. Total Frosh Upcl.
Men Men Men W'ran W'mn Wmn
Wilbur 480 120 360 240 60 180
Stem 590 570 20
Branner 170 160 10
Roble 260 250 10
Florence
Moore 350 90 260
Lagunita 290 0 290
Hoskins 120 0 120
Toyon 200 0 200
Row
Houses (3)100 0 100
(5) 180 0 180
Totals 1540 850 690 1440 400 1040
(Note: If women are allowed to move
off campus, adjustments can be made
easily. If the number of women moving
off is under 180, an appropriate num
ber of row houses can be converted
from women to men. Compensation
can also be made by admitting more
freshman and transfer women. If

necessary the measures can be com
bined. )
Students will be chosen for the Wil
bur experiment on a draw basis. It is
reasonable to expect an excess demand
for on-campus housing by upperclass
men, since a new option is being of
fered that will presumably attract men
who presently or would otherwise live
off campus, or in fraternities. The com
ration of the upperclassmen's popu
lation in Wilbur would thus differ
from the present composition of Stem.
If women are allowed off campus, there
would be a greater possibility of satis
fying the demand for men's housing.
The likelihood of vacant dormitory
space, with the introduction of the
Wilbur option, is highly improbable.
The logistics of putting the bodies
into Wilbur for the pilot project is
only half of our task in our proposal.
The problems of staffing the complex
and from there working out feasible
programs is the next step. Hopefully
to make this pilot project a real step
toward achieving the residential uni
versity, as much of the general report
as possible will be included, only the
scope has changed not the purpose of
the program.
Selection for next year's faculty resi
dents could be turned over to a com
mittee composed of one faculty and
one student member of the ASSU
Housing Commission and two members
from the Dean of Students Office, with
the advice of the present Committee.
Once this task has been completed, the
faculty can participate in choosing the
tutors and drawing up more detailed
plans for the program.
The committee realizes that a com
mitment to this kind of residential
education will require an overt shift
in educational effort from the class
room and lab to the residence, with
both compensation for it and relief
from other teaching duties—and quite
probably the replacement of their
other more formal academic functions
by other personnel. We also realize
that there will be a budget problem,
but emphatically deny that worthwhile
educational goals should not be pro
posed and slated because of current
pragmatic limitations.
The committee hopes that, through

further study—best done in conjunc
tion with the study of education at
Stanford—that it will be possible to
rearrange and reemphasize the com
ponents of freshman education in such
a way that existing resources would
permit a serious upgrading of resi
dence education, and the possibility
that such education could replace some
aspects of the present program. This
might well allow the same total re
sources of money and people to meet
the desired objectives by shifting the
locale and method of teaching, rather
than just adding to the staff and pro
gram.
Presently in Wilbur there are three
sponsor rooms and one tutor room
which can accommodate the new tutors.
Hopefully as many of these rooms will
be used for that purpose, but if for
any reason four tutors per house is im
possible, then the rooms could be used
for offices which would at least bring
more graduate level contact into the
residence.
One possible suggestion for Wilbur's
eight houses next year would be to
have five of them centered around a
general theme, one international house,
and two left unstructured. There has
been much agitation for an interna
tional house on campus and many pro
posals have been drawn up. Five sug
gested topics for the theme houses are
"Religion and Society," "Literature and
Fine Arts," "Science and Human Prob
lems," "The Urban Threat," and "So
cial Change."
To take only one of these themes and
speculate what the given house of
faculty, tutors and students will make
of it is another of those endless first
steps in imagination potential. The
house that was using the topic "Science
and Human Problems," for example,
would bring in a diversity of fields
from the natural sciences to the hu
manities. Many of the poignant prob
lems facing students and faculty are
centered in this topic but the same
could probably be said in a different
context for each of the five topics. The
impact of technology on our economic
and social system, the moral contro
versy over the newest discoveries in
genetics, the myth of the scientific
method are all themes to be explored.

What happens to a world view when
scientific discoveries puncture com
fortable philosophies? What is time
and how does man control it and how
docs it control man? These are ques
tions to be asked. Above all, it is im
portant to remember that the direc
tion of intellectual thrust must not be
too well defined in advance. One of
the most valuable experiences for the
living group will be coming to grips
with the topic, deciding for themselves
how the general area should be ap
proached, and then proceeding to de
velop programs and structures on their
own.
The committee is highly enthusiastic
about the creative possibilities pre
sented by the Wilbur experiment—the
first step in the direction of a fully
integrated and coeducational residence.
If the experiment even approaches the
measure of success the committee en
visions, it could prove a major innova
tion in the history of American higher
education. A well developed program
of residential education offers a poten
tial of immeasurable dimension.
X. Correlation of this report with the
overall review of education at Stanford
The key problems of residence edu
cational stimulus and the kind of staff
and budget commitments necessary
need further specific elucidations which
the committee hopes can be under
taken by the Executive Committee for
the study of education at the earliest
opportunity, in order to agree on ob
jectives and make necessary staff and
financial plans for the Wilbur Project
to be able to start in the Fall of 1967.
The committee takes this oppor
tunity to thank the following people
for individual contributions to our
meetings: Dwight Clark, Dr. Lawrence
Thomas, Miss Sally Mahoney, Dr. Mar
tin Evans, Dick Williams, Mike Roster,
Howie Holmes, Doug Davis, Bob Gor
don, Dean Hind, and Dean Novak.
February 6, 1967
Subcommittee on the Freshmen Resi
dence Program ASSU Housing Com
mission. Barbara Levin, Judy Bader.
Barbara Warren, David Koval, Chris
topher Harte, Douglas Sorenson, Scott
Soames (Co-Chairman) Elizabeth
Cohen, B. Davie Napier, Max
Maurice M. Osborne Jr. (Co-Chairman).
Doubts of the ability of Stanford's
present educational system to provide
for the needs of its students, and speci
fic questions about the relevance of
the residence program in its present
form, have stimulated students, faculty,
and staff to seek more appropriate
solutions.
The A.S.S.U., concerned about the
quality of residential experience at
Stanford — particularly in contrast to
that at the Overseas Campuses —
created through its Legislature a Hous
ing Commission, one task of which was
to review and make recommendations
concerning the freshman residence
program in its relation to education.
At about the same time, Associate
Dean of Students Robert Gordon was
asked to present proposals for a new
model of freshman residential educa
tion.
Both A.S.S.U. and Dean Gordon al
most simultaneously appointed com
mittees in the early Fall of 1966 to ad
vise them in the making of recommen
dations in this important area, and
rather than continue a too-familiar pat
tern of separate committees working
independently (and often divergently)
it was decided to merge the two.
In the merger, the Dean's Advisory
Committee agreed to accept the A.S.S.U.
invitation to become an integral part,
of its group. Dean Gordon agreed to
accept the report of the entire group
in the same light as he would have the
recommendations of his originally ap
pointed committee, and the merged
group in turn agreed to attempt in
good faith to assist him in meeting his
deadlines and obligations as best it
could.
Despite particular questions existing
about the Sponsor system, the Commit
tee felt from the outset that to limit
its discussions and report to such par
ticulars, or to start out with them,
would be to avoid the main Issues sur
rounding ,the quality and meaning of

residential education at Stanford, par
ticularly the freshman program.
The Committee thus firmly decided
that it would start from a fresh con
sideration of the issues and principles
involved, relating its recommendations
to them. It was recognized that such
an approach would be time consuming,
that it might seem Utopian to some;
yet a critque and basic statement about
the ideas of a residence university
seemed vital for future planning and
growth.
At the same time, the practical ne
cessity for more immediate recommen
dations and action was realized. The
present report is in this sense a pre
liminary, or interim report, which at
tempts to set forth and justify some
practical recommendations for residence
programs that could be adopted in
1967-68 — steps within the framework
of progression towards a more ideal
situation.
The Case for the Residential Commu
nity — The Personal Committment to
Learning
The impossibility of considering the
freshman experience in isolation from
the life and purposes of the entire un
dergraduate program has been a ma
jor premise in the subcommittee's
study of the Freshman Residence Pro
gram. Two main assumptions underlie
this approach.
One is that the university experience,
as a whole, is only one part of the con
tinuum of the educational process, a
process which neither begins nor ends
at the university gates. The educational
ideals should be the same for all four
undergraduate years in terms of what
they declare for the growth of persons.
The freshman year is only a step in
a span of development, having a spe
cial function as the first step but not
a separate one.
The second is a new conception which
views the university as a community
for learning through personal, interac
,tjon, find development,. .nsp, of

all its facilities for education. This view
emphasizes that the classroom, library
or laboratory cannot — indeed does not
even now — have a monopoly on pro
viding for the education and develop
ment of students. Else, why a residen
tial university? Why not subcontract
all residential arrangements and avoid
hotel problems?
The Committee felt strongly that
there was urgent need for institutional
endorsement of the fact that without
growth and development in personal,
social, and emotional dimensions, the
achievements of intellect are shallow
and stand in isolation from the indivi
dual and his world. The conviction that
gives personal meaning to knowledge
is a product of direct human relation
ship, and we make far too little use
of its potential.
In a more settled and comfortable
past, with much greater mutuality of
expectations and values both between
peers and between generations, the ur
gency of such questions was less, the
scope more limited and the answers
more predictable. The bull-session quite
effectively handled many aspects of
this personal-social side of development.
For this, and other reasons, relatively
little formal attention to it was felt
to be necessary, aside from some for
mal lectures on hygiene, the evils of
sex and booze, and the Fundamental
Standard. After all, boys were (and
would be) boys, and pretty soon they'd
grow up into men, producers and fa
thers. Home and society would take
care somehow that they grew up right,
and the college would provide an ac
cepted transition station on the way,
some academic input, and try to keep
the lid on boyish spirit getting out of
hand.
By contrast today, for many students
questions about one's nature, and about
one's relationship to an uncertain
world, and about this world itself are
more insistent, and more pre-occupying
.before The V&iefttipns a#?, -real,

and require believable answers from
within the individual. And, until he can
find them, this quest, this preoccupa
tion has top priority, while academics
suffer through seeming less relevant.
And though there are many students
who are relatively unconcerned about
such questions, we feel their total edu
cation would be enriched if they could
be purposefully involved.
The history of formal didactic at
tempts to speak to these burning ques
tions is rather dismal, and all over the
country, there has been a steady atro
phy of required, and even of voluntary
courses relative to personal hygiene,
sex, morals, and behavior. Both stu
dents and educators sense that because
a viable set of personal ethics and
values just grow within the individual,
attempts simply to impose them from
without are relatively futile.
Not only have curricular approaches
to such questions atrophied (happi
ly!), but American education is nearing
the end of a decade in which the entire
necessity of addressing itself to the
problem of personal growth has been
quite deliberately rejected. Sputnik was
the symbol, and such spokesmen as
Hyman Rickover took up the cudgels,
with articulate and seathing denuncia
tions of "Education for Living" — of
concepts of "adjustment," and insisted,
along with many others, on intellectual
excellence (for "excellence" read "a
chievement") as the right, and only
purpose of education.
Growth of population; of national
wealth with its stimulus to upward so
cial mobility; increasing complexity
and diversity of knowledge with its
concommitant of faculty pre-occupa
tion and relatively-narrower fields; and
increased competition have sharpened
the pressures for achievement, leaving
even loss time, thought, or energy for
development as a person.
The need to pay most serious atten
tion to this is most keenly felt by many
studetitfi hy their eldprs.
There has been some re-emergence of
an expressed need for leadership and
cooperation in working out better ways
to assist and support the individual in
his personal education and develop
ment, and when students do not raise
these questions, their education should
raise them, and speak to them.
Unstructured and spontaneous stu
dent discussion, particularly at the
freshman level, is heavily-flavored with
the need to sort oneself out, but as it
now operates, it tends less to growth
than to its more traditional social func
tion of settling into "bird-of-a-feather"
groupings in which the individual
can find comfort and support for his
own sets of values and seekings. With
in this spontaneously-forming group
ings, the dialogue tends to become in
creasingly circular, the values increas
ingly exclusive, and there is decreased
permeability to fresh ideas and ex
perience.
In an educational situation where
concentration is placed on the formal
aspects of education there is an imbal
ance which produces distortion, which
too often takes the form of rejection
of the academic sphere as "irrelevant."
Another consequence is the dangerous
polarization of university life into two
worlds; that of the classroom, and that
of social life, setting them to work
against each other instead of with each
other toward the individual's goals. The
acceptance of the residence university
ideal as being vital to education can
be one important factor in keeping
the two worlds together and moving in
the same direction, whereas the pres
ent residence program presents too
many forces that divide living from
learning.
The Committee takes as self-evident
that a truly liberal education is in fact
liberating — in making both wider and
deeper the individual's ability to per
ceive, absorb, analyze, and choose in a
vastly-increasing array of people,
events, and issues, and not in forcing
the premature adoption of limited, and
constricting attitudes. In effect this
seems the necessity of the student's
continuous and repeated exposure to
and challenge by diversity of ideas, of
values, styles, and of course people.
It is here that the meaning of residen
tial education springs to life, for it of
fers potentially the best milieu for
daily face-to-face interaction with peers,
with older students, and faculty mem
bers of both sexes — offering diversity
of age, sex, discipline and values in
the highly personal way so necessary
for exposure to lead to involvement,
and knowledge to become commitment.
The necessity of direct personal in
teraction is most strongly endorsed by
the Committee, for it is the set of
values and mental attitudes formed in
such day-in, day-out exchange that set
tle most deeply into one's fiber. Thus
to narrow the range, or dilute the qual
ity of this exchange seems antiethical
to education. Kenneth Benne, in his
article "The Uses of Fraternity" states
in this regard, "People learn value sys
tems in the first instance as they form
relations with others. These relations
in turn develop norms with corres
ponding rationales which the individual
then internalizes. If people, young or
old, can build groups with standards
that reward and strengthen honest
self - expression and self - acceptance,
creativity, mutual helpfulness and the
capacity to cope with conflict, then the
members of such groups will assimilate
these values as conditions of member
ship."
Choice, and learning to choose ra
tionally, are important educational
tasks, but should not be forced on the
individual too hurriedly, without
enough exposure to a wide range of
choices, nor without some room for
trial and error.
In summary then, the Committee
firmly believes that:
1. As education is, or should be, a con
tinuum, the freshman year cannot
be considered in isolation from the
entire undergraduate program, and al
though it has a special function as
the first step, it is an integral part
of the whole.
2. There is a grave imbalance in the
university's educational emphasis,
which tends to widen the needless,
and in our view harmful, gap be
tween the getting of knowledge and
the important business of living.
3. The deepest personal and intellectual
cpncems of students — their rela
tionships to themselves, and to an

uncertain world, — are not receiving
the institutional recognition and ef
fort they deserve.
4. That people learn most deeply by
living, and by forming personal re
lationships, and that when the resi
dence program, as at present, is
oriented to bed, board, and social
needs, the opportunities for inter
nalizing intellectual knowledge and
values are meager, and the tenden
cies to reject academic values as per
sonally-irrelevant are reinforced.
5. That choice, and learning to choose
critically are central educational
goals, but that it must depend on
close and repeated exposure to a
wide range of ideas, values, styles,
and people — people of different
ages, disciplines, sexes, and back
grounds, — and not be prematurely
forced into constricting channels
based primarily on social and not in
tellectual values.
6. Such close exposure to diversity, over
sufficient time, and if taken as the
norm, would go far in preventing
the formation of narrowed and
sterotypic attitudes and thought —
the surest signs of the ill-educated
man.
7. The way in which students live very
directly affects the whole quality of
their education: this single principle
underpins the whole concept of the
residential university.
"THE FRESHMAN CONDITION"
The paraphrase above in intentional,
— and designed to point out that being
a freshman at Stanford, or anywhere,
is an intensely personal experience of
transition. Although the general ideals
of education apply equally, — and es
pecially, — to him, the freshman also
has attributes which make him special,
but not separate.
It is the feeling of this committee
that freshmen can and should receive
the benefit of special experiences de
signed for their particular problems.
The assumption that we would like to
question is whether this need for some
special orientation experiences necessi
tates their living in a segragated fash
ion. Although it is expedient from an
"efficiency" point of view, it may gen
erate excessive anxiety over perfor
mance in freshman courses and a rein
forcement for essentially juvenile
modes of facing college stresses. His
special attributes can be summed up as
follows:
A. He obviously needs early and reli
able information about his new com
munity — where things are, what he
is to do, and so forth.
B. He is making the transition most
traditionally accepted in America as
the line between family dependency
and personal autonomy.
In actuality, the line, if there is one,
is blurred, and varies greatly from one
freshman to another. In general, the
freshman comes equipped with the cre
dentials of previous achievement and
approval — hoping he will be accepted
in his new college world, and fearing
that he may not. At the same time he
hopes that his performance and life
will be freer and larger than before.
The freshman, more poignantly than
any other undergraduate, in his transi
tion from a narrower to a hopefully
wider identity, wants the understand
ing of his old world, personal accep
tance by the new — and fears he may
have neither.
He is thus enormously vulnerable,
and as Steve Hurlbut has written in
his excellent paper, is characterized by
a "pervasive anxiety." Until he has as
similated workable norms, he feels he's
got to satisfy some kind of external
standard, and is anxious until he does.
Some more specific stresses that tend
to promote anxiety are:
I.The sudden change of status that
comes from being taken out of a
high school situation where one is
enormously successful and being put
in a class of similar big frogs from
small ponds, and feeling that they
are tougher frogs than he is:
2. The doubt about being able to live up
to tough academic demands:
3. Doubts about his being accepted by
his peers — of both sexes;
4. Being away from home;
5. Confrontation with different reli
gious and social values than those
the student has learned in his family
and home community;
6. Ambivalence about authority, and
older peopje in general.
This araciety and vulnerability are by

no means bad in themselves — and in
deed offer the most fertile soil for cul
tivation of the seeking young mind.
But the thrust of this searching anxiety
is in essence social, and approval-seek
ing — and therefore related to persons
and social groups, or the winning of ac
ceptable symbols of achievement.
The Committee feels that the perva
sive, and expectable freshman anxiety
and search for some group identity is
a double-edged sword, with potential
for both regression and for growth.
On one side, if there is failure of
approval from home, or personal ac
ceptance at college, or fewer grade
points "in the bank" than expected,
anxiety may well become dysfunction
al, with consequences such as neurotic
disturbance, refusal to compete aca
demically, and even regressive and
anti-social group-adolescent behavior,
and the reinforcement of pre-college
values.
CRITIQUE OF THE PRESENT
FRESHMAN RESIDENCE PROGRAM
The Committee feels that too many
features of the present freshman resi
dence program serve:
1. To reinforce natural anxieties among
the newest members of the Univer
sity, and
2. To promote the seeking of solutions
to this anxiety that have little if any
thing to do with educational pur
poses, but tend to promote prema
ture and mutually exclusive social
groupings.
As he moves into a freshman resi
dence, he is thrown into close contact
with a large peer-group of greater
diversity in background, attitudes, and
talent than he is likely to have known.
And, because competition and fears of
failure are keenest among peers (par
ticularly of neophytes performing simi
lar tasks,) these differences within the
larger peer-group tend to move the stu
dent into protective subgroups of
peers with attitudes and pre-college
backgrounds similar to his own, within
which he finds support. In such mutual
ly-supportive social groups, the student
can arm himself and defend himself
psychologically against any new ideas
to which he is being exposed, from fel
low students, members of the opposite
sex, and his professors. Studies will
never be taken at all seriously but will
be dealt with in a purely cognitive
fashion, ingested for the purpose of
passing exams and discarded soon af
terwards. Under these conditions, we
may have done away with the prob
lems of anxiety, but are faced with the
possibility of at least two other un
desirable consequences, 1) His atti
tudes and values may remain totally
unquestioned throughout his college
career; and 2) a group devoted to de
fending itself against the climate of an
institution may exhibit anti-social char
acteristics of alienated people every
where.
That present groups formed for mu
tual support emerge after a limited
exposure to new, and possible better
models, is certainly true, and groupings
tend to occur along pre-college lines
and values, or in rebellion against
them.
The present segregated freshman
residence situation also tends:
3. To promote the seeking of achieve
ment symbols (i.e. grades) rather
than knowledge of self or substance;
4. By a residence administration seen
as primarily regulatory and manger
ial, to aggravate the natural ambi
valence of freshmen towards author
ity with results ranging from thought
less docility to destructive rebellion;
or apathetic alienation;
5. To provide too much pressure for
distortion and ritualization of rela
tionships between the sexes — the
"dating syndrome" — and a poverty
of opportunities for simple, friendly
interaction of people, a lack fre
quently deplored by both freshmen
and upperclassmen.
Both architecture and group pres
sures, as well as well-institutionalized
pressures for achieving good grades
in a heavy curriculum conspire to rob
the freshman of privacy — both physi
cal privacy, and temporal privacy; i.e.
some time simply to be himself, to spin
his wheels, and to think, with room for
trial and error.
There is, at least in Wilbur, no at
mosphere in the dining halls in the
least conducive to conversation — and
for some reason, plastic and formica
encourage one to get In and out fast,

with emphasis on feeding the face, but
none on nourishing friendship.
All of these (observable) results are
Inimical to the purposes of stimulating
interest in new subjects, of promoting
constructive reaction to diversity, of
the discouragement of stereotypic
thinking and behavior, and of trust in
older people as human beings.
More importantly, the positive po
tentials of freshman vulnerability go
relatively untapped — or are being tap
ped for outworn purposes. For this
vulnerability is personal, and if pro
vided with daily personal interaction
with a wide range of interesting
people of different ages and different
disciplines, there is more than a good
chance that Stanford freshmen would
attach their enthusiasms and their
hearts to the new models they need
and seek — models of greater depth
and diversity, but providing the identi
ty and security they need.
The interaction between freshman
men in Wilbur and the Faculty Resi
dents has varied greatly in its intensity
and impact — with instances of great
fruitfulness, or relative neutrality and
harmony, and a very few of a truly
negative quality.
Faculty Associates to freshman resi
dences have often provided important
personal interactions between fresh
men and the faculty — but just as
often these contacts have been super
ficial and ritualized.
Sponsors, while providing the great
est impact in personal exchange, pre
sent, because of their small number,
relatively limited contact with upper
classmen's values and experiences.
While all these personal contacts in
the freshman residences do in fact en
rich the education of many freshmen,
the other fact remains that there are
simply not enough such contacts, nor
sufficient support and time for these
few people to give residential educa
tion the emphasis it deserves.
EVOLUTION OF THE PRESENT
FRESHMAN RESIDENCE PROGRAM
Whatever rationalizations may be
adduced in support of the present
freshman residence program, it ap
pears to the Committee that it is in
large measure a holdover from an
earlier set of norms — norms that re
ceived wide acceptance and support in
those times, but that are under serious
question *oday.
In the Teens, the Twenties, and even
well into the Thirties, there was more
general acceptance (in society at large
as well as in the university commu
nity) of a particular hierarchical order,
and the particular authority structure
such an order implies. One tended to
know where one stood in relation to
the order at any given period, and to
be confident that one would ascend the
ladder by predictable steps.
Perhaps because of the relative sta
bility of the social order, personal de
velopment was thought of more along
the lines of advancement within that
order — with of course the acquisition
of enough "knowledge" and academic
polish to secure preference in vocations
and the status of a college-educated
man. It was important in itself to be
a senior, or for that matter an upper
classman, and the class structure had
in itself real meaning to the student.
Hence, the development of class spirit
and cohesiveness was valued, encour
aged, and ritualized. Even the major
steps in progression along the well
worn rungs were ritualized in such
rites of passage as the annual "Frosh-
Soph War," a ritual which would have
been impossible had there been no such
open class distinction.
The residence arrangements prob
ably reflected an accept? e of this
order according to social and culture
values of the day, and were aimed at
initiating the freshman into them. A
deliberate segration of the neophyte —
either by residence, by distinguishing
badges (viz. the "Beanie"), by restric
tion of privilege, or by combinations
of these has in many human organiza
tions, served to reinforce acculturation
to desired social and behavioral norms,
and whether anyone was purposefully
aware of this or not, such considera
tions surely operated in freshman resi
dential segragation. Aside from "home
work" performed in a dorm, there was
a rather strict geographic separation
of intellectual-academic concerns and
the personal-social sphere. The class
room and laboratory (and one's closed
~oom or the stacks) were meant for
the'one — while the dorm was really
for the other, and largely designed for
it.
The early history of the sponsor
program, when Encina Hall was the
freshman men's dorm, illustrates well
its use as an instrument for indoctri
nation of the "hapless Frosh" into pre
vailing upperclassmen's values.
Most sponsors wore a block "S", and
embodied a prevailing ideal of social
and athletic prowess, coupled with a
sense of loyalty to the group, respect
for authority, and an obligation to be
exemplary to their potential succes
sors. As recently as 1955, the effective
ness of a sponsor was measured, among
other things, by the percentage of his
charges attending the pregame rallies
and intercollegiate games.
Most sponsors were also fraternity
men, and another measure of his suc
cess as a sponsor was the number of
his freshmen pledged. For the spon
sors, there was little conflict involved
in serving simultaneously the fresh
men, one's own upperclassman values,
and those of the institution and its
authorities, for all constituents had
pretty much the same understanding
of the system, and of each of their
places within it.
In the intervening years, particularly
those since World War 11, there have
been profound changes in the social
order — a disruption of settled commu
nity, sharpened preoccupations with
material competition, and a culture less
and less sure of where it stood, or what
it believed in. Particularly among those
intelligent enough to attend such col
leges as Stanford, there has been in
creasing criticism of existing institu
tions which seem to them to produce
as leaders men with narrowed vision,
preoccupation with power, and too
little time or love for people. In this
climate of malaise, and in the absence
of once tacitly-held assurances, the
young person's search for personal
identity, relevance, and belief has
emerged as a very important difference
between many students of today and
of the previous generation, and again
underscores the vital importance of the
living group experience.
Despite some expressed dissatisfac
tions with the existing sponsor system,
the sponsors and a few feculty resi
dents at Wilbur were quite probably
the first to sense both this new and
urgent need among the freshmen (and
of course in themselves,) and that the
approach to it had to be met at the
level of day-in, day-out personal inter
action.
The evolution of the present sponsor
system has been a response both to
the growing need for attention to per
sonal education and development, and
to the need to substitute a drive for
continuous search and openness for the
more comfortable, but rather water
tight, social groupings which they saw
taking place.
For the past few years, the sponsors
have been the real pioneers in residen
ital education in the freshman resi
dence program. To condemn them as
"politically motivated" or irresponsible
seems a rather defensive and negative
reaction to the admitted mistakes of
a few members, and more importantly
fails to recognize that, without much
help or understanding, they are on the
track of something very important.
There have, to be sure, been other
efforts in the direction of residential
education for freshmen — relatively
cautious additions which have been in
the general direction of enriching per
sonal experience and contact in the.
residences, and may represent an in
choate recognition of this need.
Such additions have been the Facul
ty Residents, the Faculty Associates,
the Student Associates — at first men,
later women — and later, more free
dom for dining exchanges. More for
mally, in-residence seminars, guests-in
residence, panel discussions, and even
classes have been introduced.
But the former additions (with the
exception of a few Faculty Residents)
have in general provided only super
ficial interactions, while the latter
(again with a few notable exceptions)
have borne little relation to life and
living education other than physical
proximity. There is a heavy implica
tion of the mere introduction of more
academics into residences — while the
.ru#ot iT.nortant questions to students
go, for the most part, unanswered.
Th< present freshmen residence pro
gram, in its segregation by class, by

sex, by its continued reinforcement of
separation of living from learning, is
anachronistic, and reflects values that
have become less relevant and ideas that
are no longer true — such as assump
tions that satisfactory personal devel
opment takes care of itself within an
accepted and orderly framework, (of
which the freshman class is one clear
step, houses and all); that personal
education and development are irrele
vant to, or at least peripheral to the
purposes of "Higher Education"; that
mutually-deaf social groupings are ac
ceptable parts of the social mosaic —
when the fact of the matter is that we
are badly failing to meet these now
paramount questions. Despite our be
ginning attentions to this need, the
main thrust of the freshman resi
dence program and the academic pro
gram, still tends to leave the freshman
alone in his search and to force him
into protective groupings.
FRESHMAN IN3PEORATION INTO
UNIVERSITY IJFE
As discussed above, the Committee
feels strongly that the present segre
gation of freshmen reflects values no
longer taken seriously, reinforces the
separation of learning from living
(with impoverishment of both), height
ens some dysfunctional anxieties, and
tends to force premature and relative
ly narrow security groupings, rein
forces the artificiality of contact be
tween the sexes, and alienates students
from the faculty.
Thus, segregation is in itself a cen
tral problem, and, of course, the alter
natives must be aimed at integration
of the freshman in one or more ways.
A. Coeducational Housing
As noted earlier, a major problem
for freshmen is the difficulty of estab
lishing relationships with members of
the opposite sex on any basis other
than a social or dating level. For fresh
man men, the problem is especially
acute, manifesting itself in a heighten
ing anxiety, increased insecurity, and
frustration. The institution of a sys
tem of coeducational housing would
not only ameliorate the undesirable so
cial position of freshman men but also
provide an atmosphere conducive to
more natural (spontaneous) and per
sonal relationships. Upperclassmen al
so face similar problems as the results
of a segragated housing system, and
they too could gain much from having
the option of a coeducational residence
program.
That such a program is both prac
tical and desirable is supported by the
acknowledged success of the overseas
campus program as a living and learn
ing experience. In addition, the appar
ent success of the Grove Project as a
coeducational residence suggests that
coeducation can be successful on the
home campus.
The committee believes that, in the
long run, coeducational housing should
be the prevailing, although not exclu
sive, pattern for residential education
at Stanford, and that significant steps
can and should be taken toward this
goal during the coming year, 1967-68.
Although some houses segregated by
sex should be retained for these stu
dents who do not wish to live in a co
educational residence, a major effort
should be directed toward providing
coeducational housing in its most sig
nificant sense, men and women living
in the same house. Even these houses
which remain segregated could be
placed in juxtaposition to increase the
interaction among men and women.
The goal of a residence housing both
men and women would be most effect
ively realized if the ratio is approxi
mately 1:1. Although the 1:1 ratio Is
most desirable, a ratio of 2:1 would,
we feel, be successful.
As a long range goal the Committee
recommends changing of th« admis
sions ratio to one that is closer to 1:1
as a step towards this ideal.
B. Integration of classes:
As discussed more fully in Section
111 of this report, the freshman year is
a period of growth in which freshmen
must adjust to what for many of them
is a totally new culture, with new and
demanding standards. This situation re
quires a certain amount of social sup
port to prevent excessive and destruc
tive anxiety.
The committee is convinced that the
freshman residence program too often
promotes a seeurity that reduces expo
sure to challenging and growth-moti
vating aspects of university life, there
by retarding development, rather than

preparing the freshman to meet the
challenges which are in a large mea
sure responsible for his insecurity. In
addition, individual anxieties often re
inforce each other to the detriment of
all concerned.
While it is agreed that there is val
uable support and learning through
contact with others engaged in the
same experience, this by no means re
quires that most of one's contacts be
freshmen, nor does it exclude the pos
sibility or desirability of living in con
tact with others.
In a maximally integrated system in
which freshmen constitute approxi
mately 30 per cent of the population,
reinforcement of pre-college values
would be healthily reduced, while
freshmen, still pursuing similar curri
cula, would not suffer from a dearth of
contact and interaction with other
freshmen. In a fully integrated system,
the freshman could contribute to the
atmosphere of the residence, but could
not dominate it. Social support would
be provided not only by contact with
other freshmen, but also by the pres
ence of upperclassmen who have gone
through similar experiences and who
can contribute to the freshman's sense
of social support both by advice or ex
ample and by providing living evidence
that students actually survive the
freshmen year. This system would, of
course, have the further advantage of
more fully orienting freshmen to the
challenges and opportunities of the
university, a need which can be only
partially fulfilled by the present spon
sor system.
C. Partial Integration
In the preceding discussion the mini
mum ratio of upperclassmen to fresh
men in an integrated residence is as
sumed to be well in excess of 1:1. Any
system of partial integration with ra
tios well below this minimum faces se
vere difficulties:
1. Although the population would be
enriched by the addition of more ex
perienced upperclass models, fresh
men would still dominate the dormi
tory; the balance between security
and growth would not be significant
ly changed.
2. Under one suggestion for partial in
tegration offered by Dean Gordon's
staff, upperclassmen would essential
ly be guests whose rooms happened
to be in a freshman dormitory. It is
difficult to understand what would
motivate 147 upperclassmen to accept
such a position, or why they would
feel any dedication to close personal
interaction with the freshmen in an
educational sense.
3. The sponsor system is successful
largely because a few individuals are
committed to making the best of an
unfortunate living situation for
freshmen. It is not clear that the sub
stitution of five guests for one spon
sor dedicated to working with fresh
men is desirable.
4. Partial integration in itself has never
been suggested as an optimal resi
dence system, and it is not clear that
it is a desirable step toward total
integration. The committee is con
vinced that change for its own sake
is an unsound policy at any stage in
the development of a more viable
residence system.
Freshmen have the most to gain in
a campus-wide residence program
founded on the principles of co-educa
tion and integration. The institution of
this program requires not only the
support of freshmen, but also that of
upperclassmen. It could be argued that
upperclassmen would not want to give
up their present housing system. In
answer to this objection three points
can be made:
1. It is not clear that upperclassmen
are satisfied with the present sys
tem. Every spring quarter freshmen
express dissatisfaction with the hous
ing alternatives open to them: the
success of the overseas program as
a living experience has prompted
many to call for a more desirable
program at Stanford at-Stanford;
there were five applicants for each
place in the Grove Project, and if
the seminar hadn't been required
there would have been more upper
classmen seeking this exciting new
living alternative.
2. Tn our model of a fully integrated,
coeducational house, the percentage
of freshmen living in should be kept
well below 50 per cent. Freshmen
could contribute their real enthusi
asm and the challenge of their ques
tions without dominating the houses,

so that integration would benefit
both freshmen and upperclassmen.
3. In our residence program some inde
pendent npperclass houses would re
main, if there were a demand for
them. We believe that most students
would choose to live in a coed, inte
grated house, however, if some stu
dents wished something akin to the
present system such alternatives
would be open to them. The assump
tion we are making is that the new
residenco opportunities will sell them
selves.
E. Diversity and Self-Selection
Diversity among housing alternatives
is desirable. In addition, diversity with
in each house must be maintained to
avoid provincialism within the various
alternatives. Free choice, particularly
too early in the college career, among
various living styles will eventually
produce self-selective, provincial group
ings which will contradict the ideal
of developing acceptance of individual
differences within the residence. Three
points can be made to this problem:
1. No house needs to represent a cross
section of the student body. When
too great diversity exists in a living
group, cohesiveness is lost and frag
mentation takes the form of break
ing up into small sub-groups between
which little communication exists.
Therefore, some commonality, espe
cially by interests, is desirable.
2. It may not be the case that giving
students free choice among really
worthwhile alternatives will result
in serious problems of self-selection.
At any rate, it will take time for this
to happen and if indeed problems do
arise, we should be able to deal with
them early.
3. Assuming that such problems do
arise and call for some restriction of
free choice, one possible solution
would be to limit the amount of time
that an individual could live in a par
ticular residence. By encouraging
switching and moving among stu
dents, no system would be allowed
to lock itself in and stagnate.
VII. The Tone and Character of the
Living Group: Staff and Program
The residential components of most
universities are now basically eating
and sleeping facilities, structurally like
barracks, motels, or high-rise Hiltons,
surrounded by parking lots. To become
a truly residential university, the resi
dence hall must become a center of
learning and development equal in im
portance to the lecture hall. Ideally
their staffing, planning, and adminis
tration should be the responsibility of
faculty members rather than housing
directors or business offices.
While Stanford now is a far cry from
the suggested ideal of a residence uni
versity, many steps have been pro
posed which work toward the ideal. In
tegration by class and co-education are
two strong recommendations made by
the committee, which as discussed
above have considerable value in them
selves.
However, these steps will not by
themselves result in genuine centers
for learning. The mechanical bod>
shuffling is only one step in preparing
a more conducive atmosphere for total
education; the other is the purposeful
stimulation of intellectual activities
within the residence. The character and
quality of such activities, and their
relevance to students' concerns will be
come a crucial measure and determi
ned of the contribution that residence
is providing for its component mem
bers. The program for each residence
would decide for itself what input to
organize as a stimulus for the desired
enrichment of the quality of living that
contributes to the total education of
the individual and of the group's stu
dents, faculty, ideas, and the unending
list of resources of a university com
munity are all potential and powerful
inputs. The interaction of these compo
nents now creates the particular ex
citement of a university, but these
components are being comparatively
wasted in one of the areas in which
they could be the most effective ... the
living situation. The challenge of a
idential program is to organize and
bring the components together in the
most imaginative ways to utilize the
potential to the lullest.
One of the major areas of waste Is
student-faculty relations. Both the stu
donts and the faculty complain about
the distance and seeming disinterest of
the two groups. The section in the re
port which* deals with the faculty rol£
in the residence university is only a
very small start on the road to killing
this unhealthy and unproductive gap.
(See section on faculty residents.)
Too often students miss out on much
of the university experience because of
communication gaps. A face-to-face liv
ing unit is the most obvious place for
communication and contact between
students and faculty. Often the pre
vailing ethos of a dormitory can work
against this ground level communica
tion and antithetically to the explora
tory ventures of the individual. A dorm
which is oriented around a strictly so
cial purpose may even squelch the mo
tivation branding it as "intellectual," a
word that has been mistreated from all
directions in our society. While many
houses do not fall into this trap, there
is another pitfall of ruts and habit that
restricts the growing of experience in
a different way. The entire responsi
bility of taking advantage of the under
graduate experience is on the individ
ual. and some people find themselves
vorking against odds that would dis
courage the most aggressive. Fresh
man in particular belong to this cate
gory. They need to be exposed to the
broad ranges of opportunity but also
need help to make use of them. An
adolescent peer culture reinforcing high
school anti-intellectualism is not one
)f the best possible ways to meet this
need. The outside stimulus and help
will not best be provided by authority
figures who tell people what to do. or
beat off the anti-intellectual bullies. The
best assurance that free exchange and
.sharing of experience will occur will
be found in the atmosphere of the liv
ing group and in the character of its
leadership. A lively house where there
is a constant influx of new and differ
ent stimuli where all things that need
expression can find it, has the best
chance against apathy or unspoken
social taboos. House organized activi
ties such as art exhibits, musical per
formances, seminars, or small scale
lecture series suffer the same fate as
the individual's struggle for expres
sion and exploration. Not everyone
would want to participate and now
many of those who do want to can,
"but to those who find it difficult, en
couragement, not brick walls, should
be present in the tone of the house.
The possibility of organizing houses
around special interests has been sug
gested; experimentation is in order.
Houses with distinctive interests—fine
arts, social issues, foreign policy—may
well bring together students and fac
ulty from various disciplines who
could more meaningfully and readily
develop a learning community than a
house whose residents and loosely
affiliated faculty can only share pleas
antries. There would still be ample
diversity by virtue of differences in
personality, background, majors, ca
reer plans and so on, but there would
also be a major intellectual and social
oncern they all share. More detail
for this kind of program is discussed
in the specific proposal for next year.
The program of input is just the
beginning to what happens to the life
n a particular house. It provides pos
sibly a focus or direction as well as the
important underlying communication
and resource network of faculty, tutor,
and student. It must be emphasized
that what is going to happen in every
house is going to be determined most
by the people who live there. There
is a give-and-take natural exchange
between the program of ideas for the
living group and the group's response.
Reuniting the sphere of living as a
meaningful and integral part of a stu
dent's education in no way signifies
the creation of a twenty-four-hour
classroom. The residential education
urogram is not an extension of the
formal academic structure; it is its
complement. Although the opportun
,fy for experimenting with courses
given for credit should be open, it is
only one of the myriad of possibilities
with residential education. While
proper planning, particularly in the
■'election of good faculty, is necessary
it would be unrealistic to lose sight
of the interaction from the other di
rection. A structure too rigid would
kill the potential of a residential pro
gram just as the naive assumption
that body shuffling is the whole
answer.
Flexibility and spontaneity are key
<*ords in the concept of what a pro
gram should be prepared to provide.
Fvrit the program should be externally

flexible. The development of the house
spirit would depend upon the inter
action between the particular members
and particular faculty and tutors. This
matter of orientation or direction for
the house could bow with the interest
and demand for a particular living sit
uation. Some programs would last
longer than others, some undoubtedly
will be less successful, some would
evolve of themselves into a new area.
There is flexibility to let the good pro
grams grow and let the bad ones kill
themselves without bringing the entire
system to ruin. A diversity of choice
between residences could be main
tained.
There should in addition be an in
ternal flexibility within each group.
There must be room for growth and
change within the group. If topics were
to be the basis for a house, they would
always have to be picked with enough
latitude to allow each member of the
house to approach it in his own way.
This casua', unstructured opportunity
for close faculty contact speaks directly
to the need of students who are con
cerned with relevance as a criterion of
education, relevance to themselves or
to the contemporary world. There is
much opportunity for the student to
become very involved in the formation
and execution of his own education.
People who are involved and interested
in their own work tend to be more in
terested and able to contribute to the
work of others.
Another possibility that should be
included in the program is the oppor
tunity for experimentation with self
government. All sorts of opportunities
exist outside of the adoption of a hier
archy handed from above of president,
social chairman, etc. . .
There is much to be said for the edu
cationally valuable experience of learn
ing to live with ambiguity and without
automatically following tradition or
the dictates of an authority figure to
create the quality of life of a house
out of what is there ... to create an
educationally meaningful experience.
"The ideas sound great on paper!" is
the old comment at the outset of any
innovation with the rejoiner "But how
do you make it work in reality?" usu
ally not far behind. Why doesn't this
all happen now? Wilbur, the recom
mended site for next year's project,
already has many of the features out
lined in this report. "Is there really
going to be any significant difference?"
might be one question. The answer is
twofold. Some of the kinds of things
this report talks about are already
happening. If they weren't then there
would really be no use in trying to
maximize the interaction. But so much
more could be happening, and many of
the detrimental currents that run con
trary to the purpose of attending a
university could be reduced. All sys
tems are implemented by men. There
is not any system of law, morality or
of a residence university which can
overcome the fallibility of man. There
is not a magical formula implied in this
program, it rests very heavily on the
people who participate but so does
every other system. Good systems help
him along and the committee firmly
feels that a true residential university,
is a better system than one which only
claims to be and is somewhere in the
middle.
The people involved therefore are at
the core of the program. But their
effectiveness will depend to a large
degree upon how they see their role.
Their conception of their role in this
new system must undergo as much
fundamental reinterpretation as the
system itself.
How will the inertia of the present
resident conditions be overcome? Who
will set the tone, provide the mo
mentum, and contribute the leader
ship? Our first answer to these ques
tions is the students themselves. In any
residence system students will unde
niably be the major constituency.. But
how the resident staff can contribute
is also an important issue. At the pres
ent time Stanford has faculty residents,
tutors, resident assistants, and spon
sors. The role of each should be re
viewed.
Faculty Resident*
The committee would certainly not
deny the valuable contribution of the
faculty residents toward improving the
living situation at Stanford, but in
general, the faculty resident program
simply is not given the support neces
sary to tree Its members from -other

tasks and to allow them to devote
more time, thought and emphasis to
the residence education program. The
basic change would be that of increased
commitment to the living situation. The
primary responsibility of the faculty
resident should not be to the dorm di
rector or the administration, but to the
student within the living group or com
plex. To be effective, the faculty resi
dent must be willing to accept a de
manding and time consuming involve
ment in the living situation. His pres
ence there will be much more than a
face at meals or even that of a good
friend. Presumably the resident would
be a full time member of the faculty,
for the success of the residence pro
gram would greatly depend upon his
response to the intellectual needs of the
students. Doctoral candidates, coaches,
university officials, and administrators,
however, could still participate if they
would be willing to make the same
kind of commitment to the ideal of a
residence university. The interpersonal
factor is extremely important in this
kind of situation. Most every student
complains about the brilliant man who
can't give a good lecture. The same
argument will have to be taken into
account that not everyone can fulfill
this particular kind of a role. The fac
ulty resident must, above all, be sensi
tive to the interaction among students
in the group.
The things a faculty member could
contribute are bounded only by their
individual creativity but a few sug
gestions are in order.
1. In certain living units, seminars for
academic credit could be offered.
2. Directed reading could be made avail
able to certain students under the
resident.
3. Informal and noncredit seminars
should be encourage by the faculty
resident or when an idea came out
of the group he or some of his col
leagues could serve as resource per
son.
4. A student chairman and the faculty
resident could set up a meaningful
faculty associate program. The resi
dent can draw upon close friends and
colleagues which would supply an
internal identification missing in the
present program.
What would bring the faculty to par
ticipate in this program? Much of the
same dissatisfaction with student-fac
ulty relations that would bring the
students. Where something lively is
going on, something which the faculty
member is part there would not be
the embarassed ordeals that now take
place in dormitories on campus where
everyone involved is on their best and
most strained behavior. The living con
ditions would be similar to that of an
overseas campus though the professor
would not be required to drop his own
work or leave the center of his re
search. Class loads could be lessened
for the faculty participating because
they would be in essence only relocat
ing their teaching commitments, not
dropping them. They would have a
more flexible time schedule that might
be convenient to their purposes. This
position would also be in effect on a
rotating basis.
Resident Assistants and Tutors
The role of resident assistant should
be eliminated. In other words, we
would eliminate the role of the nice
guy disciplinarian, the liaison between
the administration and the students
who has been for too long forced into
an unfortunate position of hypocrisy.
As he is employed by the administra
tion he has an obligation to enforce
University policies, but if he is to be
at all effective with the students his
identification is with them. Too often
he has resolved the conflict by the
statement, "I don't care what you do,
just do it quietly so I don't see it."
Caught in this bind he has been in
effective as a man playing to two mas
ters. It is not enough to react to stu
dent needs and problems, for the role
we see must be one of creative action —
one of initiative and not merely re
sponse. Similarly, the present tutor
system is limited because its goal is
only to answer questions, not raise
them.
The present role of tutor, however,
is closer to our purpose than the RA's.
But this role must be expanded to be
effective. Thus, the idea of tutors
should be maintained, but its purpose
significantly broadened. Like faculty
residents > (and unlike RA's)' tutors

must have autonomy from primarily ad
ministrative policy and must be respon
sible primarily to the students below.
They should be linked to the resident
director, who is then responsible to the
administration. Although academic
assistance is undeniably important, tu
tors must do more than merely toot.
Their role should be to stimulate dis
cussion, to promote all types of inter
change, and to actively work towards
an educational atmosphere. At present
RA's and tutors tend to preserve rather
than promote and to be problem
solvers, rather than catalysts. The
tutor, like the faculty resident, must
approach his job with a new vitality
and commitment.
Sponsors
When the freshman class has been
entirely integrated into the university
community then the sponsor system
will become an anachronism. But until
that point the need remains and the
present system of sponsors and tutors
should be maintained.
There are two more important con
siderations before any system is put
Into operation. How will the faculty
and tutors be selected? And what are
the costs for the program as a whole?
These problems become relevant and
solvable only after the initial commit
ment and go ahead has been made.
Therefore discussion of these aspects
of the program will be included in
the proposal for next year.
VIII. Brief Assessment of Experience
At Other Institutions
While it is not our intention to base
the justification for our proposals on
the successes and failures of other in
stitutions with their necessarily dif
ferent circumstances, it is interesting
to note the results of a study con
ducted by the Faculty Committee on
Student Residences at Stanford in 1959.
Studying twenty-one similar universities
in this country they found that they
were about equally divided between
integrated and segregated freshman
living facilities. In general each school
seem satisfied with the system it then
had. However, while all of these with
the integrated system found it the most
workable, about 25 per cent of those
with segregated freshmen replied that
they were dissatisfied with their situ
ation and it certainly increases the
noisy freshman atmosphere which is
inimical to good study habits and con
ditions." Some schools reported that
the only reason for maintaining fresh
man segregation was pressure from
the fraternities who "objected stren
uously to placing their pledges under
the influence of hard bitten rugged in
dependents."
The many success of coeducational
housing on other campuses are too well
known to require documentation.
The institutions interviewed were
Cal Tech, Reed, Pembroke, Swarth
more, Oberlin, Pomona, Carleton, Rad
clifTe, Occidental, Ohio Wesleyan, Chi
cago, Brown, Dartmouth, Princeton,
Yale, Harvard, Northwestern, Washing
ton State, Oregon, Cornell, and Ohio
State.
IX. A Proposal:
The Wilbur Experiment
The committee has set forth its ar
guments for coeducational and inte
grated residences. It has suggested that
the residence should be a center of
intellectual life, and through residence
education the rigid separation of the
student's social and intellectual lives
could be ended. It remains for the com
mittee to propose how these aims can
be fulfilled at Stanford.
It is the feeling of the committee
that significant experimentation in resi
dence education is altogether feasible
for next year. There is a wide range
of possibilities. The committee initially
considered a massive scrambling of the
university residence pattern, convert
ing most dormitories on campus to
coeducation and integration. This pro
posal was rejected for two reasons:
(1) Full integration, or anything ap
proaching it, would at this time pro
duce an undesirable ratio of freshmen
to upperclass men. (2) It would be im
possible to supply the staff necessary
to introduce residence education in any
meaningful way if the scope of the
housing experiment is so broad.
The committee decided that its aims
could best be fulfilled by an experiment
of more limited scope. Instead of dras
tically overhauling the university resi
dence pattern, one dormitory complex
could be used as a rather large "pilot"
project, in which * Integratiorr and • eo
education could be complete and intel
lectual life could be given the proper
attention. Wilbur Hall is ideal for this
purpose. It is the largest complex on
campus, with space for approximately
720 people. It is divided into eight
houses, each of which constitutes a
separate identity unit. Each house has
an adjacent cottage for a faculty resi
dent and a tutorial room where semin
ars can be held.
The committee recommends that
next fall each Wilbur house be occu
pied by two floors of men and one
floor of women, and that each house
be integrated by class at a rate of one
freshman to three upperclassmen. Con
stituted as such, Wilbur Hall would be
the site of meaningful experimentation
in residential education.
The Wilbur experiment will of neces
sity affect some of the other university
residences. Freshman men will move to
Stern and Branner, retaining the spon
sor system in its present form. Fresh
man women will remain in Roble, with
sponsors, and those living in neither
Roble or Wilbur will be integrated with
upperclass women in Florence Moore.
Lagunita, Hoskins, and Toyon will be
unaffected. The remaining upperclass
men will live in three of the row
houses. The statistical breakdown is
as follows.
Total Frosh Upcl. Total Frosh Upcl.
Men Men Men W'ran W'mn Wmn
Wilbur 480 120 360 240 60 180
Stem 590 570 20
Branner 170 160 10
Roble 260 250 10
Florence
Moore 350 90 260
Lagunita 290 0 290
Hoskins 120 0 120
Toyon 200 0 200
Row
Houses (3)100 0 100
(5) 180 0 180
Totals 1540 850 690 1440 400 1040
(Note: If women are allowed to move
off campus, adjustments can be made
easily. If the number of women moving
off is under 180, an appropriate num
ber of row houses can be converted
from women to men. Compensation
can also be made by admitting more
freshman and transfer women. If

necessary the measures can be com
bined. )
Students will be chosen for the Wil
bur experiment on a draw basis. It is
reasonable to expect an excess demand
for on-campus housing by upperclass
men, since a new option is being of
fered that will presumably attract men
who presently or would otherwise live
off campus, or in fraternities. The com
ration of the upperclassmen's popu
lation in Wilbur would thus differ
from the present composition of Stem.
If women are allowed off campus, there
would be a greater possibility of satis
fying the demand for men's housing.
The likelihood of vacant dormitory
space, with the introduction of the
Wilbur option, is highly improbable.
The logistics of putting the bodies
into Wilbur for the pilot project is
only half of our task in our proposal.
The problems of staffing the complex
and from there working out feasible
programs is the next step. Hopefully
to make this pilot project a real step
toward achieving the residential uni
versity, as much of the general report
as possible will be included, only the
scope has changed not the purpose of
the program.
Selection for next year's faculty resi
dents could be turned over to a com
mittee composed of one faculty and
one student member of the ASSU
Housing Commission and two members
from the Dean of Students Office, with
the advice of the present Committee.
Once this task has been completed, the
faculty can participate in choosing the
tutors and drawing up more detailed
plans for the program.
The committee realizes that a com
mitment to this kind of residential
education will require an overt shift
in educational effort from the class
room and lab to the residence, with
both compensation for it and relief
from other teaching duties—and quite
probably the replacement of their
other more formal academic functions
by other personnel. We also realize
that there will be a budget problem,
but emphatically deny that worthwhile
educational goals should not be pro
posed and slated because of current
pragmatic limitations.
The committee hopes that, through

further study—best done in conjunc
tion with the study of education at
Stanford—that it will be possible to
rearrange and reemphasize the com
ponents of freshman education in such
a way that existing resources would
permit a serious upgrading of resi
dence education, and the possibility
that such education could replace some
aspects of the present program. This
might well allow the same total re
sources of money and people to meet
the desired objectives by shifting the
locale and method of teaching, rather
than just adding to the staff and pro
gram.
Presently in Wilbur there are three
sponsor rooms and one tutor room
which can accommodate the new tutors.
Hopefully as many of these rooms will
be used for that purpose, but if for
any reason four tutors per house is im
possible, then the rooms could be used
for offices which would at least bring
more graduate level contact into the
residence.
One possible suggestion for Wilbur's
eight houses next year would be to
have five of them centered around a
general theme, one international house,
and two left unstructured. There has
been much agitation for an interna
tional house on campus and many pro
posals have been drawn up. Five sug
gested topics for the theme houses are
"Religion and Society," "Literature and
Fine Arts," "Science and Human Prob
lems," "The Urban Threat," and "So
cial Change."
To take only one of these themes and
speculate what the given house of
faculty, tutors and students will make
of it is another of those endless first
steps in imagination potential. The
house that was using the topic "Science
and Human Problems," for example,
would bring in a diversity of fields
from the natural sciences to the hu
manities. Many of the poignant prob
lems facing students and faculty are
centered in this topic but the same
could probably be said in a different
context for each of the five topics. The
impact of technology on our economic
and social system, the moral contro
versy over the newest discoveries in
genetics, the myth of the scientific
method are all themes to be explored.

What happens to a world view when
scientific discoveries puncture com
fortable philosophies? What is time
and how does man control it and how
docs it control man? These are ques
tions to be asked. Above all, it is im
portant to remember that the direc
tion of intellectual thrust must not be
too well defined in advance. One of
the most valuable experiences for the
living group will be coming to grips
with the topic, deciding for themselves
how the general area should be ap
proached, and then proceeding to de
velop programs and structures on their
own.
The committee is highly enthusiastic
about the creative possibilities pre
sented by the Wilbur experiment—the
first step in the direction of a fully
integrated and coeducational residence.
If the experiment even approaches the
measure of success the committee en
visions, it could prove a major innova
tion in the history of American higher
education. A well developed program
of residential education offers a poten
tial of immeasurable dimension.
X. Correlation of this report with the
overall review of education at Stanford
The key problems of residence edu
cational stimulus and the kind of staff
and budget commitments necessary
need further specific elucidations which
the committee hopes can be under
taken by the Executive Committee for
the study of education at the earliest
opportunity, in order to agree on ob
jectives and make necessary staff and
financial plans for the Wilbur Project
to be able to start in the Fall of 1967.
The committee takes this oppor
tunity to thank the following people
for individual contributions to our
meetings: Dwight Clark, Dr. Lawrence
Thomas, Miss Sally Mahoney, Dr. Mar
tin Evans, Dick Williams, Mike Roster,
Howie Holmes, Doug Davis, Bob Gor
don, Dean Hind, and Dean Novak.
February 6, 1967
Subcommittee on the Freshmen Resi
dence Program ASSU Housing Com
mission. Barbara Levin, Judy Bader.
Barbara Warren, David Koval, Chris
topher Harte, Douglas Sorenson, Scott
Soames (Co-Chairman) Elizabeth
Cohen, B. Davie Napier, Max
Maurice M. Osborne Jr. (Co-Chairman).
Doubts of the ability of Stanford's
present educational system to provide
for the needs of its students, and speci
fic questions about the relevance of
the residence program in its present
form, have stimulated students, faculty,
and staff to seek more appropriate
solutions.
The A.S.S.U., concerned about the
quality of residential experience at
Stanford — particularly in contrast to
that at the Overseas Campuses —
created through its Legislature a Hous
ing Commission, one task of which was
to review and make recommendations
concerning the freshman residence
program in its relation to education.
At about the same time, Associate
Dean of Students Robert Gordon was
asked to present proposals for a new
model of freshman residential educa
tion.
Both A.S.S.U. and Dean Gordon al
most simultaneously appointed com
mittees in the early Fall of 1966 to ad
vise them in the making of recommen
dations in this important area, and
rather than continue a too-familiar pat
tern of separate committees working
independently (and often divergently)
it was decided to merge the two.
In the merger, the Dean's Advisory
Committee agreed to accept the A.S.S.U.
invitation to become an integral part,
of its group. Dean Gordon agreed to
accept the report of the entire group
in the same light as he would have the
recommendations of his originally ap
pointed committee, and the merged
group in turn agreed to attempt in
good faith to assist him in meeting his
deadlines and obligations as best it
could.
Despite particular questions existing
about the Sponsor system, the Commit
tee felt from the outset that to limit
its discussions and report to such par
ticulars, or to start out with them,
would be to avoid the main Issues sur
rounding ,the quality and meaning of

residential education at Stanford, par
ticularly the freshman program.
The Committee thus firmly decided
that it would start from a fresh con
sideration of the issues and principles
involved, relating its recommendations
to them. It was recognized that such
an approach would be time consuming,
that it might seem Utopian to some;
yet a critque and basic statement about
the ideas of a residence university
seemed vital for future planning and
growth.
At the same time, the practical ne
cessity for more immediate recommen
dations and action was realized. The
present report is in this sense a pre
liminary, or interim report, which at
tempts to set forth and justify some
practical recommendations for residence
programs that could be adopted in
1967-68 — steps within the framework
of progression towards a more ideal
situation.
The Case for the Residential Commu
nity — The Personal Committment to
Learning
The impossibility of considering the
freshman experience in isolation from
the life and purposes of the entire un
dergraduate program has been a ma
jor premise in the subcommittee's
study of the Freshman Residence Pro
gram. Two main assumptions underlie
this approach.
One is that the university experience,
as a whole, is only one part of the con
tinuum of the educational process, a
process which neither begins nor ends
at the university gates. The educational
ideals should be the same for all four
undergraduate years in terms of what
they declare for the growth of persons.
The freshman year is only a step in
a span of development, having a spe
cial function as the first step but not
a separate one.
The second is a new conception which
views the university as a community
for learning through personal, interac
,tjon, find development,. .nsp, of

all its facilities for education. This view
emphasizes that the classroom, library
or laboratory cannot — indeed does not
even now — have a monopoly on pro
viding for the education and develop
ment of students. Else, why a residen
tial university? Why not subcontract
all residential arrangements and avoid
hotel problems?
The Committee felt strongly that
there was urgent need for institutional
endorsement of the fact that without
growth and development in personal,
social, and emotional dimensions, the
achievements of intellect are shallow
and stand in isolation from the indivi
dual and his world. The conviction that
gives personal meaning to knowledge
is a product of direct human relation
ship, and we make far too little use
of its potential.
In a more settled and comfortable
past, with much greater mutuality of
expectations and values both between
peers and between generations, the ur
gency of such questions was less, the
scope more limited and the answers
more predictable. The bull-session quite
effectively handled many aspects of
this personal-social side of development.
For this, and other reasons, relatively
little formal attention to it was felt
to be necessary, aside from some for
mal lectures on hygiene, the evils of
sex and booze, and the Fundamental
Standard. After all, boys were (and
would be) boys, and pretty soon they'd
grow up into men, producers and fa
thers. Home and society would take
care somehow that they grew up right,
and the college would provide an ac
cepted transition station on the way,
some academic input, and try to keep
the lid on boyish spirit getting out of
hand.
By contrast today, for many students
questions about one's nature, and about
one's relationship to an uncertain
world, and about this world itself are
more insistent, and more pre-occupying
.before The V&iefttipns a#?, -real,

and require believable answers from
within the individual. And, until he can
find them, this quest, this preoccupa
tion has top priority, while academics
suffer through seeming less relevant.
And though there are many students
who are relatively unconcerned about
such questions, we feel their total edu
cation would be enriched if they could
be purposefully involved.
The history of formal didactic at
tempts to speak to these burning ques
tions is rather dismal, and all over the
country, there has been a steady atro
phy of required, and even of voluntary
courses relative to personal hygiene,
sex, morals, and behavior. Both stu
dents and educators sense that because
a viable set of personal ethics and
values just grow within the individual,
attempts simply to impose them from
without are relatively futile.
Not only have curricular approaches
to such questions atrophied (happi
ly!), but American education is nearing
the end of a decade in which the entire
necessity of addressing itself to the
problem of personal growth has been
quite deliberately rejected. Sputnik was
the symbol, and such spokesmen as
Hyman Rickover took up the cudgels,
with articulate and seathing denuncia
tions of "Education for Living" — of
concepts of "adjustment," and insisted,
along with many others, on intellectual
excellence (for "excellence" read "a
chievement") as the right, and only
purpose of education.
Growth of population; of national
wealth with its stimulus to upward so
cial mobility; increasing complexity
and diversity of knowledge with its
concommitant of faculty pre-occupa
tion and relatively-narrower fields; and
increased competition have sharpened
the pressures for achievement, leaving
even loss time, thought, or energy for
development as a person.
The need to pay most serious atten
tion to this is most keenly felt by many
studetitfi hy their eldprs.
There has been some re-emergence of
an expressed need for leadership and
cooperation in working out better ways
to assist and support the individual in
his personal education and develop
ment, and when students do not raise
these questions, their education should
raise them, and speak to them.
Unstructured and spontaneous stu
dent discussion, particularly at the
freshman level, is heavily-flavored with
the need to sort oneself out, but as it
now operates, it tends less to growth
than to its more traditional social func
tion of settling into "bird-of-a-feather"
groupings in which the individual
can find comfort and support for his
own sets of values and seekings. With
in this spontaneously-forming group
ings, the dialogue tends to become in
creasingly circular, the values increas
ingly exclusive, and there is decreased
permeability to fresh ideas and ex
perience.
In an educational situation where
concentration is placed on the formal
aspects of education there is an imbal
ance which produces distortion, which
too often takes the form of rejection
of the academic sphere as "irrelevant."
Another consequence is the dangerous
polarization of university life into two
worlds; that of the classroom, and that
of social life, setting them to work
against each other instead of with each
other toward the individual's goals. The
acceptance of the residence university
ideal as being vital to education can
be one important factor in keeping
the two worlds together and moving in
the same direction, whereas the pres
ent residence program presents too
many forces that divide living from
learning.
The Committee takes as self-evident
that a truly liberal education is in fact
liberating — in making both wider and
deeper the individual's ability to per
ceive, absorb, analyze, and choose in a
vastly-increasing array of people,
events, and issues, and not in forcing
the premature adoption of limited, and
constricting attitudes. In effect this
seems the necessity of the student's
continuous and repeated exposure to
and challenge by diversity of ideas, of
values, styles, and of course people.
It is here that the meaning of residen
tial education springs to life, for it of
fers potentially the best milieu for
daily face-to-face interaction with peers,
with older students, and faculty mem
bers of both sexes — offering diversity
of age, sex, discipline and values in
the highly personal way so necessary
for exposure to lead to involvement,
and knowledge to become commitment.
The necessity of direct personal in
teraction is most strongly endorsed by
the Committee, for it is the set of
values and mental attitudes formed in
such day-in, day-out exchange that set
tle most deeply into one's fiber. Thus
to narrow the range, or dilute the qual
ity of this exchange seems antiethical
to education. Kenneth Benne, in his
article "The Uses of Fraternity" states
in this regard, "People learn value sys
tems in the first instance as they form
relations with others. These relations
in turn develop norms with corres
ponding rationales which the individual
then internalizes. If people, young or
old, can build groups with standards
that reward and strengthen honest
self - expression and self - acceptance,
creativity, mutual helpfulness and the
capacity to cope with conflict, then the
members of such groups will assimilate
these values as conditions of member
ship."
Choice, and learning to choose ra
tionally, are important educational
tasks, but should not be forced on the
individual too hurriedly, without
enough exposure to a wide range of
choices, nor without some room for
trial and error.
In summary then, the Committee
firmly believes that:
1. As education is, or should be, a con
tinuum, the freshman year cannot
be considered in isolation from the
entire undergraduate program, and al
though it has a special function as
the first step, it is an integral part
of the whole.
2. There is a grave imbalance in the
university's educational emphasis,
which tends to widen the needless,
and in our view harmful, gap be
tween the getting of knowledge and
the important business of living.
3. The deepest personal and intellectual
cpncems of students — their rela
tionships to themselves, and to an

uncertain world, — are not receiving
the institutional recognition and ef
fort they deserve.
4. That people learn most deeply by
living, and by forming personal re
lationships, and that when the resi
dence program, as at present, is
oriented to bed, board, and social
needs, the opportunities for inter
nalizing intellectual knowledge and
values are meager, and the tenden
cies to reject academic values as per
sonally-irrelevant are reinforced.
5. That choice, and learning to choose
critically are central educational
goals, but that it must depend on
close and repeated exposure to a
wide range of ideas, values, styles,
and people — people of different
ages, disciplines, sexes, and back
grounds, — and not be prematurely
forced into constricting channels
based primarily on social and not in
tellectual values.
6. Such close exposure to diversity, over
sufficient time, and if taken as the
norm, would go far in preventing
the formation of narrowed and
sterotypic attitudes and thought —
the surest signs of the ill-educated
man.
7. The way in which students live very
directly affects the whole quality of
their education: this single principle
underpins the whole concept of the
residential university.
"THE FRESHMAN CONDITION"
The paraphrase above in intentional,
— and designed to point out that being
a freshman at Stanford, or anywhere,
is an intensely personal experience of
transition. Although the general ideals
of education apply equally, — and es
pecially, — to him, the freshman also
has attributes which make him special,
but not separate.
It is the feeling of this committee
that freshmen can and should receive
the benefit of special experiences de
signed for their particular problems.
The assumption that we would like to
question is whether this need for some
special orientation experiences necessi
tates their living in a segragated fash
ion. Although it is expedient from an
"efficiency" point of view, it may gen
erate excessive anxiety over perfor
mance in freshman courses and a rein
forcement for essentially juvenile
modes of facing college stresses. His
special attributes can be summed up as
follows:
A. He obviously needs early and reli
able information about his new com
munity — where things are, what he
is to do, and so forth.
B. He is making the transition most
traditionally accepted in America as
the line between family dependency
and personal autonomy.
In actuality, the line, if there is one,
is blurred, and varies greatly from one
freshman to another. In general, the
freshman comes equipped with the cre
dentials of previous achievement and
approval — hoping he will be accepted
in his new college world, and fearing
that he may not. At the same time he
hopes that his performance and life
will be freer and larger than before.
The freshman, more poignantly than
any other undergraduate, in his transi
tion from a narrower to a hopefully
wider identity, wants the understand
ing of his old world, personal accep
tance by the new — and fears he may
have neither.
He is thus enormously vulnerable,
and as Steve Hurlbut has written in
his excellent paper, is characterized by
a "pervasive anxiety." Until he has as
similated workable norms, he feels he's
got to satisfy some kind of external
standard, and is anxious until he does.
Some more specific stresses that tend
to promote anxiety are:
I.The sudden change of status that
comes from being taken out of a
high school situation where one is
enormously successful and being put
in a class of similar big frogs from
small ponds, and feeling that they
are tougher frogs than he is:
2. The doubt about being able to live up
to tough academic demands:
3. Doubts about his being accepted by
his peers — of both sexes;
4. Being away from home;
5. Confrontation with different reli
gious and social values than those
the student has learned in his family
and home community;
6. Ambivalence about authority, and
older peopje in general.
This araciety and vulnerability are by

no means bad in themselves — and in
deed offer the most fertile soil for cul
tivation of the seeking young mind.
But the thrust of this searching anxiety
is in essence social, and approval-seek
ing — and therefore related to persons
and social groups, or the winning of ac
ceptable symbols of achievement.
The Committee feels that the perva
sive, and expectable freshman anxiety
and search for some group identity is
a double-edged sword, with potential
for both regression and for growth.
On one side, if there is failure of
approval from home, or personal ac
ceptance at college, or fewer grade
points "in the bank" than expected,
anxiety may well become dysfunction
al, with consequences such as neurotic
disturbance, refusal to compete aca
demically, and even regressive and
anti-social group-adolescent behavior,
and the reinforcement of pre-college
values.
CRITIQUE OF THE PRESENT
FRESHMAN RESIDENCE PROGRAM
The Committee feels that too many
features of the present freshman resi
dence program serve:
1. To reinforce natural anxieties among
the newest members of the Univer
sity, and
2. To promote the seeking of solutions
to this anxiety that have little if any
thing to do with educational pur
poses, but tend to promote prema
ture and mutually exclusive social
groupings.
As he moves into a freshman resi
dence, he is thrown into close contact
with a large peer-group of greater
diversity in background, attitudes, and
talent than he is likely to have known.
And, because competition and fears of
failure are keenest among peers (par
ticularly of neophytes performing simi
lar tasks,) these differences within the
larger peer-group tend to move the stu
dent into protective subgroups of
peers with attitudes and pre-college
backgrounds similar to his own, within
which he finds support. In such mutual
ly-supportive social groups, the student
can arm himself and defend himself
psychologically against any new ideas
to which he is being exposed, from fel
low students, members of the opposite
sex, and his professors. Studies will
never be taken at all seriously but will
be dealt with in a purely cognitive
fashion, ingested for the purpose of
passing exams and discarded soon af
terwards. Under these conditions, we
may have done away with the prob
lems of anxiety, but are faced with the
possibility of at least two other un
desirable consequences, 1) His atti
tudes and values may remain totally
unquestioned throughout his college
career; and 2) a group devoted to de
fending itself against the climate of an
institution may exhibit anti-social char
acteristics of alienated people every
where.
That present groups formed for mu
tual support emerge after a limited
exposure to new, and possible better
models, is certainly true, and groupings
tend to occur along pre-college lines
and values, or in rebellion against
them.
The present segregated freshman
residence situation also tends:
3. To promote the seeking of achieve
ment symbols (i.e. grades) rather
than knowledge of self or substance;
4. By a residence administration seen
as primarily regulatory and manger
ial, to aggravate the natural ambi
valence of freshmen towards author
ity with results ranging from thought
less docility to destructive rebellion;
or apathetic alienation;
5. To provide too much pressure for
distortion and ritualization of rela
tionships between the sexes — the
"dating syndrome" — and a poverty
of opportunities for simple, friendly
interaction of people, a lack fre
quently deplored by both freshmen
and upperclassmen.
Both architecture and group pres
sures, as well as well-institutionalized
pressures for achieving good grades
in a heavy curriculum conspire to rob
the freshman of privacy — both physi
cal privacy, and temporal privacy; i.e.
some time simply to be himself, to spin
his wheels, and to think, with room for
trial and error.
There is, at least in Wilbur, no at
mosphere in the dining halls in the
least conducive to conversation — and
for some reason, plastic and formica
encourage one to get In and out fast,

with emphasis on feeding the face, but
none on nourishing friendship.
All of these (observable) results are
Inimical to the purposes of stimulating
interest in new subjects, of promoting
constructive reaction to diversity, of
the discouragement of stereotypic
thinking and behavior, and of trust in
older people as human beings.
More importantly, the positive po
tentials of freshman vulnerability go
relatively untapped — or are being tap
ped for outworn purposes. For this
vulnerability is personal, and if pro
vided with daily personal interaction
with a wide range of interesting
people of different ages and different
disciplines, there is more than a good
chance that Stanford freshmen would
attach their enthusiasms and their
hearts to the new models they need
and seek — models of greater depth
and diversity, but providing the identi
ty and security they need.
The interaction between freshman
men in Wilbur and the Faculty Resi
dents has varied greatly in its intensity
and impact — with instances of great
fruitfulness, or relative neutrality and
harmony, and a very few of a truly
negative quality.
Faculty Associates to freshman resi
dences have often provided important
personal interactions between fresh
men and the faculty — but just as
often these contacts have been super
ficial and ritualized.
Sponsors, while providing the great
est impact in personal exchange, pre
sent, because of their small number,
relatively limited contact with upper
classmen's values and experiences.
While all these personal contacts in
the freshman residences do in fact en
rich the education of many freshmen,
the other fact remains that there are
simply not enough such contacts, nor
sufficient support and time for these
few people to give residential educa
tion the emphasis it deserves.
EVOLUTION OF THE PRESENT
FRESHMAN RESIDENCE PROGRAM
Whatever rationalizations may be
adduced in support of the present
freshman residence program, it ap
pears to the Committee that it is in
large measure a holdover from an
earlier set of norms — norms that re
ceived wide acceptance and support in
those times, but that are under serious
question *oday.
In the Teens, the Twenties, and even
well into the Thirties, there was more
general acceptance (in society at large
as well as in the university commu
nity) of a particular hierarchical order,
and the particular authority structure
such an order implies. One tended to
know where one stood in relation to
the order at any given period, and to
be confident that one would ascend the
ladder by predictable steps.
Perhaps because of the relative sta
bility of the social order, personal de
velopment was thought of more along
the lines of advancement within that
order — with of course the acquisition
of enough "knowledge" and academic
polish to secure preference in vocations
and the status of a college-educated
man. It was important in itself to be
a senior, or for that matter an upper
classman, and the class structure had
in itself real meaning to the student.
Hence, the development of class spirit
and cohesiveness was valued, encour
aged, and ritualized. Even the major
steps in progression along the well
worn rungs were ritualized in such
rites of passage as the annual "Frosh-
Soph War," a ritual which would have
been impossible had there been no such
open class distinction.
The residence arrangements prob
ably reflected an accept? e of this
order according to social and culture
values of the day, and were aimed at
initiating the freshman into them. A
deliberate segration of the neophyte —
either by residence, by distinguishing
badges (viz. the "Beanie"), by restric
tion of privilege, or by combinations
of these has in many human organiza
tions, served to reinforce acculturation
to desired social and behavioral norms,
and whether anyone was purposefully
aware of this or not, such considera
tions surely operated in freshman resi
dential segragation. Aside from "home
work" performed in a dorm, there was
a rather strict geographic separation
of intellectual-academic concerns and
the personal-social sphere. The class
room and laboratory (and one's closed
~oom or the stacks) were meant for
the'one — while the dorm was really
for the other, and largely designed for
it.
The early history of the sponsor
program, when Encina Hall was the
freshman men's dorm, illustrates well
its use as an instrument for indoctri
nation of the "hapless Frosh" into pre
vailing upperclassmen's values.
Most sponsors wore a block "S", and
embodied a prevailing ideal of social
and athletic prowess, coupled with a
sense of loyalty to the group, respect
for authority, and an obligation to be
exemplary to their potential succes
sors. As recently as 1955, the effective
ness of a sponsor was measured, among
other things, by the percentage of his
charges attending the pregame rallies
and intercollegiate games.
Most sponsors were also fraternity
men, and another measure of his suc
cess as a sponsor was the number of
his freshmen pledged. For the spon
sors, there was little conflict involved
in serving simultaneously the fresh
men, one's own upperclassman values,
and those of the institution and its
authorities, for all constituents had
pretty much the same understanding
of the system, and of each of their
places within it.
In the intervening years, particularly
those since World War 11, there have
been profound changes in the social
order — a disruption of settled commu
nity, sharpened preoccupations with
material competition, and a culture less
and less sure of where it stood, or what
it believed in. Particularly among those
intelligent enough to attend such col
leges as Stanford, there has been in
creasing criticism of existing institu
tions which seem to them to produce
as leaders men with narrowed vision,
preoccupation with power, and too
little time or love for people. In this
climate of malaise, and in the absence
of once tacitly-held assurances, the
young person's search for personal
identity, relevance, and belief has
emerged as a very important difference
between many students of today and
of the previous generation, and again
underscores the vital importance of the
living group experience.
Despite some expressed dissatisfac
tions with the existing sponsor system,
the sponsors and a few feculty resi
dents at Wilbur were quite probably
the first to sense both this new and
urgent need among the freshmen (and
of course in themselves,) and that the
approach to it had to be met at the
level of day-in, day-out personal inter
action.
The evolution of the present sponsor
system has been a response both to
the growing need for attention to per
sonal education and development, and
to the need to substitute a drive for
continuous search and openness for the
more comfortable, but rather water
tight, social groupings which they saw
taking place.
For the past few years, the sponsors
have been the real pioneers in residen
ital education in the freshman resi
dence program. To condemn them as
"politically motivated" or irresponsible
seems a rather defensive and negative
reaction to the admitted mistakes of
a few members, and more importantly
fails to recognize that, without much
help or understanding, they are on the
track of something very important.
There have, to be sure, been other
efforts in the direction of residential
education for freshmen — relatively
cautious additions which have been in
the general direction of enriching per
sonal experience and contact in the.
residences, and may represent an in
choate recognition of this need.
Such additions have been the Facul
ty Residents, the Faculty Associates,
the Student Associates — at first men,
later women — and later, more free
dom for dining exchanges. More for
mally, in-residence seminars, guests-in
residence, panel discussions, and even
classes have been introduced.
But the former additions (with the
exception of a few Faculty Residents)
have in general provided only super
ficial interactions, while the latter
(again with a few notable exceptions)
have borne little relation to life and
living education other than physical
proximity. There is a heavy implica
tion of the mere introduction of more
academics into residences — while the
.ru#ot iT.nortant questions to students
go, for the most part, unanswered.
Th< present freshmen residence pro
gram, in its segregation by class, by

sex, by its continued reinforcement of
separation of living from learning, is
anachronistic, and reflects values that
have become less relevant and ideas that
are no longer true — such as assump
tions that satisfactory personal devel
opment takes care of itself within an
accepted and orderly framework, (of
which the freshman class is one clear
step, houses and all); that personal
education and development are irrele
vant to, or at least peripheral to the
purposes of "Higher Education"; that
mutually-deaf social groupings are ac
ceptable parts of the social mosaic —
when the fact of the matter is that we
are badly failing to meet these now
paramount questions. Despite our be
ginning attentions to this need, the
main thrust of the freshman resi
dence program and the academic pro
gram, still tends to leave the freshman
alone in his search and to force him
into protective groupings.
FRESHMAN IN3PEORATION INTO
UNIVERSITY IJFE
As discussed above, the Committee
feels strongly that the present segre
gation of freshmen reflects values no
longer taken seriously, reinforces the
separation of learning from living
(with impoverishment of both), height
ens some dysfunctional anxieties, and
tends to force premature and relative
ly narrow security groupings, rein
forces the artificiality of contact be
tween the sexes, and alienates students
from the faculty.
Thus, segregation is in itself a cen
tral problem, and, of course, the alter
natives must be aimed at integration
of the freshman in one or more ways.
A. Coeducational Housing
As noted earlier, a major problem
for freshmen is the difficulty of estab
lishing relationships with members of
the opposite sex on any basis other
than a social or dating level. For fresh
man men, the problem is especially
acute, manifesting itself in a heighten
ing anxiety, increased insecurity, and
frustration. The institution of a sys
tem of coeducational housing would
not only ameliorate the undesirable so
cial position of freshman men but also
provide an atmosphere conducive to
more natural (spontaneous) and per
sonal relationships. Upperclassmen al
so face similar problems as the results
of a segragated housing system, and
they too could gain much from having
the option of a coeducational residence
program.
That such a program is both prac
tical and desirable is supported by the
acknowledged success of the overseas
campus program as a living and learn
ing experience. In addition, the appar
ent success of the Grove Project as a
coeducational residence suggests that
coeducation can be successful on the
home campus.
The committee believes that, in the
long run, coeducational housing should
be the prevailing, although not exclu
sive, pattern for residential education
at Stanford, and that significant steps
can and should be taken toward this
goal during the coming year, 1967-68.
Although some houses segregated by
sex should be retained for these stu
dents who do not wish to live in a co
educational residence, a major effort
should be directed toward providing
coeducational housing in its most sig
nificant sense, men and women living
in the same house. Even these houses
which remain segregated could be
placed in juxtaposition to increase the
interaction among men and women.
The goal of a residence housing both
men and women would be most effect
ively realized if the ratio is approxi
mately 1:1. Although the 1:1 ratio Is
most desirable, a ratio of 2:1 would,
we feel, be successful.
As a long range goal the Committee
recommends changing of th« admis
sions ratio to one that is closer to 1:1
as a step towards this ideal.
B. Integration of classes:
As discussed more fully in Section
111 of this report, the freshman year is
a period of growth in which freshmen
must adjust to what for many of them
is a totally new culture, with new and
demanding standards. This situation re
quires a certain amount of social sup
port to prevent excessive and destruc
tive anxiety.
The committee is convinced that the
freshman residence program too often
promotes a seeurity that reduces expo
sure to challenging and growth-moti
vating aspects of university life, there
by retarding development, rather than

preparing the freshman to meet the
challenges which are in a large mea
sure responsible for his insecurity. In
addition, individual anxieties often re
inforce each other to the detriment of
all concerned.
While it is agreed that there is val
uable support and learning through
contact with others engaged in the
same experience, this by no means re
quires that most of one's contacts be
freshmen, nor does it exclude the pos
sibility or desirability of living in con
tact with others.
In a maximally integrated system in
which freshmen constitute approxi
mately 30 per cent of the population,
reinforcement of pre-college values
would be healthily reduced, while
freshmen, still pursuing similar curri
cula, would not suffer from a dearth of
contact and interaction with other
freshmen. In a fully integrated system,
the freshman could contribute to the
atmosphere of the residence, but could
not dominate it. Social support would
be provided not only by contact with
other freshmen, but also by the pres
ence of upperclassmen who have gone
through similar experiences and who
can contribute to the freshman's sense
of social support both by advice or ex
ample and by providing living evidence
that students actually survive the
freshmen year. This system would, of
course, have the further advantage of
more fully orienting freshmen to the
challenges and opportunities of the
university, a need which can be only
partially fulfilled by the present spon
sor system.
C. Partial Integration
In the preceding discussion the mini
mum ratio of upperclassmen to fresh
men in an integrated residence is as
sumed to be well in excess of 1:1. Any
system of partial integration with ra
tios well below this minimum faces se
vere difficulties:
1. Although the population would be
enriched by the addition of more ex
perienced upperclass models, fresh
men would still dominate the dormi
tory; the balance between security
and growth would not be significant
ly changed.
2. Under one suggestion for partial in
tegration offered by Dean Gordon's
staff, upperclassmen would essential
ly be guests whose rooms happened
to be in a freshman dormitory. It is
difficult to understand what would
motivate 147 upperclassmen to accept
such a position, or why they would
feel any dedication to close personal
interaction with the freshmen in an
educational sense.
3. The sponsor system is successful
largely because a few individuals are
committed to making the best of an
unfortunate living situation for
freshmen. It is not clear that the sub
stitution of five guests for one spon
sor dedicated to working with fresh
men is desirable.
4. Partial integration in itself has never
been suggested as an optimal resi
dence system, and it is not clear that
it is a desirable step toward total
integration. The committee is con
vinced that change for its own sake
is an unsound policy at any stage in
the development of a more viable
residence system.
Freshmen have the most to gain in
a campus-wide residence program
founded on the principles of co-educa
tion and integration. The institution of
this program requires not only the
support of freshmen, but also that of
upperclassmen. It could be argued that
upperclassmen would not want to give
up their present housing system. In
answer to this objection three points
can be made:
1. It is not clear that upperclassmen
are satisfied with the present sys
tem. Every spring quarter freshmen
express dissatisfaction with the hous
ing alternatives open to them: the
success of the overseas program as
a living experience has prompted
many to call for a more desirable
program at Stanford at-Stanford;
there were five applicants for each
place in the Grove Project, and if
the seminar hadn't been required
there would have been more upper
classmen seeking this exciting new
living alternative.
2. Tn our model of a fully integrated,
coeducational house, the percentage
of freshmen living in should be kept
well below 50 per cent. Freshmen
could contribute their real enthusi
asm and the challenge of their ques
tions without dominating the houses,

so that integration would benefit
both freshmen and upperclassmen.
3. In our residence program some inde
pendent npperclass houses would re
main, if there were a demand for
them. We believe that most students
would choose to live in a coed, inte
grated house, however, if some stu
dents wished something akin to the
present system such alternatives
would be open to them. The assump
tion we are making is that the new
residenco opportunities will sell them
selves.
E. Diversity and Self-Selection
Diversity among housing alternatives
is desirable. In addition, diversity with
in each house must be maintained to
avoid provincialism within the various
alternatives. Free choice, particularly
too early in the college career, among
various living styles will eventually
produce self-selective, provincial group
ings which will contradict the ideal
of developing acceptance of individual
differences within the residence. Three
points can be made to this problem:
1. No house needs to represent a cross
section of the student body. When
too great diversity exists in a living
group, cohesiveness is lost and frag
mentation takes the form of break
ing up into small sub-groups between
which little communication exists.
Therefore, some commonality, espe
cially by interests, is desirable.
2. It may not be the case that giving
students free choice among really
worthwhile alternatives will result
in serious problems of self-selection.
At any rate, it will take time for this
to happen and if indeed problems do
arise, we should be able to deal with
them early.
3. Assuming that such problems do
arise and call for some restriction of
free choice, one possible solution
would be to limit the amount of time
that an individual could live in a par
ticular residence. By encouraging
switching and moving among stu
dents, no system would be allowed
to lock itself in and stagnate.
VII. The Tone and Character of the
Living Group: Staff and Program
The residential components of most
universities are now basically eating
and sleeping facilities, structurally like
barracks, motels, or high-rise Hiltons,
surrounded by parking lots. To become
a truly residential university, the resi
dence hall must become a center of
learning and development equal in im
portance to the lecture hall. Ideally
their staffing, planning, and adminis
tration should be the responsibility of
faculty members rather than housing
directors or business offices.
While Stanford now is a far cry from
the suggested ideal of a residence uni
versity, many steps have been pro
posed which work toward the ideal. In
tegration by class and co-education are
two strong recommendations made by
the committee, which as discussed
above have considerable value in them
selves.
However, these steps will not by
themselves result in genuine centers
for learning. The mechanical bod>
shuffling is only one step in preparing
a more conducive atmosphere for total
education; the other is the purposeful
stimulation of intellectual activities
within the residence. The character and
quality of such activities, and their
relevance to students' concerns will be
come a crucial measure and determi
ned of the contribution that residence
is providing for its component mem
bers. The program for each residence
would decide for itself what input to
organize as a stimulus for the desired
enrichment of the quality of living that
contributes to the total education of
the individual and of the group's stu
dents, faculty, ideas, and the unending
list of resources of a university com
munity are all potential and powerful
inputs. The interaction of these compo
nents now creates the particular ex
citement of a university, but these
components are being comparatively
wasted in one of the areas in which
they could be the most effective ... the
living situation. The challenge of a
idential program is to organize and
bring the components together in the
most imaginative ways to utilize the
potential to the lullest.
One of the major areas of waste Is
student-faculty relations. Both the stu
donts and the faculty complain about
the distance and seeming disinterest of
the two groups. The section in the re
port which* deals with the faculty rol£
in the residence university is only a
very small start on the road to killing
this unhealthy and unproductive gap.
(See section on faculty residents.)
Too often students miss out on much
of the university experience because of
communication gaps. A face-to-face liv
ing unit is the most obvious place for
communication and contact between
students and faculty. Often the pre
vailing ethos of a dormitory can work
against this ground level communica
tion and antithetically to the explora
tory ventures of the individual. A dorm
which is oriented around a strictly so
cial purpose may even squelch the mo
tivation branding it as "intellectual," a
word that has been mistreated from all
directions in our society. While many
houses do not fall into this trap, there
is another pitfall of ruts and habit that
restricts the growing of experience in
a different way. The entire responsi
bility of taking advantage of the under
graduate experience is on the individ
ual. and some people find themselves
vorking against odds that would dis
courage the most aggressive. Fresh
man in particular belong to this cate
gory. They need to be exposed to the
broad ranges of opportunity but also
need help to make use of them. An
adolescent peer culture reinforcing high
school anti-intellectualism is not one
)f the best possible ways to meet this
need. The outside stimulus and help
will not best be provided by authority
figures who tell people what to do. or
beat off the anti-intellectual bullies. The
best assurance that free exchange and
.sharing of experience will occur will
be found in the atmosphere of the liv
ing group and in the character of its
leadership. A lively house where there
is a constant influx of new and differ
ent stimuli where all things that need
expression can find it, has the best
chance against apathy or unspoken
social taboos. House organized activi
ties such as art exhibits, musical per
formances, seminars, or small scale
lecture series suffer the same fate as
the individual's struggle for expres
sion and exploration. Not everyone
would want to participate and now
many of those who do want to can,
"but to those who find it difficult, en
couragement, not brick walls, should
be present in the tone of the house.
The possibility of organizing houses
around special interests has been sug
gested; experimentation is in order.
Houses with distinctive interests—fine
arts, social issues, foreign policy—may
well bring together students and fac
ulty from various disciplines who
could more meaningfully and readily
develop a learning community than a
house whose residents and loosely
affiliated faculty can only share pleas
antries. There would still be ample
diversity by virtue of differences in
personality, background, majors, ca
reer plans and so on, but there would
also be a major intellectual and social
oncern they all share. More detail
for this kind of program is discussed
in the specific proposal for next year.
The program of input is just the
beginning to what happens to the life
n a particular house. It provides pos
sibly a focus or direction as well as the
important underlying communication
and resource network of faculty, tutor,
and student. It must be emphasized
that what is going to happen in every
house is going to be determined most
by the people who live there. There
is a give-and-take natural exchange
between the program of ideas for the
living group and the group's response.
Reuniting the sphere of living as a
meaningful and integral part of a stu
dent's education in no way signifies
the creation of a twenty-four-hour
classroom. The residential education
urogram is not an extension of the
formal academic structure; it is its
complement. Although the opportun
,fy for experimenting with courses
given for credit should be open, it is
only one of the myriad of possibilities
with residential education. While
proper planning, particularly in the
■'election of good faculty, is necessary
it would be unrealistic to lose sight
of the interaction from the other di
rection. A structure too rigid would
kill the potential of a residential pro
gram just as the naive assumption
that body shuffling is the whole
answer.
Flexibility and spontaneity are key
<*ords in the concept of what a pro
gram should be prepared to provide.
Fvrit the program should be externally

flexible. The development of the house
spirit would depend upon the inter
action between the particular members
and particular faculty and tutors. This
matter of orientation or direction for
the house could bow with the interest
and demand for a particular living sit
uation. Some programs would last
longer than others, some undoubtedly
will be less successful, some would
evolve of themselves into a new area.
There is flexibility to let the good pro
grams grow and let the bad ones kill
themselves without bringing the entire
system to ruin. A diversity of choice
between residences could be main
tained.
There should in addition be an in
ternal flexibility within each group.
There must be room for growth and
change within the group. If topics were
to be the basis for a house, they would
always have to be picked with enough
latitude to allow each member of the
house to approach it in his own way.
This casua', unstructured opportunity
for close faculty contact speaks directly
to the need of students who are con
cerned with relevance as a criterion of
education, relevance to themselves or
to the contemporary world. There is
much opportunity for the student to
become very involved in the formation
and execution of his own education.
People who are involved and interested
in their own work tend to be more in
terested and able to contribute to the
work of others.
Another possibility that should be
included in the program is the oppor
tunity for experimentation with self
government. All sorts of opportunities
exist outside of the adoption of a hier
archy handed from above of president,
social chairman, etc. . .
There is much to be said for the edu
cationally valuable experience of learn
ing to live with ambiguity and without
automatically following tradition or
the dictates of an authority figure to
create the quality of life of a house
out of what is there ... to create an
educationally meaningful experience.
"The ideas sound great on paper!" is
the old comment at the outset of any
innovation with the rejoiner "But how
do you make it work in reality?" usu
ally not far behind. Why doesn't this
all happen now? Wilbur, the recom
mended site for next year's project,
already has many of the features out
lined in this report. "Is there really
going to be any significant difference?"
might be one question. The answer is
twofold. Some of the kinds of things
this report talks about are already
happening. If they weren't then there
would really be no use in trying to
maximize the interaction. But so much
more could be happening, and many of
the detrimental currents that run con
trary to the purpose of attending a
university could be reduced. All sys
tems are implemented by men. There
is not any system of law, morality or
of a residence university which can
overcome the fallibility of man. There
is not a magical formula implied in this
program, it rests very heavily on the
people who participate but so does
every other system. Good systems help
him along and the committee firmly
feels that a true residential university,
is a better system than one which only
claims to be and is somewhere in the
middle.
The people involved therefore are at
the core of the program. But their
effectiveness will depend to a large
degree upon how they see their role.
Their conception of their role in this
new system must undergo as much
fundamental reinterpretation as the
system itself.
How will the inertia of the present
resident conditions be overcome? Who
will set the tone, provide the mo
mentum, and contribute the leader
ship? Our first answer to these ques
tions is the students themselves. In any
residence system students will unde
niably be the major constituency.. But
how the resident staff can contribute
is also an important issue. At the pres
ent time Stanford has faculty residents,
tutors, resident assistants, and spon
sors. The role of each should be re
viewed.
Faculty Resident*
The committee would certainly not
deny the valuable contribution of the
faculty residents toward improving the
living situation at Stanford, but in
general, the faculty resident program
simply is not given the support neces
sary to tree Its members from -other

tasks and to allow them to devote
more time, thought and emphasis to
the residence education program. The
basic change would be that of increased
commitment to the living situation. The
primary responsibility of the faculty
resident should not be to the dorm di
rector or the administration, but to the
student within the living group or com
plex. To be effective, the faculty resi
dent must be willing to accept a de
manding and time consuming involve
ment in the living situation. His pres
ence there will be much more than a
face at meals or even that of a good
friend. Presumably the resident would
be a full time member of the faculty,
for the success of the residence pro
gram would greatly depend upon his
response to the intellectual needs of the
students. Doctoral candidates, coaches,
university officials, and administrators,
however, could still participate if they
would be willing to make the same
kind of commitment to the ideal of a
residence university. The interpersonal
factor is extremely important in this
kind of situation. Most every student
complains about the brilliant man who
can't give a good lecture. The same
argument will have to be taken into
account that not everyone can fulfill
this particular kind of a role. The fac
ulty resident must, above all, be sensi
tive to the interaction among students
in the group.
The things a faculty member could
contribute are bounded only by their
individual creativity but a few sug
gestions are in order.
1. In certain living units, seminars for
academic credit could be offered.
2. Directed reading could be made avail
able to certain students under the
resident.
3. Informal and noncredit seminars
should be encourage by the faculty
resident or when an idea came out
of the group he or some of his col
leagues could serve as resource per
son.
4. A student chairman and the faculty
resident could set up a meaningful
faculty associate program. The resi
dent can draw upon close friends and
colleagues which would supply an
internal identification missing in the
present program.
What would bring the faculty to par
ticipate in this program? Much of the
same dissatisfaction with student-fac
ulty relations that would bring the
students. Where something lively is
going on, something which the faculty
member is part there would not be
the embarassed ordeals that now take
place in dormitories on campus where
everyone involved is on their best and
most strained behavior. The living con
ditions would be similar to that of an
overseas campus though the professor
would not be required to drop his own
work or leave the center of his re
search. Class loads could be lessened
for the faculty participating because
they would be in essence only relocat
ing their teaching commitments, not
dropping them. They would have a
more flexible time schedule that might
be convenient to their purposes. This
position would also be in effect on a
rotating basis.
Resident Assistants and Tutors
The role of resident assistant should
be eliminated. In other words, we
would eliminate the role of the nice
guy disciplinarian, the liaison between
the administration and the students
who has been for too long forced into
an unfortunate position of hypocrisy.
As he is employed by the administra
tion he has an obligation to enforce
University policies, but if he is to be
at all effective with the students his
identification is with them. Too often
he has resolved the conflict by the
statement, "I don't care what you do,
just do it quietly so I don't see it."
Caught in this bind he has been in
effective as a man playing to two mas
ters. It is not enough to react to stu
dent needs and problems, for the role
we see must be one of creative action —
one of initiative and not merely re
sponse. Similarly, the present tutor
system is limited because its goal is
only to answer questions, not raise
them.
The present role of tutor, however,
is closer to our purpose than the RA's.
But this role must be expanded to be
effective. Thus, the idea of tutors
should be maintained, but its purpose
significantly broadened. Like faculty
residents > (and unlike RA's)' tutors

must have autonomy from primarily ad
ministrative policy and must be respon
sible primarily to the students below.
They should be linked to the resident
director, who is then responsible to the
administration. Although academic
assistance is undeniably important, tu
tors must do more than merely toot.
Their role should be to stimulate dis
cussion, to promote all types of inter
change, and to actively work towards
an educational atmosphere. At present
RA's and tutors tend to preserve rather
than promote and to be problem
solvers, rather than catalysts. The
tutor, like the faculty resident, must
approach his job with a new vitality
and commitment.
Sponsors
When the freshman class has been
entirely integrated into the university
community then the sponsor system
will become an anachronism. But until
that point the need remains and the
present system of sponsors and tutors
should be maintained.
There are two more important con
siderations before any system is put
Into operation. How will the faculty
and tutors be selected? And what are
the costs for the program as a whole?
These problems become relevant and
solvable only after the initial commit
ment and go ahead has been made.
Therefore discussion of these aspects
of the program will be included in
the proposal for next year.
VIII. Brief Assessment of Experience
At Other Institutions
While it is not our intention to base
the justification for our proposals on
the successes and failures of other in
stitutions with their necessarily dif
ferent circumstances, it is interesting
to note the results of a study con
ducted by the Faculty Committee on
Student Residences at Stanford in 1959.
Studying twenty-one similar universities
in this country they found that they
were about equally divided between
integrated and segregated freshman
living facilities. In general each school
seem satisfied with the system it then
had. However, while all of these with
the integrated system found it the most
workable, about 25 per cent of those
with segregated freshmen replied that
they were dissatisfied with their situ
ation and it certainly increases the
noisy freshman atmosphere which is
inimical to good study habits and con
ditions." Some schools reported that
the only reason for maintaining fresh
man segregation was pressure from
the fraternities who "objected stren
uously to placing their pledges under
the influence of hard bitten rugged in
dependents."
The many success of coeducational
housing on other campuses are too well
known to require documentation.
The institutions interviewed were
Cal Tech, Reed, Pembroke, Swarth
more, Oberlin, Pomona, Carleton, Rad
clifTe, Occidental, Ohio Wesleyan, Chi
cago, Brown, Dartmouth, Princeton,
Yale, Harvard, Northwestern, Washing
ton State, Oregon, Cornell, and Ohio
State.
IX. A Proposal:
The Wilbur Experiment
The committee has set forth its ar
guments for coeducational and inte
grated residences. It has suggested that
the residence should be a center of
intellectual life, and through residence
education the rigid separation of the
student's social and intellectual lives
could be ended. It remains for the com
mittee to propose how these aims can
be fulfilled at Stanford.
It is the feeling of the committee
that significant experimentation in resi
dence education is altogether feasible
for next year. There is a wide range
of possibilities. The committee initially
considered a massive scrambling of the
university residence pattern, convert
ing most dormitories on campus to
coeducation and integration. This pro
posal was rejected for two reasons:
(1) Full integration, or anything ap
proaching it, would at this time pro
duce an undesirable ratio of freshmen
to upperclass men. (2) It would be im
possible to supply the staff necessary
to introduce residence education in any
meaningful way if the scope of the
housing experiment is so broad.
The committee decided that its aims
could best be fulfilled by an experiment
of more limited scope. Instead of dras
tically overhauling the university resi
dence pattern, one dormitory complex
could be used as a rather large "pilot"
project, in which * Integratiorr and • eo
education could be complete and intel
lectual life could be given the proper
attention. Wilbur Hall is ideal for this
purpose. It is the largest complex on
campus, with space for approximately
720 people. It is divided into eight
houses, each of which constitutes a
separate identity unit. Each house has
an adjacent cottage for a faculty resi
dent and a tutorial room where semin
ars can be held.
The committee recommends that
next fall each Wilbur house be occu
pied by two floors of men and one
floor of women, and that each house
be integrated by class at a rate of one
freshman to three upperclassmen. Con
stituted as such, Wilbur Hall would be
the site of meaningful experimentation
in residential education.
The Wilbur experiment will of neces
sity affect some of the other university
residences. Freshman men will move to
Stern and Branner, retaining the spon
sor system in its present form. Fresh
man women will remain in Roble, with
sponsors, and those living in neither
Roble or Wilbur will be integrated with
upperclass women in Florence Moore.
Lagunita, Hoskins, and Toyon will be
unaffected. The remaining upperclass
men will live in three of the row
houses. The statistical breakdown is
as follows.
Total Frosh Upcl. Total Frosh Upcl.
Men Men Men W'ran W'mn Wmn
Wilbur 480 120 360 240 60 180
Stem 590 570 20
Branner 170 160 10
Roble 260 250 10
Florence
Moore 350 90 260
Lagunita 290 0 290
Hoskins 120 0 120
Toyon 200 0 200
Row
Houses (3)100 0 100
(5) 180 0 180
Totals 1540 850 690 1440 400 1040
(Note: If women are allowed to move
off campus, adjustments can be made
easily. If the number of women moving
off is under 180, an appropriate num
ber of row houses can be converted
from women to men. Compensation
can also be made by admitting more
freshman and transfer women. If

necessary the measures can be com
bined. )
Students will be chosen for the Wil
bur experiment on a draw basis. It is
reasonable to expect an excess demand
for on-campus housing by upperclass
men, since a new option is being of
fered that will presumably attract men
who presently or would otherwise live
off campus, or in fraternities. The com
ration of the upperclassmen's popu
lation in Wilbur would thus differ
from the present composition of Stem.
If women are allowed off campus, there
would be a greater possibility of satis
fying the demand for men's housing.
The likelihood of vacant dormitory
space, with the introduction of the
Wilbur option, is highly improbable.
The logistics of putting the bodies
into Wilbur for the pilot project is
only half of our task in our proposal.
The problems of staffing the complex
and from there working out feasible
programs is the next step. Hopefully
to make this pilot project a real step
toward achieving the residential uni
versity, as much of the general report
as possible will be included, only the
scope has changed not the purpose of
the program.
Selection for next year's faculty resi
dents could be turned over to a com
mittee composed of one faculty and
one student member of the ASSU
Housing Commission and two members
from the Dean of Students Office, with
the advice of the present Committee.
Once this task has been completed, the
faculty can participate in choosing the
tutors and drawing up more detailed
plans for the program.
The committee realizes that a com
mitment to this kind of residential
education will require an overt shift
in educational effort from the class
room and lab to the residence, with
both compensation for it and relief
from other teaching duties—and quite
probably the replacement of their
other more formal academic functions
by other personnel. We also realize
that there will be a budget problem,
but emphatically deny that worthwhile
educational goals should not be pro
posed and slated because of current
pragmatic limitations.
The committee hopes that, through

further study—best done in conjunc
tion with the study of education at
Stanford—that it will be possible to
rearrange and reemphasize the com
ponents of freshman education in such
a way that existing resources would
permit a serious upgrading of resi
dence education, and the possibility
that such education could replace some
aspects of the present program. This
might well allow the same total re
sources of money and people to meet
the desired objectives by shifting the
locale and method of teaching, rather
than just adding to the staff and pro
gram.
Presently in Wilbur there are three
sponsor rooms and one tutor room
which can accommodate the new tutors.
Hopefully as many of these rooms will
be used for that purpose, but if for
any reason four tutors per house is im
possible, then the rooms could be used
for offices which would at least bring
more graduate level contact into the
residence.
One possible suggestion for Wilbur's
eight houses next year would be to
have five of them centered around a
general theme, one international house,
and two left unstructured. There has
been much agitation for an interna
tional house on campus and many pro
posals have been drawn up. Five sug
gested topics for the theme houses are
"Religion and Society," "Literature and
Fine Arts," "Science and Human Prob
lems," "The Urban Threat," and "So
cial Change."
To take only one of these themes and
speculate what the given house of
faculty, tutors and students will make
of it is another of those endless first
steps in imagination potential. The
house that was using the topic "Science
and Human Problems," for example,
would bring in a diversity of fields
from the natural sciences to the hu
manities. Many of the poignant prob
lems facing students and faculty are
centered in this topic but the same
could probably be said in a different
context for each of the five topics. The
impact of technology on our economic
and social system, the moral contro
versy over the newest discoveries in
genetics, the myth of the scientific
method are all themes to be explored.

What happens to a world view when
scientific discoveries puncture com
fortable philosophies? What is time
and how does man control it and how
docs it control man? These are ques
tions to be asked. Above all, it is im
portant to remember that the direc
tion of intellectual thrust must not be
too well defined in advance. One of
the most valuable experiences for the
living group will be coming to grips
with the topic, deciding for themselves
how the general area should be ap
proached, and then proceeding to de
velop programs and structures on their
own.
The committee is highly enthusiastic
about the creative possibilities pre
sented by the Wilbur experiment—the
first step in the direction of a fully
integrated and coeducational residence.
If the experiment even approaches the
measure of success the committee en
visions, it could prove a major innova
tion in the history of American higher
education. A well developed program
of residential education offers a poten
tial of immeasurable dimension.
X. Correlation of this report with the
overall review of education at Stanford
The key problems of residence edu
cational stimulus and the kind of staff
and budget commitments necessary
need further specific elucidations which
the committee hopes can be under
taken by the Executive Committee for
the study of education at the earliest
opportunity, in order to agree on ob
jectives and make necessary staff and
financial plans for the Wilbur Project
to be able to start in the Fall of 1967.
The committee takes this oppor
tunity to thank the following people
for individual contributions to our
meetings: Dwight Clark, Dr. Lawrence
Thomas, Miss Sally Mahoney, Dr. Mar
tin Evans, Dick Williams, Mike Roster,
Howie Holmes, Doug Davis, Bob Gor
don, Dean Hind, and Dean Novak.
February 6, 1967
Subcommittee on the Freshmen Resi
dence Program ASSU Housing Com
mission. Barbara Levin, Judy Bader.
Barbara Warren, David Koval, Chris
topher Harte, Douglas Sorenson, Scott
Soames (Co-Chairman) Elizabeth
Cohen, B. Davie Napier, Max
Maurice M. Osborne Jr. (Co-Chairman).
Doubts of the ability of Stanford's
present educational system to provide
for the needs of its students, and speci
fic questions about the relevance of
the residence program in its present
form, have stimulated students, faculty,
and staff to seek more appropriate
solutions.
The A.S.S.U., concerned about the
quality of residential experience at
Stanford — particularly in contrast to
that at the Overseas Campuses —
created through its Legislature a Hous
ing Commission, one task of which was
to review and make recommendations
concerning the freshman residence
program in its relation to education.
At about the same time, Associate
Dean of Students Robert Gordon was
asked to present proposals for a new
model of freshman residential educa
tion.
Both A.S.S.U. and Dean Gordon al
most simultaneously appointed com
mittees in the early Fall of 1966 to ad
vise them in the making of recommen
dations in this important area, and
rather than continue a too-familiar pat
tern of separate committees working
independently (and often divergently)
it was decided to merge the two.
In the merger, the Dean's Advisory
Committee agreed to accept the A.S.S.U.
invitation to become an integral part,
of its group. Dean Gordon agreed to
accept the report of the entire group
in the same light as he would have the
recommendations of his originally ap
pointed committee, and the merged
group in turn agreed to attempt in
good faith to assist him in meeting his
deadlines and obligations as best it
could.
Despite particular questions existing
about the Sponsor system, the Commit
tee felt from the outset that to limit
its discussions and report to such par
ticulars, or to start out with them,
would be to avoid the main Issues sur
rounding ,the quality and meaning of

residential education at Stanford, par
ticularly the freshman program.
The Committee thus firmly decided
that it would start from a fresh con
sideration of the issues and principles
involved, relating its recommendations
to them. It was recognized that such
an approach would be time consuming,
that it might seem Utopian to some;
yet a critque and basic statement about
the ideas of a residence university
seemed vital for future planning and
growth.
At the same time, the practical ne
cessity for more immediate recommen
dations and action was realized. The
present report is in this sense a pre
liminary, or interim report, which at
tempts to set forth and justify some
practical recommendations for residence
programs that could be adopted in
1967-68 — steps within the framework
of progression towards a more ideal
situation.
The Case for the Residential Commu
nity — The Personal Committment to
Learning
The impossibility of considering the
freshman experience in isolation from
the life and purposes of the entire un
dergraduate program has been a ma
jor premise in the subcommittee's
study of the Freshman Residence Pro
gram. Two main assumptions underlie
this approach.
One is that the university experience,
as a whole, is only one part of the con
tinuum of the educational process, a
process which neither begins nor ends
at the university gates. The educational
ideals should be the same for all four
undergraduate years in terms of what
they declare for the growth of persons.
The freshman year is only a step in
a span of development, having a spe
cial function as the first step but not
a separate one.
The second is a new conception which
views the university as a community
for learning through personal, interac
,tjon, find development,. .nsp, of

all its facilities for education. This view
emphasizes that the classroom, library
or laboratory cannot — indeed does not
even now — have a monopoly on pro
viding for the education and develop
ment of students. Else, why a residen
tial university? Why not subcontract
all residential arrangements and avoid
hotel problems?
The Committee felt strongly that
there was urgent need for institutional
endorsement of the fact that without
growth and development in personal,
social, and emotional dimensions, the
achievements of intellect are shallow
and stand in isolation from the indivi
dual and his world. The conviction that
gives personal meaning to knowledge
is a product of direct human relation
ship, and we make far too little use
of its potential.
In a more settled and comfortable
past, with much greater mutuality of
expectations and values both between
peers and between generations, the ur
gency of such questions was less, the
scope more limited and the answers
more predictable. The bull-session quite
effectively handled many aspects of
this personal-social side of development.
For this, and other reasons, relatively
little formal attention to it was felt
to be necessary, aside from some for
mal lectures on hygiene, the evils of
sex and booze, and the Fundamental
Standard. After all, boys were (and
would be) boys, and pretty soon they'd
grow up into men, producers and fa
thers. Home and society would take
care somehow that they grew up right,
and the college would provide an ac
cepted transition station on the way,
some academic input, and try to keep
the lid on boyish spirit getting out of
hand.
By contrast today, for many students
questions about one's nature, and about
one's relationship to an uncertain
world, and about this world itself are
more insistent, and more pre-occupying
.before The V&iefttipns a#?, -real,

and require believable answers from
within the individual. And, until he can
find them, this quest, this preoccupa
tion has top priority, while academics
suffer through seeming less relevant.
And though there are many students
who are relatively unconcerned about
such questions, we feel their total edu
cation would be enriched if they could
be purposefully involved.
The history of formal didactic at
tempts to speak to these burning ques
tions is rather dismal, and all over the
country, there has been a steady atro
phy of required, and even of voluntary
courses relative to personal hygiene,
sex, morals, and behavior. Both stu
dents and educators sense that because
a viable set of personal ethics and
values just grow within the individual,
attempts simply to impose them from
without are relatively futile.
Not only have curricular approaches
to such questions atrophied (happi
ly!), but American education is nearing
the end of a decade in which the entire
necessity of addressing itself to the
problem of personal growth has been
quite deliberately rejected. Sputnik was
the symbol, and such spokesmen as
Hyman Rickover took up the cudgels,
with articulate and seathing denuncia
tions of "Education for Living" — of
concepts of "adjustment," and insisted,
along with many others, on intellectual
excellence (for "excellence" read "a
chievement") as the right, and only
purpose of education.
Growth of population; of national
wealth with its stimulus to upward so
cial mobility; increasing complexity
and diversity of knowledge with its
concommitant of faculty pre-occupa
tion and relatively-narrower fields; and
increased competition have sharpened
the pressures for achievement, leaving
even loss time, thought, or energy for
development as a person.
The need to pay most serious atten
tion to this is most keenly felt by many
studetitfi hy their eldprs.
There has been some re-emergence of
an expressed need for leadership and
cooperation in working out better ways
to assist and support the individual in
his personal education and develop
ment, and when students do not raise
these questions, their education should
raise them, and speak to them.
Unstructured and spontaneous stu
dent discussion, particularly at the
freshman level, is heavily-flavored with
the need to sort oneself out, but as it
now operates, it tends less to growth
than to its more traditional social func
tion of settling into "bird-of-a-feather"
groupings in which the individual
can find comfort and support for his
own sets of values and seekings. With
in this spontaneously-forming group
ings, the dialogue tends to become in
creasingly circular, the values increas
ingly exclusive, and there is decreased
permeability to fresh ideas and ex
perience.
In an educational situation where
concentration is placed on the formal
aspects of education there is an imbal
ance which produces distortion, which
too often takes the form of rejection
of the academic sphere as "irrelevant."
Another consequence is the dangerous
polarization of university life into two
worlds; that of the classroom, and that
of social life, setting them to work
against each other instead of with each
other toward the individual's goals. The
acceptance of the residence university
ideal as being vital to education can
be one important factor in keeping
the two worlds together and moving in
the same direction, whereas the pres
ent residence program presents too
many forces that divide living from
learning.
The Committee takes as self-evident
that a truly liberal education is in fact
liberating — in making both wider and
deeper the individual's ability to per
ceive, absorb, analyze, and choose in a
vastly-increasing array of people,
events, and issues, and not in forcing
the premature adoption of limited, and
constricting attitudes. In effect this
seems the necessity of the student's
continuous and repeated exposure to
and challenge by diversity of ideas, of
values, styles, and of course people.
It is here that the meaning of residen
tial education springs to life, for it of
fers potentially the best milieu for
daily face-to-face interaction with peers,
with older students, and faculty mem
bers of both sexes — offering diversity
of age, sex, discipline and values in
the highly personal way so necessary
for exposure to lead to involvement,
and knowledge to become commitment.
The necessity of direct personal in
teraction is most strongly endorsed by
the Committee, for it is the set of
values and mental attitudes formed in
such day-in, day-out exchange that set
tle most deeply into one's fiber. Thus
to narrow the range, or dilute the qual
ity of this exchange seems antiethical
to education. Kenneth Benne, in his
article "The Uses of Fraternity" states
in this regard, "People learn value sys
tems in the first instance as they form
relations with others. These relations
in turn develop norms with corres
ponding rationales which the individual
then internalizes. If people, young or
old, can build groups with standards
that reward and strengthen honest
self - expression and self - acceptance,
creativity, mutual helpfulness and the
capacity to cope with conflict, then the
members of such groups will assimilate
these values as conditions of member
ship."
Choice, and learning to choose ra
tionally, are important educational
tasks, but should not be forced on the
individual too hurriedly, without
enough exposure to a wide range of
choices, nor without some room for
trial and error.
In summary then, the Committee
firmly believes that:
1. As education is, or should be, a con
tinuum, the freshman year cannot
be considered in isolation from the
entire undergraduate program, and al
though it has a special function as
the first step, it is an integral part
of the whole.
2. There is a grave imbalance in the
university's educational emphasis,
which tends to widen the needless,
and in our view harmful, gap be
tween the getting of knowledge and
the important business of living.
3. The deepest personal and intellectual
cpncems of students — their rela
tionships to themselves, and to an

uncertain world, — are not receiving
the institutional recognition and ef
fort they deserve.
4. That people learn most deeply by
living, and by forming personal re
lationships, and that when the resi
dence program, as at present, is
oriented to bed, board, and social
needs, the opportunities for inter
nalizing intellectual knowledge and
values are meager, and the tenden
cies to reject academic values as per
sonally-irrelevant are reinforced.
5. That choice, and learning to choose
critically are central educational
goals, but that it must depend on
close and repeated exposure to a
wide range of ideas, values, styles,
and people — people of different
ages, disciplines, sexes, and back
grounds, — and not be prematurely
forced into constricting channels
based primarily on social and not in
tellectual values.
6. Such close exposure to diversity, over
sufficient time, and if taken as the
norm, would go far in preventing
the formation of narrowed and
sterotypic attitudes and thought —
the surest signs of the ill-educated
man.
7. The way in which students live very
directly affects the whole quality of
their education: this single principle
underpins the whole concept of the
residential university.
"THE FRESHMAN CONDITION"
The paraphrase above in intentional,
— and designed to point out that being
a freshman at Stanford, or anywhere,
is an intensely personal experience of
transition. Although the general ideals
of education apply equally, — and es
pecially, — to him, the freshman also
has attributes which make him special,
but not separate.
It is the feeling of this committee
that freshmen can and should receive
the benefit of special experiences de
signed for their particular problems.
The assumption that we would like to
question is whether this need for some
special orientation experiences necessi
tates their living in a segragated fash
ion. Although it is expedient from an
"efficiency" point of view, it may gen
erate excessive anxiety over perfor
mance in freshman courses and a rein
forcement for essentially juvenile
modes of facing college stresses. His
special attributes can be summed up as
follows:
A. He obviously needs early and reli
able information about his new com
munity — where things are, what he
is to do, and so forth.
B. He is making the transition most
traditionally accepted in America as
the line between family dependency
and personal autonomy.
In actuality, the line, if there is one,
is blurred, and varies greatly from one
freshman to another. In general, the
freshman comes equipped with the cre
dentials of previous achievement and
approval — hoping he will be accepted
in his new college world, and fearing
that he may not. At the same time he
hopes that his performance and life
will be freer and larger than before.
The freshman, more poignantly than
any other undergraduate, in his transi
tion from a narrower to a hopefully
wider identity, wants the understand
ing of his old world, personal accep
tance by the new — and fears he may
have neither.
He is thus enormously vulnerable,
and as Steve Hurlbut has written in
his excellent paper, is characterized by
a "pervasive anxiety." Until he has as
similated workable norms, he feels he's
got to satisfy some kind of external
standard, and is anxious until he does.
Some more specific stresses that tend
to promote anxiety are:
I.The sudden change of status that
comes from being taken out of a
high school situation where one is
enormously successful and being put
in a class of similar big frogs from
small ponds, and feeling that they
are tougher frogs than he is:
2. The doubt about being able to live up
to tough academic demands:
3. Doubts about his being accepted by
his peers — of both sexes;
4. Being away from home;
5. Confrontation with different reli
gious and social values than those
the student has learned in his family
and home community;
6. Ambivalence about authority, and
older peopje in general.
This araciety and vulnerability are by

no means bad in themselves — and in
deed offer the most fertile soil for cul
tivation of the seeking young mind.
But the thrust of this searching anxiety
is in essence social, and approval-seek
ing — and therefore related to persons
and social groups, or the winning of ac
ceptable symbols of achievement.
The Committee feels that the perva
sive, and expectable freshman anxiety
and search for some group identity is
a double-edged sword, with potential
for both regression and for growth.
On one side, if there is failure of
approval from home, or personal ac
ceptance at college, or fewer grade
points "in the bank" than expected,
anxiety may well become dysfunction
al, with consequences such as neurotic
disturbance, refusal to compete aca
demically, and even regressive and
anti-social group-adolescent behavior,
and the reinforcement of pre-college
values.
CRITIQUE OF THE PRESENT
FRESHMAN RESIDENCE PROGRAM
The Committee feels that too many
features of the present freshman resi
dence program serve:
1. To reinforce natural anxieties among
the newest members of the Univer
sity, and
2. To promote the seeking of solutions
to this anxiety that have little if any
thing to do with educational pur
poses, but tend to promote prema
ture and mutually exclusive social
groupings.
As he moves into a freshman resi
dence, he is thrown into close contact
with a large peer-group of greater
diversity in background, attitudes, and
talent than he is likely to have known.
And, because competition and fears of
failure are keenest among peers (par
ticularly of neophytes performing simi
lar tasks,) these differences within the
larger peer-group tend to move the stu
dent into protective subgroups of
peers with attitudes and pre-college
backgrounds similar to his own, within
which he finds support. In such mutual
ly-supportive social groups, the student
can arm himself and defend himself
psychologically against any new ideas
to which he is being exposed, from fel
low students, members of the opposite
sex, and his professors. Studies will
never be taken at all seriously but will
be dealt with in a purely cognitive
fashion, ingested for the purpose of
passing exams and discarded soon af
terwards. Under these conditions, we
may have done away with the prob
lems of anxiety, but are faced with the
possibility of at least two other un
desirable consequences, 1) His atti
tudes and values may remain totally
unquestioned throughout his college
career; and 2) a group devoted to de
fending itself against the climate of an
institution may exhibit anti-social char
acteristics of alienated people every
where.
That present groups formed for mu
tual support emerge after a limited
exposure to new, and possible better
models, is certainly true, and groupings
tend to occur along pre-college lines
and values, or in rebellion against
them.
The present segregated freshman
residence situation also tends:
3. To promote the seeking of achieve
ment symbols (i.e. grades) rather
than knowledge of self or substance;
4. By a residence administration seen
as primarily regulatory and manger
ial, to aggravate the natural ambi
valence of freshmen towards author
ity with results ranging from thought
less docility to destructive rebellion;
or apathetic alienation;
5. To provide too much pressure for
distortion and ritualization of rela
tionships between the sexes — the
"dating syndrome" — and a poverty
of opportunities for simple, friendly
interaction of people, a lack fre
quently deplored by both freshmen
and upperclassmen.
Both architecture and group pres
sures, as well as well-institutionalized
pressures for achieving good grades
in a heavy curriculum conspire to rob
the freshman of privacy — both physi
cal privacy, and temporal privacy; i.e.
some time simply to be himself, to spin
his wheels, and to think, with room for
trial and error.
There is, at least in Wilbur, no at
mosphere in the dining halls in the
least conducive to conversation — and
for some reason, plastic and formica
encourage one to get In and out fast,

with emphasis on feeding the face, but
none on nourishing friendship.
All of these (observable) results are
Inimical to the purposes of stimulating
interest in new subjects, of promoting
constructive reaction to diversity, of
the discouragement of stereotypic
thinking and behavior, and of trust in
older people as human beings.
More importantly, the positive po
tentials of freshman vulnerability go
relatively untapped — or are being tap
ped for outworn purposes. For this
vulnerability is personal, and if pro
vided with daily personal interaction
with a wide range of interesting
people of different ages and different
disciplines, there is more than a good
chance that Stanford freshmen would
attach their enthusiasms and their
hearts to the new models they need
and seek — models of greater depth
and diversity, but providing the identi
ty and security they need.
The interaction between freshman
men in Wilbur and the Faculty Resi
dents has varied greatly in its intensity
and impact — with instances of great
fruitfulness, or relative neutrality and
harmony, and a very few of a truly
negative quality.
Faculty Associates to freshman resi
dences have often provided important
personal interactions between fresh
men and the faculty — but just as
often these contacts have been super
ficial and ritualized.
Sponsors, while providing the great
est impact in personal exchange, pre
sent, because of their small number,
relatively limited contact with upper
classmen's values and experiences.
While all these personal contacts in
the freshman residences do in fact en
rich the education of many freshmen,
the other fact remains that there are
simply not enough such contacts, nor
sufficient support and time for these
few people to give residential educa
tion the emphasis it deserves.
EVOLUTION OF THE PRESENT
FRESHMAN RESIDENCE PROGRAM
Whatever rationalizations may be
adduced in support of the present
freshman residence program, it ap
pears to the Committee that it is in
large measure a holdover from an
earlier set of norms — norms that re
ceived wide acceptance and support in
those times, but that are under serious
question *oday.
In the Teens, the Twenties, and even
well into the Thirties, there was more
general acceptance (in society at large
as well as in the university commu
nity) of a particular hierarchical order,
and the particular authority structure
such an order implies. One tended to
know where one stood in relation to
the order at any given period, and to
be confident that one would ascend the
ladder by predictable steps.
Perhaps because of the relative sta
bility of the social order, personal de
velopment was thought of more along
the lines of advancement within that
order — with of course the acquisition
of enough "knowledge" and academic
polish to secure preference in vocations
and the status of a college-educated
man. It was important in itself to be
a senior, or for that matter an upper
classman, and the class structure had
in itself real meaning to the student.
Hence, the development of class spirit
and cohesiveness was valued, encour
aged, and ritualized. Even the major
steps in progression along the well
worn rungs were ritualized in such
rites of passage as the annual "Frosh-
Soph War," a ritual which would have
been impossible had there been no such
open class distinction.
The residence arrangements prob
ably reflected an accept? e of this
order according to social and culture
values of the day, and were aimed at
initiating the freshman into them. A
deliberate segration of the neophyte —
either by residence, by distinguishing
badges (viz. the "Beanie"), by restric
tion of privilege, or by combinations
of these has in many human organiza
tions, served to reinforce acculturation
to desired social and behavioral norms,
and whether anyone was purposefully
aware of this or not, such considera
tions surely operated in freshman resi
dential segragation. Aside from "home
work" performed in a dorm, there was
a rather strict geographic separation
of intellectual-academic concerns and
the personal-social sphere. The class
room and laboratory (and one's closed
~oom or the stacks) were meant for
the'one — while the dorm was really
for the other, and largely designed for
it.
The early history of the sponsor
program, when Encina Hall was the
freshman men's dorm, illustrates well
its use as an instrument for indoctri
nation of the "hapless Frosh" into pre
vailing upperclassmen's values.
Most sponsors wore a block "S", and
embodied a prevailing ideal of social
and athletic prowess, coupled with a
sense of loyalty to the group, respect
for authority, and an obligation to be
exemplary to their potential succes
sors. As recently as 1955, the effective
ness of a sponsor was measured, among
other things, by the percentage of his
charges attending the pregame rallies
and intercollegiate games.
Most sponsors were also fraternity
men, and another measure of his suc
cess as a sponsor was the number of
his freshmen pledged. For the spon
sors, there was little conflict involved
in serving simultaneously the fresh
men, one's own upperclassman values,
and those of the institution and its
authorities, for all constituents had
pretty much the same understanding
of the system, and of each of their
places within it.
In the intervening years, particularly
those since World War 11, there have
been profound changes in the social
order — a disruption of settled commu
nity, sharpened preoccupations with
material competition, and a culture less
and less sure of where it stood, or what
it believed in. Particularly among those
intelligent enough to attend such col
leges as Stanford, there has been in
creasing criticism of existing institu
tions which seem to them to produce
as leaders men with narrowed vision,
preoccupation with power, and too
little time or love for people. In this
climate of malaise, and in the absence
of once tacitly-held assurances, the
young person's search for personal
identity, relevance, and belief has
emerged as a very important difference
between many students of today and
of the previous generation, and again
underscores the vital importance of the
living group experience.
Despite some expressed dissatisfac
tions with the existing sponsor system,
the sponsors and a few feculty resi
dents at Wilbur were quite probably
the first to sense both this new and
urgent need among the freshmen (and
of course in themselves,) and that the
approach to it had to be met at the
level of day-in, day-out personal inter
action.
The evolution of the present sponsor
system has been a response both to
the growing need for attention to per
sonal education and development, and
to the need to substitute a drive for
continuous search and openness for the
more comfortable, but rather water
tight, social groupings which they saw
taking place.
For the past few years, the sponsors
have been the real pioneers in residen
ital education in the freshman resi
dence program. To condemn them as
"politically motivated" or irresponsible
seems a rather defensive and negative
reaction to the admitted mistakes of
a few members, and more importantly
fails to recognize that, without much
help or understanding, they are on the
track of something very important.
There have, to be sure, been other
efforts in the direction of residential
education for freshmen — relatively
cautious additions which have been in
the general direction of enriching per
sonal experience and contact in the.
residences, and may represent an in
choate recognition of this need.
Such additions have been the Facul
ty Residents, the Faculty Associates,
the Student Associates — at first men,
later women — and later, more free
dom for dining exchanges. More for
mally, in-residence seminars, guests-in
residence, panel discussions, and even
classes have been introduced.
But the former additions (with the
exception of a few Faculty Residents)
have in general provided only super
ficial interactions, while the latter
(again with a few notable exceptions)
have borne little relation to life and
living education other than physical
proximity. There is a heavy implica
tion of the mere introduction of more
academics into residences — while the
.ru#ot iT.nortant questions to students
go, for the most part, unanswered.
Th< present freshmen residence pro
gram, in its segregation by class, by

sex, by its continued reinforcement of
separation of living from learning, is
anachronistic, and reflects values that
have become less relevant and ideas that
are no longer true — such as assump
tions that satisfactory personal devel
opment takes care of itself within an
accepted and orderly framework, (of
which the freshman class is one clear
step, houses and all); that personal
education and development are irrele
vant to, or at least peripheral to the
purposes of "Higher Education"; that
mutually-deaf social groupings are ac
ceptable parts of the social mosaic —
when the fact of the matter is that we
are badly failing to meet these now
paramount questions. Despite our be
ginning attentions to this need, the
main thrust of the freshman resi
dence program and the academic pro
gram, still tends to leave the freshman
alone in his search and to force him
into protective groupings.
FRESHMAN IN3PEORATION INTO
UNIVERSITY IJFE
As discussed above, the Committee
feels strongly that the present segre
gation of freshmen reflects values no
longer taken seriously, reinforces the
separation of learning from living
(with impoverishment of both), height
ens some dysfunctional anxieties, and
tends to force premature and relative
ly narrow security groupings, rein
forces the artificiality of contact be
tween the sexes, and alienates students
from the faculty.
Thus, segregation is in itself a cen
tral problem, and, of course, the alter
natives must be aimed at integration
of the freshman in one or more ways.
A. Coeducational Housing
As noted earlier, a major problem
for freshmen is the difficulty of estab
lishing relationships with members of
the opposite sex on any basis other
than a social or dating level. For fresh
man men, the problem is especially
acute, manifesting itself in a heighten
ing anxiety, increased insecurity, and
frustration. The institution of a sys
tem of coeducational housing would
not only ameliorate the undesirable so
cial position of freshman men but also
provide an atmosphere conducive to
more natural (spontaneous) and per
sonal relationships. Upperclassmen al
so face similar problems as the results
of a segragated housing system, and
they too could gain much from having
the option of a coeducational residence
program.
That such a program is both prac
tical and desirable is supported by the
acknowledged success of the overseas
campus program as a living and learn
ing experience. In addition, the appar
ent success of the Grove Project as a
coeducational residence suggests that
coeducation can be successful on the
home campus.
The committee believes that, in the
long run, coeducational housing should
be the prevailing, although not exclu
sive, pattern for residential education
at Stanford, and that significant steps
can and should be taken toward this
goal during the coming year, 1967-68.
Although some houses segregated by
sex should be retained for these stu
dents who do not wish to live in a co
educational residence, a major effort
should be directed toward providing
coeducational housing in its most sig
nificant sense, men and women living
in the same house. Even these houses
which remain segregated could be
placed in juxtaposition to increase the
interaction among men and women.
The goal of a residence housing both
men and women would be most effect
ively realized if the ratio is approxi
mately 1:1. Although the 1:1 ratio Is
most desirable, a ratio of 2:1 would,
we feel, be successful.
As a long range goal the Committee
recommends changing of th« admis
sions ratio to one that is closer to 1:1
as a step towards this ideal.
B. Integration of classes:
As discussed more fully in Section
111 of this report, the freshman year is
a period of growth in which freshmen
must adjust to what for many of them
is a totally new culture, with new and
demanding standards. This situation re
quires a certain amount of social sup
port to prevent excessive and destruc
tive anxiety.
The committee is convinced that the
freshman residence program too often
promotes a seeurity that reduces expo
sure to challenging and growth-moti
vating aspects of university life, there
by retarding development, rather than

preparing the freshman to meet the
challenges which are in a large mea
sure responsible for his insecurity. In
addition, individual anxieties often re
inforce each other to the detriment of
all concerned.
While it is agreed that there is val
uable support and learning through
contact with others engaged in the
same experience, this by no means re
quires that most of one's contacts be
freshmen, nor does it exclude the pos
sibility or desirability of living in con
tact with others.
In a maximally integrated system in
which freshmen constitute approxi
mately 30 per cent of the population,
reinforcement of pre-college values
would be healthily reduced, while
freshmen, still pursuing similar curri
cula, would not suffer from a dearth of
contact and interaction with other
freshmen. In a fully integrated system,
the freshman could contribute to the
atmosphere of the residence, but could
not dominate it. Social support would
be provided not only by contact with
other freshmen, but also by the pres
ence of upperclassmen who have gone
through similar experiences and who
can contribute to the freshman's sense
of social support both by advice or ex
ample and by providing living evidence
that students actually survive the
freshmen year. This system would, of
course, have the further advantage of
more fully orienting freshmen to the
challenges and opportunities of the
university, a need which can be only
partially fulfilled by the present spon
sor system.
C. Partial Integration
In the preceding discussion the mini
mum ratio of upperclassmen to fresh
men in an integrated residence is as
sumed to be well in excess of 1:1. Any
system of partial integration with ra
tios well below this minimum faces se
vere difficulties:
1. Although the population would be
enriched by the addition of more ex
perienced upperclass models, fresh
men would still dominate the dormi
tory; the balance between security
and growth would not be significant
ly changed.
2. Under one suggestion for partial in
tegration offered by Dean Gordon's
staff, upperclassmen would essential
ly be guests whose rooms happened
to be in a freshman dormitory. It is
difficult to understand what would
motivate 147 upperclassmen to accept
such a position, or why they would
feel any dedication to close personal
interaction with the freshmen in an
educational sense.
3. The sponsor system is successful
largely because a few individuals are
committed to making the best of an
unfortunate living situation for
freshmen. It is not clear that the sub
stitution of five guests for one spon
sor dedicated to working with fresh
men is desirable.
4. Partial integration in itself has never
been suggested as an optimal resi
dence system, and it is not clear that
it is a desirable step toward total
integration. The committee is con
vinced that change for its own sake
is an unsound policy at any stage in
the development of a more viable
residence system.
Freshmen have the most to gain in
a campus-wide residence program
founded on the principles of co-educa
tion and integration. The institution of
this program requires not only the
support of freshmen, but also that of
upperclassmen. It could be argued that
upperclassmen would not want to give
up their present housing system. In
answer to this objection three points
can be made:
1. It is not clear that upperclassmen
are satisfied with the present sys
tem. Every spring quarter freshmen
express dissatisfaction with the hous
ing alternatives open to them: the
success of the overseas program as
a living experience has prompted
many to call for a more desirable
program at Stanford at-Stanford;
there were five applicants for each
place in the Grove Project, and if
the seminar hadn't been required
there would have been more upper
classmen seeking this exciting new
living alternative.
2. Tn our model of a fully integrated,
coeducational house, the percentage
of freshmen living in should be kept
well below 50 per cent. Freshmen
could contribute their real enthusi
asm and the challenge of their ques
tions without dominating the houses,

so that integration would benefit
both freshmen and upperclassmen.
3. In our residence program some inde
pendent npperclass houses would re
main, if there were a demand for
them. We believe that most students
would choose to live in a coed, inte
grated house, however, if some stu
dents wished something akin to the
present system such alternatives
would be open to them. The assump
tion we are making is that the new
residenco opportunities will sell them
selves.
E. Diversity and Self-Selection
Diversity among housing alternatives
is desirable. In addition, diversity with
in each house must be maintained to
avoid provincialism within the various
alternatives. Free choice, particularly
too early in the college career, among
various living styles will eventually
produce self-selective, provincial group
ings which will contradict the ideal
of developing acceptance of individual
differences within the residence. Three
points can be made to this problem:
1. No house needs to represent a cross
section of the student body. When
too great diversity exists in a living
group, cohesiveness is lost and frag
mentation takes the form of break
ing up into small sub-groups between
which little communication exists.
Therefore, some commonality, espe
cially by interests, is desirable.
2. It may not be the case that giving
students free choice among really
worthwhile alternatives will result
in serious problems of self-selection.
At any rate, it will take time for this
to happen and if indeed problems do
arise, we should be able to deal with
them early.
3. Assuming that such problems do
arise and call for some restriction of
free choice, one possible solution
would be to limit the amount of time
that an individual could live in a par
ticular residence. By encouraging
switching and moving among stu
dents, no system would be allowed
to lock itself in and stagnate.
VII. The Tone and Character of the
Living Group: Staff and Program
The residential components of most
universities are now basically eating
and sleeping facilities, structurally like
barracks, motels, or high-rise Hiltons,
surrounded by parking lots. To become
a truly residential university, the resi
dence hall must become a center of
learning and development equal in im
portance to the lecture hall. Ideally
their staffing, planning, and adminis
tration should be the responsibility of
faculty members rather than housing
directors or business offices.
While Stanford now is a far cry from
the suggested ideal of a residence uni
versity, many steps have been pro
posed which work toward the ideal. In
tegration by class and co-education are
two strong recommendations made by
the committee, which as discussed
above have considerable value in them
selves.
However, these steps will not by
themselves result in genuine centers
for learning. The mechanical bod>
shuffling is only one step in preparing
a more conducive atmosphere for total
education; the other is the purposeful
stimulation of intellectual activities
within the residence. The character and
quality of such activities, and their
relevance to students' concerns will be
come a crucial measure and determi
ned of the contribution that residence
is providing for its component mem
bers. The program for each residence
would decide for itself what input to
organize as a stimulus for the desired
enrichment of the quality of living that
contributes to the total education of
the individual and of the group's stu
dents, faculty, ideas, and the unending
list of resources of a university com
munity are all potential and powerful
inputs. The interaction of these compo
nents now creates the particular ex
citement of a university, but these
components are being comparatively
wasted in one of the areas in which
they could be the most effective ... the
living situation. The challenge of a
idential program is to organize and
bring the components together in the
most imaginative ways to utilize the
potential to the lullest.
One of the major areas of waste Is
student-faculty relations. Both the stu
donts and the faculty complain about
the distance and seeming disinterest of
the two groups. The section in the re
port which* deals with the faculty rol£
in the residence university is only a
very small start on the road to killing
this unhealthy and unproductive gap.
(See section on faculty residents.)
Too often students miss out on much
of the university experience because of
communication gaps. A face-to-face liv
ing unit is the most obvious place for
communication and contact between
students and faculty. Often the pre
vailing ethos of a dormitory can work
against this ground level communica
tion and antithetically to the explora
tory ventures of the individual. A dorm
which is oriented around a strictly so
cial purpose may even squelch the mo
tivation branding it as "intellectual," a
word that has been mistreated from all
directions in our society. While many
houses do not fall into this trap, there
is another pitfall of ruts and habit that
restricts the growing of experience in
a different way. The entire responsi
bility of taking advantage of the under
graduate experience is on the individ
ual. and some people find themselves
vorking against odds that would dis
courage the most aggressive. Fresh
man in particular belong to this cate
gory. They need to be exposed to the
broad ranges of opportunity but also
need help to make use of them. An
adolescent peer culture reinforcing high
school anti-intellectualism is not one
)f the best possible ways to meet this
need. The outside stimulus and help
will not best be provided by authority
figures who tell people what to do. or
beat off the anti-intellectual bullies. The
best assurance that free exchange and
.sharing of experience will occur will
be found in the atmosphere of the liv
ing group and in the character of its
leadership. A lively house where there
is a constant influx of new and differ
ent stimuli where all things that need
expression can find it, has the best
chance against apathy or unspoken
social taboos. House organized activi
ties such as art exhibits, musical per
formances, seminars, or small scale
lecture series suffer the same fate as
the individual's struggle for expres
sion and exploration. Not everyone
would want to participate and now
many of those who do want to can,
"but to those who find it difficult, en
couragement, not brick walls, should
be present in the tone of the house.
The possibility of organizing houses
around special interests has been sug
gested; experimentation is in order.
Houses with distinctive interests—fine
arts, social issues, foreign policy—may
well bring together students and fac
ulty from various disciplines who
could more meaningfully and readily
develop a learning community than a
house whose residents and loosely
affiliated faculty can only share pleas
antries. There would still be ample
diversity by virtue of differences in
personality, background, majors, ca
reer plans and so on, but there would
also be a major intellectual and social
oncern they all share. More detail
for this kind of program is discussed
in the specific proposal for next year.
The program of input is just the
beginning to what happens to the life
n a particular house. It provides pos
sibly a focus or direction as well as the
important underlying communication
and resource network of faculty, tutor,
and student. It must be emphasized
that what is going to happen in every
house is going to be determined most
by the people who live there. There
is a give-and-take natural exchange
between the program of ideas for the
living group and the group's response.
Reuniting the sphere of living as a
meaningful and integral part of a stu
dent's education in no way signifies
the creation of a twenty-four-hour
classroom. The residential education
urogram is not an extension of the
formal academic structure; it is its
complement. Although the opportun
,fy for experimenting with courses
given for credit should be open, it is
only one of the myriad of possibilities
with residential education. While
proper planning, particularly in the
■'election of good faculty, is necessary
it would be unrealistic to lose sight
of the interaction from the other di
rection. A structure too rigid would
kill the potential of a residential pro
gram just as the naive assumption
that body shuffling is the whole
answer.
Flexibility and spontaneity are key
<*ords in the concept of what a pro
gram should be prepared to provide.
Fvrit the program should be externally

flexible. The development of the house
spirit would depend upon the inter
action between the particular members
and particular faculty and tutors. This
matter of orientation or direction for
the house could bow with the interest
and demand for a particular living sit
uation. Some programs would last
longer than others, some undoubtedly
will be less successful, some would
evolve of themselves into a new area.
There is flexibility to let the good pro
grams grow and let the bad ones kill
themselves without bringing the entire
system to ruin. A diversity of choice
between residences could be main
tained.
There should in addition be an in
ternal flexibility within each group.
There must be room for growth and
change within the group. If topics were
to be the basis for a house, they would
always have to be picked with enough
latitude to allow each member of the
house to approach it in his own way.
This casua', unstructured opportunity
for close faculty contact speaks directly
to the need of students who are con
cerned with relevance as a criterion of
education, relevance to themselves or
to the contemporary world. There is
much opportunity for the student to
become very involved in the formation
and execution of his own education.
People who are involved and interested
in their own work tend to be more in
terested and able to contribute to the
work of others.
Another possibility that should be
included in the program is the oppor
tunity for experimentation with self
government. All sorts of opportunities
exist outside of the adoption of a hier
archy handed from above of president,
social chairman, etc. . .
There is much to be said for the edu
cationally valuable experience of learn
ing to live with ambiguity and without
automatically following tradition or
the dictates of an authority figure to
create the quality of life of a house
out of what is there ... to create an
educationally meaningful experience.
"The ideas sound great on paper!" is
the old comment at the outset of any
innovation with the rejoiner "But how
do you make it work in reality?" usu
ally not far behind. Why doesn't this
all happen now? Wilbur, the recom
mended site for next year's project,
already has many of the features out
lined in this report. "Is there really
going to be any significant difference?"
might be one question. The answer is
twofold. Some of the kinds of things
this report talks about are already
happening. If they weren't then there
would really be no use in trying to
maximize the interaction. But so much
more could be happening, and many of
the detrimental currents that run con
trary to the purpose of attending a
university could be reduced. All sys
tems are implemented by men. There
is not any system of law, morality or
of a residence university which can
overcome the fallibility of man. There
is not a magical formula implied in this
program, it rests very heavily on the
people who participate but so does
every other system. Good systems help
him along and the committee firmly
feels that a true residential university,
is a better system than one which only
claims to be and is somewhere in the
middle.
The people involved therefore are at
the core of the program. But their
effectiveness will depend to a large
degree upon how they see their role.
Their conception of their role in this
new system must undergo as much
fundamental reinterpretation as the
system itself.
How will the inertia of the present
resident conditions be overcome? Who
will set the tone, provide the mo
mentum, and contribute the leader
ship? Our first answer to these ques
tions is the students themselves. In any
residence system students will unde
niably be the major constituency.. But
how the resident staff can contribute
is also an important issue. At the pres
ent time Stanford has faculty residents,
tutors, resident assistants, and spon
sors. The role of each should be re
viewed.
Faculty Resident*
The committee would certainly not
deny the valuable contribution of the
faculty residents toward improving the
living situation at Stanford, but in
general, the faculty resident program
simply is not given the support neces
sary to tree Its members from -other

tasks and to allow them to devote
more time, thought and emphasis to
the residence education program. The
basic change would be that of increased
commitment to the living situation. The
primary responsibility of the faculty
resident should not be to the dorm di
rector or the administration, but to the
student within the living group or com
plex. To be effective, the faculty resi
dent must be willing to accept a de
manding and time consuming involve
ment in the living situation. His pres
ence there will be much more than a
face at meals or even that of a good
friend. Presumably the resident would
be a full time member of the faculty,
for the success of the residence pro
gram would greatly depend upon his
response to the intellectual needs of the
students. Doctoral candidates, coaches,
university officials, and administrators,
however, could still participate if they
would be willing to make the same
kind of commitment to the ideal of a
residence university. The interpersonal
factor is extremely important in this
kind of situation. Most every student
complains about the brilliant man who
can't give a good lecture. The same
argument will have to be taken into
account that not everyone can fulfill
this particular kind of a role. The fac
ulty resident must, above all, be sensi
tive to the interaction among students
in the group.
The things a faculty member could
contribute are bounded only by their
individual creativity but a few sug
gestions are in order.
1. In certain living units, seminars for
academic credit could be offered.
2. Directed reading could be made avail
able to certain students under the
resident.
3. Informal and noncredit seminars
should be encourage by the faculty
resident or when an idea came out
of the group he or some of his col
leagues could serve as resource per
son.
4. A student chairman and the faculty
resident could set up a meaningful
faculty associate program. The resi
dent can draw upon close friends and
colleagues which would supply an
internal identification missing in the
present program.
What would bring the faculty to par
ticipate in this program? Much of the
same dissatisfaction with student-fac
ulty relations that would bring the
students. Where something lively is
going on, something which the faculty
member is part there would not be
the embarassed ordeals that now take
place in dormitories on campus where
everyone involved is on their best and
most strained behavior. The living con
ditions would be similar to that of an
overseas campus though the professor
would not be required to drop his own
work or leave the center of his re
search. Class loads could be lessened
for the faculty participating because
they would be in essence only relocat
ing their teaching commitments, not
dropping them. They would have a
more flexible time schedule that might
be convenient to their purposes. This
position would also be in effect on a
rotating basis.
Resident Assistants and Tutors
The role of resident assistant should
be eliminated. In other words, we
would eliminate the role of the nice
guy disciplinarian, the liaison between
the administration and the students
who has been for too long forced into
an unfortunate position of hypocrisy.
As he is employed by the administra
tion he has an obligation to enforce
University policies, but if he is to be
at all effective with the students his
identification is with them. Too often
he has resolved the conflict by the
statement, "I don't care what you do,
just do it quietly so I don't see it."
Caught in this bind he has been in
effective as a man playing to two mas
ters. It is not enough to react to stu
dent needs and problems, for the role
we see must be one of creative action —
one of initiative and not merely re
sponse. Similarly, the present tutor
system is limited because its goal is
only to answer questions, not raise
them.
The present role of tutor, however,
is closer to our purpose than the RA's.
But this role must be expanded to be
effective. Thus, the idea of tutors
should be maintained, but its purpose
significantly broadened. Like faculty
residents > (and unlike RA's)' tutors

must have autonomy from primarily ad
ministrative policy and must be respon
sible primarily to the students below.
They should be linked to the resident
director, who is then responsible to the
administration. Although academic
assistance is undeniably important, tu
tors must do more than merely toot.
Their role should be to stimulate dis
cussion, to promote all types of inter
change, and to actively work towards
an educational atmosphere. At present
RA's and tutors tend to preserve rather
than promote and to be problem
solvers, rather than catalysts. The
tutor, like the faculty resident, must
approach his job with a new vitality
and commitment.
Sponsors
When the freshman class has been
entirely integrated into the university
community then the sponsor system
will become an anachronism. But until
that point the need remains and the
present system of sponsors and tutors
should be maintained.
There are two more important con
siderations before any system is put
Into operation. How will the faculty
and tutors be selected? And what are
the costs for the program as a whole?
These problems become relevant and
solvable only after the initial commit
ment and go ahead has been made.
Therefore discussion of these aspects
of the program will be included in
the proposal for next year.
VIII. Brief Assessment of Experience
At Other Institutions
While it is not our intention to base
the justification for our proposals on
the successes and failures of other in
stitutions with their necessarily dif
ferent circumstances, it is interesting
to note the results of a study con
ducted by the Faculty Committee on
Student Residences at Stanford in 1959.
Studying twenty-one similar universities
in this country they found that they
were about equally divided between
integrated and segregated freshman
living facilities. In general each school
seem satisfied with the system it then
had. However, while all of these with
the integrated system found it the most
workable, about 25 per cent of those
with segregated freshmen replied that
they were dissatisfied with their situ
ation and it certainly increases the
noisy freshman atmosphere which is
inimical to good study habits and con
ditions." Some schools reported that
the only reason for maintaining fresh
man segregation was pressure from
the fraternities who "objected stren
uously to placing their pledges under
the influence of hard bitten rugged in
dependents."
The many success of coeducational
housing on other campuses are too well
known to require documentation.
The institutions interviewed were
Cal Tech, Reed, Pembroke, Swarth
more, Oberlin, Pomona, Carleton, Rad
clifTe, Occidental, Ohio Wesleyan, Chi
cago, Brown, Dartmouth, Princeton,
Yale, Harvard, Northwestern, Washing
ton State, Oregon, Cornell, and Ohio
State.
IX. A Proposal:
The Wilbur Experiment
The committee has set forth its ar
guments for coeducational and inte
grated residences. It has suggested that
the residence should be a center of
intellectual life, and through residence
education the rigid separation of the
student's social and intellectual lives
could be ended. It remains for the com
mittee to propose how these aims can
be fulfilled at Stanford.
It is the feeling of the committee
that significant experimentation in resi
dence education is altogether feasible
for next year. There is a wide range
of possibilities. The committee initially
considered a massive scrambling of the
university residence pattern, convert
ing most dormitories on campus to
coeducation and integration. This pro
posal was rejected for two reasons:
(1) Full integration, or anything ap
proaching it, would at this time pro
duce an undesirable ratio of freshmen
to upperclass men. (2) It would be im
possible to supply the staff necessary
to introduce residence education in any
meaningful way if the scope of the
housing experiment is so broad.
The committee decided that its aims
could best be fulfilled by an experiment
of more limited scope. Instead of dras
tically overhauling the university resi
dence pattern, one dormitory complex
could be used as a rather large "pilot"
project, in which * Integratiorr and • eo
education could be complete and intel
lectual life could be given the proper
attention. Wilbur Hall is ideal for this
purpose. It is the largest complex on
campus, with space for approximately
720 people. It is divided into eight
houses, each of which constitutes a
separate identity unit. Each house has
an adjacent cottage for a faculty resi
dent and a tutorial room where semin
ars can be held.
The committee recommends that
next fall each Wilbur house be occu
pied by two floors of men and one
floor of women, and that each house
be integrated by class at a rate of one
freshman to three upperclassmen. Con
stituted as such, Wilbur Hall would be
the site of meaningful experimentation
in residential education.
The Wilbur experiment will of neces
sity affect some of the other university
residences. Freshman men will move to
Stern and Branner, retaining the spon
sor system in its present form. Fresh
man women will remain in Roble, with
sponsors, and those living in neither
Roble or Wilbur will be integrated with
upperclass women in Florence Moore.
Lagunita, Hoskins, and Toyon will be
unaffected. The remaining upperclass
men will live in three of the row
houses. The statistical breakdown is
as follows.
Total Frosh Upcl. Total Frosh Upcl.
Men Men Men W'ran W'mn Wmn
Wilbur 480 120 360 240 60 180
Stem 590 570 20
Branner 170 160 10
Roble 260 250 10
Florence
Moore 350 90 260
Lagunita 290 0 290
Hoskins 120 0 120
Toyon 200 0 200
Row
Houses (3)100 0 100
(5) 180 0 180
Totals 1540 850 690 1440 400 1040
(Note: If women are allowed to move
off campus, adjustments can be made
easily. If the number of women moving
off is under 180, an appropriate num
ber of row houses can be converted
from women to men. Compensation
can also be made by admitting more
freshman and transfer women. If

necessary the measures can be com
bined. )
Students will be chosen for the Wil
bur experiment on a draw basis. It is
reasonable to expect an excess demand
for on-campus housing by upperclass
men, since a new option is being of
fered that will presumably attract men
who presently or would otherwise live
off campus, or in fraternities. The com
ration of the upperclassmen's popu
lation in Wilbur would thus differ
from the present composition of Stem.
If women are allowed off campus, there
would be a greater possibility of satis
fying the demand for men's housing.
The likelihood of vacant dormitory
space, with the introduction of the
Wilbur option, is highly improbable.
The logistics of putting the bodies
into Wilbur for the pilot project is
only half of our task in our proposal.
The problems of staffing the complex
and from there working out feasible
programs is the next step. Hopefully
to make this pilot project a real step
toward achieving the residential uni
versity, as much of the general report
as possible will be included, only the
scope has changed not the purpose of
the program.
Selection for next year's faculty resi
dents could be turned over to a com
mittee composed of one faculty and
one student member of the ASSU
Housing Commission and two members
from the Dean of Students Office, with
the advice of the present Committee.
Once this task has been completed, the
faculty can participate in choosing the
tutors and drawing up more detailed
plans for the program.
The committee realizes that a com
mitment to this kind of residential
education will require an overt shift
in educational effort from the class
room and lab to the residence, with
both compensation for it and relief
from other teaching duties—and quite
probably the replacement of their
other more formal academic functions
by other personnel. We also realize
that there will be a budget problem,
but emphatically deny that worthwhile
educational goals should not be pro
posed and slated because of current
pragmatic limitations.
The committee hopes that, through

further study—best done in conjunc
tion with the study of education at
Stanford—that it will be possible to
rearrange and reemphasize the com
ponents of freshman education in such
a way that existing resources would
permit a serious upgrading of resi
dence education, and the possibility
that such education could replace some
aspects of the present program. This
might well allow the same total re
sources of money and people to meet
the desired objectives by shifting the
locale and method of teaching, rather
than just adding to the staff and pro
gram.
Presently in Wilbur there are three
sponsor rooms and one tutor room
which can accommodate the new tutors.
Hopefully as many of these rooms will
be used for that purpose, but if for
any reason four tutors per house is im
possible, then the rooms could be used
for offices which would at least bring
more graduate level contact into the
residence.
One possible suggestion for Wilbur's
eight houses next year would be to
have five of them centered around a
general theme, one international house,
and two left unstructured. There has
been much agitation for an interna
tional house on campus and many pro
posals have been drawn up. Five sug
gested topics for the theme houses are
"Religion and Society," "Literature and
Fine Arts," "Science and Human Prob
lems," "The Urban Threat," and "So
cial Change."
To take only one of these themes and
speculate what the given house of
faculty, tutors and students will make
of it is another of those endless first
steps in imagination potential. The
house that was using the topic "Science
and Human Problems," for example,
would bring in a diversity of fields
from the natural sciences to the hu
manities. Many of the poignant prob
lems facing students and faculty are
centered in this topic but the same
could probably be said in a different
context for each of the five topics. The
impact of technology on our economic
and social system, the moral contro
versy over the newest discoveries in
genetics, the myth of the scientific
method are all themes to be explored.

What happens to a world view when
scientific discoveries puncture com
fortable philosophies? What is time
and how does man control it and how
docs it control man? These are ques
tions to be asked. Above all, it is im
portant to remember that the direc
tion of intellectual thrust must not be
too well defined in advance. One of
the most valuable experiences for the
living group will be coming to grips
with the topic, deciding for themselves
how the general area should be ap
proached, and then proceeding to de
velop programs and structures on their
own.
The committee is highly enthusiastic
about the creative possibilities pre
sented by the Wilbur experiment—the
first step in the direction of a fully
integrated and coeducational residence.
If the experiment even approaches the
measure of success the committee en
visions, it could prove a major innova
tion in the history of American higher
education. A well developed program
of residential education offers a poten
tial of immeasurable dimension.
X. Correlation of this report with the
overall review of education at Stanford
The key problems of residence edu
cational stimulus and the kind of staff
and budget commitments necessary
need further specific elucidations which
the committee hopes can be under
taken by the Executive Committee for
the study of education at the earliest
opportunity, in order to agree on ob
jectives and make necessary staff and
financial plans for the Wilbur Project
to be able to start in the Fall of 1967.
The committee takes this oppor
tunity to thank the following people
for individual contributions to our
meetings: Dwight Clark, Dr. Lawrence
Thomas, Miss Sally Mahoney, Dr. Mar
tin Evans, Dick Williams, Mike Roster,
Howie Holmes, Doug Davis, Bob Gor
don, Dean Hind, and Dean Novak.
February 6, 1967
Subcommittee on the Freshmen Resi
dence Program ASSU Housing Com
mission. Barbara Levin, Judy Bader.
Barbara Warren, David Koval, Chris
topher Harte, Douglas Sorenson, Scott
Soames (Co-Chairman) Elizabeth
Cohen, B. Davie Napier, Max
Maurice M. Osborne Jr. (Co-Chairman).
Doubts of the ability of Stanford's
present educational system to provide
for the needs of its students, and speci
fic questions about the relevance of
the residence program in its present
form, have stimulated students, faculty,
and staff to seek more appropriate
solutions.
The A.S.S.U., concerned about the
quality of residential experience at
Stanford — particularly in contrast to
that at the Overseas Campuses —
created through its Legislature a Hous
ing Commission, one task of which was
to review and make recommendations
concerning the freshman residence
program in its relation to education.
At about the same time, Associate
Dean of Students Robert Gordon was
asked to present proposals for a new
model of freshman residential educa
tion.
Both A.S.S.U. and Dean Gordon al
most simultaneously appointed com
mittees in the early Fall of 1966 to ad
vise them in the making of recommen
dations in this important area, and
rather than continue a too-familiar pat
tern of separate committees working
independently (and often divergently)
it was decided to merge the two.
In the merger, the Dean's Advisory
Committee agreed to accept the A.S.S.U.
invitation to become an integral part,
of its group. Dean Gordon agreed to
accept the report of the entire group
in the same light as he would have the
recommendations of his originally ap
pointed committee, and the merged
group in turn agreed to attempt in
good faith to assist him in meeting his
deadlines and obligations as best it
could.
Despite particular questions existing
about the Sponsor system, the Commit
tee felt from the outset that to limit
its discussions and report to such par
ticulars, or to start out with them,
would be to avoid the main Issues sur
rounding ,the quality and meaning of

residential education at Stanford, par
ticularly the freshman program.
The Committee thus firmly decided
that it would start from a fresh con
sideration of the issues and principles
involved, relating its recommendations
to them. It was recognized that such
an approach would be time consuming,
that it might seem Utopian to some;
yet a critque and basic statement about
the ideas of a residence university
seemed vital for future planning and
growth.
At the same time, the practical ne
cessity for more immediate recommen
dations and action was realized. The
present report is in this sense a pre
liminary, or interim report, which at
tempts to set forth and justify some
practical recommendations for residence
programs that could be adopted in
1967-68 — steps within the framework
of progression towards a more ideal
situation.
The Case for the Residential Commu
nity — The Personal Committment to
Learning
The impossibility of considering the
freshman experience in isolation from
the life and purposes of the entire un
dergraduate program has been a ma
jor premise in the subcommittee's
study of the Freshman Residence Pro
gram. Two main assumptions underlie
this approach.
One is that the university experience,
as a whole, is only one part of the con
tinuum of the educational process, a
process which neither begins nor ends
at the university gates. The educational
ideals should be the same for all four
undergraduate years in terms of what
they declare for the growth of persons.
The freshman year is only a step in
a span of development, having a spe
cial function as the first step but not
a separate one.
The second is a new conception which
views the university as a community
for learning through personal, interac
,tjon, find development,. .nsp, of

all its facilities for education. This view
emphasizes that the classroom, library
or laboratory cannot — indeed does not
even now — have a monopoly on pro
viding for the education and develop
ment of students. Else, why a residen
tial university? Why not subcontract
all residential arrangements and avoid
hotel problems?
The Committee felt strongly that
there was urgent need for institutional
endorsement of the fact that without
growth and development in personal,
social, and emotional dimensions, the
achievements of intellect are shallow
and stand in isolation from the indivi
dual and his world. The conviction that
gives personal meaning to knowledge
is a product of direct human relation
ship, and we make far too little use
of its potential.
In a more settled and comfortable
past, with much greater mutuality of
expectations and values both between
peers and between generations, the ur
gency of such questions was less, the
scope more limited and the answers
more predictable. The bull-session quite
effectively handled many aspects of
this personal-social side of development.
For this, and other reasons, relatively
little formal attention to it was felt
to be necessary, aside from some for
mal lectures on hygiene, the evils of
sex and booze, and the Fundamental
Standard. After all, boys were (and
would be) boys, and pretty soon they'd
grow up into men, producers and fa
thers. Home and society would take
care somehow that they grew up right,
and the college would provide an ac
cepted transition station on the way,
some academic input, and try to keep
the lid on boyish spirit getting out of
hand.
By contrast today, for many students
questions about one's nature, and about
one's relationship to an uncertain
world, and about this world itself are
more insistent, and more pre-occupying
.before The V&iefttipns a#?, -real,

and require believable answers from
within the individual. And, until he can
find them, this quest, this preoccupa
tion has top priority, while academics
suffer through seeming less relevant.
And though there are many students
who are relatively unconcerned about
such questions, we feel their total edu
cation would be enriched if they could
be purposefully involved.
The history of formal didactic at
tempts to speak to these burning ques
tions is rather dismal, and all over the
country, there has been a steady atro
phy of required, and even of voluntary
courses relative to personal hygiene,
sex, morals, and behavior. Both stu
dents and educators sense that because
a viable set of personal ethics and
values just grow within the individual,
attempts simply to impose them from
without are relatively futile.
Not only have curricular approaches
to such questions atrophied (happi
ly!), but American education is nearing
the end of a decade in which the entire
necessity of addressing itself to the
problem of personal growth has been
quite deliberately rejected. Sputnik was
the symbol, and such spokesmen as
Hyman Rickover took up the cudgels,
with articulate and seathing denuncia
tions of "Education for Living" — of
concepts of "adjustment," and insisted,
along with many others, on intellectual
excellence (for "excellence" read "a
chievement") as the right, and only
purpose of education.
Growth of population; of national
wealth with its stimulus to upward so
cial mobility; increasing complexity
and diversity of knowledge with its
concommitant of faculty pre-occupa
tion and relatively-narrower fields; and
increased competition have sharpened
the pressures for achievement, leaving
even loss time, thought, or energy for
development as a person.
The need to pay most serious atten
tion to this is most keenly felt by many
studetitfi hy their eldprs.
There has been some re-emergence of
an expressed need for leadership and
cooperation in working out better ways
to assist and support the individual in
his personal education and develop
ment, and when students do not raise
these questions, their education should
raise them, and speak to them.
Unstructured and spontaneous stu
dent discussion, particularly at the
freshman level, is heavily-flavored with
the need to sort oneself out, but as it
now operates, it tends less to growth
than to its more traditional social func
tion of settling into "bird-of-a-feather"
groupings in which the individual
can find comfort and support for his
own sets of values and seekings. With
in this spontaneously-forming group
ings, the dialogue tends to become in
creasingly circular, the values increas
ingly exclusive, and there is decreased
permeability to fresh ideas and ex
perience.
In an educational situation where
concentration is placed on the formal
aspects of education there is an imbal
ance which produces distortion, which
too often takes the form of rejection
of the academic sphere as "irrelevant."
Another consequence is the dangerous
polarization of university life into two
worlds; that of the classroom, and that
of social life, setting them to work
against each other instead of with each
other toward the individual's goals. The
acceptance of the residence university
ideal as being vital to education can
be one important factor in keeping
the two worlds together and moving in
the same direction, whereas the pres
ent residence program presents too
many forces that divide living from
learning.
The Committee takes as self-evident
that a truly liberal education is in fact
liberating — in making both wider and
deeper the individual's ability to per
ceive, absorb, analyze, and choose in a
vastly-increasing array of people,
events, and issues, and not in forcing
the premature adoption of limited, and
constricting attitudes. In effect this
seems the necessity of the student's
continuous and repeated exposure to
and challenge by diversity of ideas, of
values, styles, and of course people.
It is here that the meaning of residen
tial education springs to life, for it of
fers potentially the best milieu for
daily face-to-face interaction with peers,
with older students, and faculty mem
bers of both sexes — offering diversity
of age, sex, discipline and values in
the highly personal way so necessary
for exposure to lead to involvement,
and knowledge to become commitment.
The necessity of direct personal in
teraction is most strongly endorsed by
the Committee, for it is the set of
values and mental attitudes formed in
such day-in, day-out exchange that set
tle most deeply into one's fiber. Thus
to narrow the range, or dilute the qual
ity of this exchange seems antiethical
to education. Kenneth Benne, in his
article "The Uses of Fraternity" states
in this regard, "People learn value sys
tems in the first instance as they form
relations with others. These relations
in turn develop norms with corres
ponding rationales which the individual
then internalizes. If people, young or
old, can build groups with standards
that reward and strengthen honest
self - expression and self - acceptance,
creativity, mutual helpfulness and the
capacity to cope with conflict, then the
members of such groups will assimilate
these values as conditions of member
ship."
Choice, and learning to choose ra
tionally, are important educational
tasks, but should not be forced on the
individual too hurriedly, without
enough exposure to a wide range of
choices, nor without some room for
trial and error.
In summary then, the Committee
firmly believes that:
1. As education is, or should be, a con
tinuum, the freshman year cannot
be considered in isolation from the
entire undergraduate program, and al
though it has a special function as
the first step, it is an integral part
of the whole.
2. There is a grave imbalance in the
university's educational emphasis,
which tends to widen the needless,
and in our view harmful, gap be
tween the getting of knowledge and
the important business of living.
3. The deepest personal and intellectual
cpncems of students — their rela
tionships to themselves, and to an

uncertain world, — are not receiving
the institutional recognition and ef
fort they deserve.
4. That people learn most deeply by
living, and by forming personal re
lationships, and that when the resi
dence program, as at present, is
oriented to bed, board, and social
needs, the opportunities for inter
nalizing intellectual knowledge and
values are meager, and the tenden
cies to reject academic values as per
sonally-irrelevant are reinforced.
5. That choice, and learning to choose
critically are central educational
goals, but that it must depend on
close and repeated exposure to a
wide range of ideas, values, styles,
and people — people of different
ages, disciplines, sexes, and back
grounds, — and not be prematurely
forced into constricting channels
based primarily on social and not in
tellectual values.
6. Such close exposure to diversity, over
sufficient time, and if taken as the
norm, would go far in preventing
the formation of narrowed and
sterotypic attitudes and thought —
the surest signs of the ill-educated
man.
7. The way in which students live very
directly affects the whole quality of
their education: this single principle
underpins the whole concept of the
residential university.
"THE FRESHMAN CONDITION"
The paraphrase above in intentional,
— and designed to point out that being
a freshman at Stanford, or anywhere,
is an intensely personal experience of
transition. Although the general ideals
of education apply equally, — and es
pecially, — to him, the freshman also
has attributes which make him special,
but not separate.
It is the feeling of this committee
that freshmen can and should receive
the benefit of special experiences de
signed for their particular problems.
The assumption that we would like to
question is whether this need for some
special orientation experiences necessi
tates their living in a segragated fash
ion. Although it is expedient from an
"efficiency" point of view, it may gen
erate excessive anxiety over perfor
mance in freshman courses and a rein
forcement for essentially juvenile
modes of facing college stresses. His
special attributes can be summed up as
follows:
A. He obviously needs early and reli
able information about his new com
munity — where things are, what he
is to do, and so forth.
B. He is making the transition most
traditionally accepted in America as
the line between family dependency
and personal autonomy.
In actuality, the line, if there is one,
is blurred, and varies greatly from one
freshman to another. In general, the
freshman comes equipped with the cre
dentials of previous achievement and
approval — hoping he will be accepted
in his new college world, and fearing
that he may not. At the same time he
hopes that his performance and life
will be freer and larger than before.
The freshman, more poignantly than
any other undergraduate, in his transi
tion from a narrower to a hopefully
wider identity, wants the understand
ing of his old world, personal accep
tance by the new — and fears he may
have neither.
He is thus enormously vulnerable,
and as Steve Hurlbut has written in
his excellent paper, is characterized by
a "pervasive anxiety." Until he has as
similated workable norms, he feels he's
got to satisfy some kind of external
standard, and is anxious until he does.
Some more specific stresses that tend
to promote anxiety are:
I.The sudden change of status that
comes from being taken out of a
high school situation where one is
enormously successful and being put
in a class of similar big frogs from
small ponds, and feeling that they
are tougher frogs than he is:
2. The doubt about being able to live up
to tough academic demands:
3. Doubts about his being accepted by
his peers — of both sexes;
4. Being away from home;
5. Confrontation with different reli
gious and social values than those
the student has learned in his family
and home community;
6. Ambivalence about authority, and
older peopje in general.
This araciety and vulnerability are by

no means bad in themselves — and in
deed offer the most fertile soil for cul
tivation of the seeking young mind.
But the thrust of this searching anxiety
is in essence social, and approval-seek
ing — and therefore related to persons
and social groups, or the winning of ac
ceptable symbols of achievement.
The Committee feels that the perva
sive, and expectable freshman anxiety
and search for some group identity is
a double-edged sword, with potential
for both regression and for growth.
On one side, if there is failure of
approval from home, or personal ac
ceptance at college, or fewer grade
points "in the bank" than expected,
anxiety may well become dysfunction
al, with consequences such as neurotic
disturbance, refusal to compete aca
demically, and even regressive and
anti-social group-adolescent behavior,
and the reinforcement of pre-college
values.
CRITIQUE OF THE PRESENT
FRESHMAN RESIDENCE PROGRAM
The Committee feels that too many
features of the present freshman resi
dence program serve:
1. To reinforce natural anxieties among
the newest members of the Univer
sity, and
2. To promote the seeking of solutions
to this anxiety that have little if any
thing to do with educational pur
poses, but tend to promote prema
ture and mutually exclusive social
groupings.
As he moves into a freshman resi
dence, he is thrown into close contact
with a large peer-group of greater
diversity in background, attitudes, and
talent than he is likely to have known.
And, because competition and fears of
failure are keenest among peers (par
ticularly of neophytes performing simi
lar tasks,) these differences within the
larger peer-group tend to move the stu
dent into protective subgroups of
peers with attitudes and pre-college
backgrounds similar to his own, within
which he finds support. In such mutual
ly-supportive social groups, the student
can arm himself and defend himself
psychologically against any new ideas
to which he is being exposed, from fel
low students, members of the opposite
sex, and his professors. Studies will
never be taken at all seriously but will
be dealt with in a purely cognitive
fashion, ingested for the purpose of
passing exams and discarded soon af
terwards. Under these conditions, we
may have done away with the prob
lems of anxiety, but are faced with the
possibility of at least two other un
desirable consequences, 1) His atti
tudes and values may remain totally
unquestioned throughout his college
career; and 2) a group devoted to de
fending itself against the climate of an
institution may exhibit anti-social char
acteristics of alienated people every
where.
That present groups formed for mu
tual support emerge after a limited
exposure to new, and possible better
models, is certainly true, and groupings
tend to occur along pre-college lines
and values, or in rebellion against
them.
The present segregated freshman
residence situation also tends:
3. To promote the seeking of achieve
ment symbols (i.e. grades) rather
than knowledge of self or substance;
4. By a residence administration seen
as primarily regulatory and manger
ial, to aggravate the natural ambi
valence of freshmen towards author
ity with results ranging from thought
less docility to destructive rebellion;
or apathetic alienation;
5. To provide too much pressure for
distortion and ritualization of rela
tionships between the sexes — the
"dating syndrome" — and a poverty
of opportunities for simple, friendly
interaction of people, a lack fre
quently deplored by both freshmen
and upperclassmen.
Both architecture and group pres
sures, as well as well-institutionalized
pressures for achieving good grades
in a heavy curriculum conspire to rob
the freshman of privacy — both physi
cal privacy, and temporal privacy; i.e.
some time simply to be himself, to spin
his wheels, and to think, with room for
trial and error.
There is, at least in Wilbur, no at
mosphere in the dining halls in the
least conducive to conversation — and
for some reason, plastic and formica
encourage one to get In and out fast,

with emphasis on feeding the face, but
none on nourishing friendship.
All of these (observable) results are
Inimical to the purposes of stimulating
interest in new subjects, of promoting
constructive reaction to diversity, of
the discouragement of stereotypic
thinking and behavior, and of trust in
older people as human beings.
More importantly, the positive po
tentials of freshman vulnerability go
relatively untapped — or are being tap
ped for outworn purposes. For this
vulnerability is personal, and if pro
vided with daily personal interaction
with a wide range of interesting
people of different ages and different
disciplines, there is more than a good
chance that Stanford freshmen would
attach their enthusiasms and their
hearts to the new models they need
and seek — models of greater depth
and diversity, but providing the identi
ty and security they need.
The interaction between freshman
men in Wilbur and the Faculty Resi
dents has varied greatly in its intensity
and impact — with instances of great
fruitfulness, or relative neutrality and
harmony, and a very few of a truly
negative quality.
Faculty Associates to freshman resi
dences have often provided important
personal interactions between fresh
men and the faculty — but just as
often these contacts have been super
ficial and ritualized.
Sponsors, while providing the great
est impact in personal exchange, pre
sent, because of their small number,
relatively limited contact with upper
classmen's values and experiences.
While all these personal contacts in
the freshman residences do in fact en
rich the education of many freshmen,
the other fact remains that there are
simply not enough such contacts, nor
sufficient support and time for these
few people to give residential educa
tion the emphasis it deserves.
EVOLUTION OF THE PRESENT
FRESHMAN RESIDENCE PROGRAM
Whatever rationalizations may be
adduced in support of the present
freshman residence program, it ap
pears to the Committee that it is in
large measure a holdover from an
earlier set of norms — norms that re
ceived wide acceptance and support in
those times, but that are under serious
question *oday.
In the Teens, the Twenties, and even
well into the Thirties, there was more
general acceptance (in society at large
as well as in the university commu
nity) of a particular hierarchical order,
and the particular authority structure
such an order implies. One tended to
know where one stood in relation to
the order at any given period, and to
be confident that one would ascend the
ladder by predictable steps.
Perhaps because of the relative sta
bility of the social order, personal de
velopment was thought of more along
the lines of advancement within that
order — with of course the acquisition
of enough "knowledge" and academic
polish to secure preference in vocations
and the status of a college-educated
man. It was important in itself to be
a senior, or for that matter an upper
classman, and the class structure had
in itself real meaning to the student.
Hence, the development of class spirit
and cohesiveness was valued, encour
aged, and ritualized. Even the major
steps in progression along the well
worn rungs were ritualized in such
rites of passage as the annual "Frosh-
Soph War," a ritual which would have
been impossible had there been no such
open class distinction.
The residence arrangements prob
ably reflected an accept? e of this
order according to social and culture
values of the day, and were aimed at
initiating the freshman into them. A
deliberate segration of the neophyte —
either by residence, by distinguishing
badges (viz. the "Beanie"), by restric
tion of privilege, or by combinations
of these has in many human organiza
tions, served to reinforce acculturation
to desired social and behavioral norms,
and whether anyone was purposefully
aware of this or not, such considera
tions surely operated in freshman resi
dential segragation. Aside from "home
work" performed in a dorm, there was
a rather strict geographic separation
of intellectual-academic concerns and
the personal-social sphere. The class
room and laboratory (and one's closed
~oom or the stacks) were meant for
the'one — while the dorm was really
for the other, and largely designed for
it.
The early history of the sponsor
program, when Encina Hall was the
freshman men's dorm, illustrates well
its use as an instrument for indoctri
nation of the "hapless Frosh" into pre
vailing upperclassmen's values.
Most sponsors wore a block "S", and
embodied a prevailing ideal of social
and athletic prowess, coupled with a
sense of loyalty to the group, respect
for authority, and an obligation to be
exemplary to their potential succes
sors. As recently as 1955, the effective
ness of a sponsor was measured, among
other things, by the percentage of his
charges attending the pregame rallies
and intercollegiate games.
Most sponsors were also fraternity
men, and another measure of his suc
cess as a sponsor was the number of
his freshmen pledged. For the spon
sors, there was little conflict involved
in serving simultaneously the fresh
men, one's own upperclassman values,
and those of the institution and its
authorities, for all constituents had
pretty much the same understanding
of the system, and of each of their
places within it.
In the intervening years, particularly
those since World War 11, there have
been profound changes in the social
order — a disruption of settled commu
nity, sharpened preoccupations with
material competition, and a culture less
and less sure of where it stood, or what
it believed in. Particularly among those
intelligent enough to attend such col
leges as Stanford, there has been in
creasing criticism of existing institu
tions which seem to them to produce
as leaders men with narrowed vision,
preoccupation with power, and too
little time or love for people. In this
climate of malaise, and in the absence
of once tacitly-held assurances, the
young person's search for personal
identity, relevance, and belief has
emerged as a very important difference
between many students of today and
of the previous generation, and again
underscores the vital importance of the
living group experience.
Despite some expressed dissatisfac
tions with the existing sponsor system,
the sponsors and a few feculty resi
dents at Wilbur were quite probably
the first to sense both this new and
urgent need among the freshmen (and
of course in themselves,) and that the
approach to it had to be met at the
level of day-in, day-out personal inter
action.
The evolution of the present sponsor
system has been a response both to
the growing need for attention to per
sonal education and development, and
to the need to substitute a drive for
continuous search and openness for the
more comfortable, but rather water
tight, social groupings which they saw
taking place.
For the past few years, the sponsors
have been the real pioneers in residen
ital education in the freshman resi
dence program. To condemn them as
"politically motivated" or irresponsible
seems a rather defensive and negative
reaction to the admitted mistakes of
a few members, and more importantly
fails to recognize that, without much
help or understanding, they are on the
track of something very important.
There have, to be sure, been other
efforts in the direction of residential
education for freshmen — relatively
cautious additions which have been in
the general direction of enriching per
sonal experience and contact in the.
residences, and may represent an in
choate recognition of this need.
Such additions have been the Facul
ty Residents, the Faculty Associates,
the Student Associates — at first men,
later women — and later, more free
dom for dining exchanges. More for
mally, in-residence seminars, guests-in
residence, panel discussions, and even
classes have been introduced.
But the former additions (with the
exception of a few Faculty Residents)
have in general provided only super
ficial interactions, while the latter
(again with a few notable exceptions)
have borne little relation to life and
living education other than physical
proximity. There is a heavy implica
tion of the mere introduction of more
academics into residences — while the
.ru#ot iT.nortant questions to students
go, for the most part, unanswered.
Th< present freshmen residence pro
gram, in its segregation by class, by

sex, by its continued reinforcement of
separation of living from learning, is
anachronistic, and reflects values that
have become less relevant and ideas that
are no longer true — such as assump
tions that satisfactory personal devel
opment takes care of itself within an
accepted and orderly framework, (of
which the freshman class is one clear
step, houses and all); that personal
education and development are irrele
vant to, or at least peripheral to the
purposes of "Higher Education"; that
mutually-deaf social groupings are ac
ceptable parts of the social mosaic —
when the fact of the matter is that we
are badly failing to meet these now
paramount questions. Despite our be
ginning attentions to this need, the
main thrust of the freshman resi
dence program and the academic pro
gram, still tends to leave the freshman
alone in his search and to force him
into protective groupings.
FRESHMAN IN3PEORATION INTO
UNIVERSITY IJFE
As discussed above, the Committee
feels strongly that the present segre
gation of freshmen reflects values no
longer taken seriously, reinforces the
separation of learning from living
(with impoverishment of both), height
ens some dysfunctional anxieties, and
tends to force premature and relative
ly narrow security groupings, rein
forces the artificiality of contact be
tween the sexes, and alienates students
from the faculty.
Thus, segregation is in itself a cen
tral problem, and, of course, the alter
natives must be aimed at integration
of the freshman in one or more ways.
A. Coeducational Housing
As noted earlier, a major problem
for freshmen is the difficulty of estab
lishing relationships with members of
the opposite sex on any basis other
than a social or dating level. For fresh
man men, the problem is especially
acute, manifesting itself in a heighten
ing anxiety, increased insecurity, and
frustration. The institution of a sys
tem of coeducational housing would
not only ameliorate the undesirable so
cial position of freshman men but also
provide an atmosphere conducive to
more natural (spontaneous) and per
sonal relationships. Upperclassmen al
so face similar problems as the results
of a segragated housing system, and
they too could gain much from having
the option of a coeducational residence
program.
That such a program is both prac
tical and desirable is supported by the
acknowledged success of the overseas
campus program as a living and learn
ing experience. In addition, the appar
ent success of the Grove Project as a
coeducational residence suggests that
coeducation can be successful on the
home campus.
The committee believes that, in the
long run, coeducational housing should
be the prevailing, although not exclu
sive, pattern for residential education
at Stanford, and that significant steps
can and should be taken toward this
goal during the coming year, 1967-68.
Although some houses segregated by
sex should be retained for these stu
dents who do not wish to live in a co
educational residence, a major effort
should be directed toward providing
coeducational housing in its most sig
nificant sense, men and women living
in the same house. Even these houses
which remain segregated could be
placed in juxtaposition to increase the
interaction among men and women.
The goal of a residence housing both
men and women would be most effect
ively realized if the ratio is approxi
mately 1:1. Although the 1:1 ratio Is
most desirable, a ratio of 2:1 would,
we feel, be successful.
As a long range goal the Committee
recommends changing of th« admis
sions ratio to one that is closer to 1:1
as a step towards this ideal.
B. Integration of classes:
As discussed more fully in Section
111 of this report, the freshman year is
a period of growth in which freshmen
must adjust to what for many of them
is a totally new culture, with new and
demanding standards. This situation re
quires a certain amount of social sup
port to prevent excessive and destruc
tive anxiety.
The committee is convinced that the
freshman residence program too often
promotes a seeurity that reduces expo
sure to challenging and growth-moti
vating aspects of university life, there
by retarding development, rather than

preparing the freshman to meet the
challenges which are in a large mea
sure responsible for his insecurity. In
addition, individual anxieties often re
inforce each other to the detriment of
all concerned.
While it is agreed that there is val
uable support and learning through
contact with others engaged in the
same experience, this by no means re
quires that most of one's contacts be
freshmen, nor does it exclude the pos
sibility or desirability of living in con
tact with others.
In a maximally integrated system in
which freshmen constitute approxi
mately 30 per cent of the population,
reinforcement of pre-college values
would be healthily reduced, while
freshmen, still pursuing similar curri
cula, would not suffer from a dearth of
contact and interaction with other
freshmen. In a fully integrated system,
the freshman could contribute to the
atmosphere of the residence, but could
not dominate it. Social support would
be provided not only by contact with
other freshmen, but also by the pres
ence of upperclassmen who have gone
through similar experiences and who
can contribute to the freshman's sense
of social support both by advice or ex
ample and by providing living evidence
that students actually survive the
freshmen year. This system would, of
course, have the further advantage of
more fully orienting freshmen to the
challenges and opportunities of the
university, a need which can be only
partially fulfilled by the present spon
sor system.
C. Partial Integration
In the preceding discussion the mini
mum ratio of upperclassmen to fresh
men in an integrated residence is as
sumed to be well in excess of 1:1. Any
system of partial integration with ra
tios well below this minimum faces se
vere difficulties:
1. Although the population would be
enriched by the addition of more ex
perienced upperclass models, fresh
men would still dominate the dormi
tory; the balance between security
and growth would not be significant
ly changed.
2. Under one suggestion for partial in
tegration offered by Dean Gordon's
staff, upperclassmen would essential
ly be guests whose rooms happened
to be in a freshman dormitory. It is
difficult to understand what would
motivate 147 upperclassmen to accept
such a position, or why they would
feel any dedication to close personal
interaction with the freshmen in an
educational sense.
3. The sponsor system is successful
largely because a few individuals are
committed to making the best of an
unfortunate living situation for
freshmen. It is not clear that the sub
stitution of five guests for one spon
sor dedicated to working with fresh
men is desirable.
4. Partial integration in itself has never
been suggested as an optimal resi
dence system, and it is not clear that
it is a desirable step toward total
integration. The committee is con
vinced that change for its own sake
is an unsound policy at any stage in
the development of a more viable
residence system.
Freshmen have the most to gain in
a campus-wide residence program
founded on the principles of co-educa
tion and integration. The institution of
this program requires not only the
support of freshmen, but also that of
upperclassmen. It could be argued that
upperclassmen would not want to give
up their present housing system. In
answer to this objection three points
can be made:
1. It is not clear that upperclassmen
are satisfied with the present sys
tem. Every spring quarter freshmen
express dissatisfaction with the hous
ing alternatives open to them: the
success of the overseas program as
a living experience has prompted
many to call for a more desirable
program at Stanford at-Stanford;
there were five applicants for each
place in the Grove Project, and if
the seminar hadn't been required
there would have been more upper
classmen seeking this exciting new
living alternative.
2. Tn our model of a fully integrated,
coeducational house, the percentage
of freshmen living in should be kept
well below 50 per cent. Freshmen
could contribute their real enthusi
asm and the challenge of their ques
tions without dominating the houses,

so that integration would benefit
both freshmen and upperclassmen.
3. In our residence program some inde
pendent npperclass houses would re
main, if there were a demand for
them. We believe that most students
would choose to live in a coed, inte
grated house, however, if some stu
dents wished something akin to the
present system such alternatives
would be open to them. The assump
tion we are making is that the new
residenco opportunities will sell them
selves.
E. Diversity and Self-Selection
Diversity among housing alternatives
is desirable. In addition, diversity with
in each house must be maintained to
avoid provincialism within the various
alternatives. Free choice, particularly
too early in the college career, among
various living styles will eventually
produce self-selective, provincial group
ings which will contradict the ideal
of developing acceptance of individual
differences within the residence. Three
points can be made to this problem:
1. No house needs to represent a cross
section of the student body. When
too great diversity exists in a living
group, cohesiveness is lost and frag
mentation takes the form of break
ing up into small sub-groups between
which little communication exists.
Therefore, some commonality, espe
cially by interests, is desirable.
2. It may not be the case that giving
students free choice among really
worthwhile alternatives will result
in serious problems of self-selection.
At any rate, it will take time for this
to happen and if indeed problems do
arise, we should be able to deal with
them early.
3. Assuming that such problems do
arise and call for some restriction of
free choice, one possible solution
would be to limit the amount of time
that an individual could live in a par
ticular residence. By encouraging
switching and moving among stu
dents, no system would be allowed
to lock itself in and stagnate.
VII. The Tone and Character of the
Living Group: Staff and Program
The residential components of most
universities are now basically eating
and sleeping facilities, structurally like
barracks, motels, or high-rise Hiltons,
surrounded by parking lots. To become
a truly residential university, the resi
dence hall must become a center of
learning and development equal in im
portance to the lecture hall. Ideally
their staffing, planning, and adminis
tration should be the responsibility of
faculty members rather than housing
directors or business offices.
While Stanford now is a far cry from
the suggested ideal of a residence uni
versity, many steps have been pro
posed which work toward the ideal. In
tegration by class and co-education are
two strong recommendations made by
the committee, which as discussed
above have considerable value in them
selves.
However, these steps will not by
themselves result in genuine centers
for learning. The mechanical bod>
shuffling is only one step in preparing
a more conducive atmosphere for total
education; the other is the purposeful
stimulation of intellectual activities
within the residence. The character and
quality of such activities, and their
relevance to students' concerns will be
come a crucial measure and determi
ned of the contribution that residence
is providing for its component mem
bers. The program for each residence
would decide for itself what input to
organize as a stimulus for the desired
enrichment of the quality of living that
contributes to the total education of
the individual and of the group's stu
dents, faculty, ideas, and the unending
list of resources of a university com
munity are all potential and powerful
inputs. The interaction of these compo
nents now creates the particular ex
citement of a university, but these
components are being comparatively
wasted in one of the areas in which
they could be the most effective ... the
living situation. The challenge of a
idential program is to organize and
bring the components together in the
most imaginative ways to utilize the
potential to the lullest.
One of the major areas of waste Is
student-faculty relations. Both the stu
donts and the faculty complain about
the distance and seeming disinterest of
the two groups. The section in the re
port which* deals with the faculty rol£
in the residence university is only a
very small start on the road to killing
this unhealthy and unproductive gap.
(See section on faculty residents.)
Too often students miss out on much
of the university experience because of
communication gaps. A face-to-face liv
ing unit is the most obvious place for
communication and contact between
students and faculty. Often the pre
vailing ethos of a dormitory can work
against this ground level communica
tion and antithetically to the explora
tory ventures of the individual. A dorm
which is oriented around a strictly so
cial purpose may even squelch the mo
tivation branding it as "intellectual," a
word that has been mistreated from all
directions in our society. While many
houses do not fall into this trap, there
is another pitfall of ruts and habit that
restricts the growing of experience in
a different way. The entire responsi
bility of taking advantage of the under
graduate experience is on the individ
ual. and some people find themselves
vorking against odds that would dis
courage the most aggressive. Fresh
man in particular belong to this cate
gory. They need to be exposed to the
broad ranges of opportunity but also
need help to make use of them. An
adolescent peer culture reinforcing high
school anti-intellectualism is not one
)f the best possible ways to meet this
need. The outside stimulus and help
will not best be provided by authority
figures who tell people what to do. or
beat off the anti-intellectual bullies. The
best assurance that free exchange and
.sharing of experience will occur will
be found in the atmosphere of the liv
ing group and in the character of its
leadership. A lively house where there
is a constant influx of new and differ
ent stimuli where all things that need
expression can find it, has the best
chance against apathy or unspoken
social taboos. House organized activi
ties such as art exhibits, musical per
formances, seminars, or small scale
lecture series suffer the same fate as
the individual's struggle for expres
sion and exploration. Not everyone
would want to participate and now
many of those who do want to can,
"but to those who find it difficult, en
couragement, not brick walls, should
be present in the tone of the house.
The possibility of organizing houses
around special interests has been sug
gested; experimentation is in order.
Houses with distinctive interests—fine
arts, social issues, foreign policy—may
well bring together students and fac
ulty from various disciplines who
could more meaningfully and readily
develop a learning community than a
house whose residents and loosely
affiliated faculty can only share pleas
antries. There would still be ample
diversity by virtue of differences in
personality, background, majors, ca
reer plans and so on, but there would
also be a major intellectual and social
oncern they all share. More detail
for this kind of program is discussed
in the specific proposal for next year.
The program of input is just the
beginning to what happens to the life
n a particular house. It provides pos
sibly a focus or direction as well as the
important underlying communication
and resource network of faculty, tutor,
and student. It must be emphasized
that what is going to happen in every
house is going to be determined most
by the people who live there. There
is a give-and-take natural exchange
between the program of ideas for the
living group and the group's response.
Reuniting the sphere of living as a
meaningful and integral part of a stu
dent's education in no way signifies
the creation of a twenty-four-hour
classroom. The residential education
urogram is not an extension of the
formal academic structure; it is its
complement. Although the opportun
,fy for experimenting with courses
given for credit should be open, it is
only one of the myriad of possibilities
with residential education. While
proper planning, particularly in the
■'election of good faculty, is necessary
it would be unrealistic to lose sight
of the interaction from the other di
rection. A structure too rigid would
kill the potential of a residential pro
gram just as the naive assumption
that body shuffling is the whole
answer.
Flexibility and spontaneity are key
<*ords in the concept of what a pro
gram should be prepared to provide.
Fvrit the program should be externally

flexible. The development of the house
spirit would depend upon the inter
action between the particular members
and particular faculty and tutors. This
matter of orientation or direction for
the house could bow with the interest
and demand for a particular living sit
uation. Some programs would last
longer than others, some undoubtedly
will be less successful, some would
evolve of themselves into a new area.
There is flexibility to let the good pro
grams grow and let the bad ones kill
themselves without bringing the entire
system to ruin. A diversity of choice
between residences could be main
tained.
There should in addition be an in
ternal flexibility within each group.
There must be room for growth and
change within the group. If topics were
to be the basis for a house, they would
always have to be picked with enough
latitude to allow each member of the
house to approach it in his own way.
This casua', unstructured opportunity
for close faculty contact speaks directly
to the need of students who are con
cerned with relevance as a criterion of
education, relevance to themselves or
to the contemporary world. There is
much opportunity for the student to
become very involved in the formation
and execution of his own education.
People who are involved and interested
in their own work tend to be more in
terested and able to contribute to the
work of others.
Another possibility that should be
included in the program is the oppor
tunity for experimentation with self
government. All sorts of opportunities
exist outside of the adoption of a hier
archy handed from above of president,
social chairman, etc. . .
There is much to be said for the edu
cationally valuable experience of learn
ing to live with ambiguity and without
automatically following tradition or
the dictates of an authority figure to
create the quality of life of a house
out of what is there ... to create an
educationally meaningful experience.
"The ideas sound great on paper!" is
the old comment at the outset of any
innovation with the rejoiner "But how
do you make it work in reality?" usu
ally not far behind. Why doesn't this
all happen now? Wilbur, the recom
mended site for next year's project,
already has many of the features out
lined in this report. "Is there really
going to be any significant difference?"
might be one question. The answer is
twofold. Some of the kinds of things
this report talks about are already
happening. If they weren't then there
would really be no use in trying to
maximize the interaction. But so much
more could be happening, and many of
the detrimental currents that run con
trary to the purpose of attending a
university could be reduced. All sys
tems are implemented by men. There
is not any system of law, morality or
of a residence university which can
overcome the fallibility of man. There
is not a magical formula implied in this
program, it rests very heavily on the
people who participate but so does
every other system. Good systems help
him along and the committee firmly
feels that a true residential university,
is a better system than one which only
claims to be and is somewhere in the
middle.
The people involved therefore are at
the core of the program. But their
effectiveness will depend to a large
degree upon how they see their role.
Their conception of their role in this
new system must undergo as much
fundamental reinterpretation as the
system itself.
How will the inertia of the present
resident conditions be overcome? Who
will set the tone, provide the mo
mentum, and contribute the leader
ship? Our first answer to these ques
tions is the students themselves. In any
residence system students will unde
niably be the major constituency.. But
how the resident staff can contribute
is also an important issue. At the pres
ent time Stanford has faculty residents,
tutors, resident assistants, and spon
sors. The role of each should be re
viewed.
Faculty Resident*
The committee would certainly not
deny the valuable contribution of the
faculty residents toward improving the
living situation at Stanford, but in
general, the faculty resident program
simply is not given the support neces
sary to tree Its members from -other

tasks and to allow them to devote
more time, thought and emphasis to
the residence education program. The
basic change would be that of increased
commitment to the living situation. The
primary responsibility of the faculty
resident should not be to the dorm di
rector or the administration, but to the
student within the living group or com
plex. To be effective, the faculty resi
dent must be willing to accept a de
manding and time consuming involve
ment in the living situation. His pres
ence there will be much more than a
face at meals or even that of a good
friend. Presumably the resident would
be a full time member of the faculty,
for the success of the residence pro
gram would greatly depend upon his
response to the intellectual needs of the
students. Doctoral candidates, coaches,
university officials, and administrators,
however, could still participate if they
would be willing to make the same
kind of commitment to the ideal of a
residence university. The interpersonal
factor is extremely important in this
kind of situation. Most every student
complains about the brilliant man who
can't give a good lecture. The same
argument will have to be taken into
account that not everyone can fulfill
this particular kind of a role. The fac
ulty resident must, above all, be sensi
tive to the interaction among students
in the group.
The things a faculty member could
contribute are bounded only by their
individual creativity but a few sug
gestions are in order.
1. In certain living units, seminars for
academic credit could be offered.
2. Directed reading could be made avail
able to certain students under the
resident.
3. Informal and noncredit seminars
should be encourage by the faculty
resident or when an idea came out
of the group he or some of his col
leagues could serve as resource per
son.
4. A student chairman and the faculty
resident could set up a meaningful
faculty associate program. The resi
dent can draw upon close friends and
colleagues which would supply an
internal identification missing in the
present program.
What would bring the faculty to par
ticipate in this program? Much of the
same dissatisfaction with student-fac
ulty relations that would bring the
students. Where something lively is
going on, something which the faculty
member is part there would not be
the embarassed ordeals that now take
place in dormitories on campus where
everyone involved is on their best and
most strained behavior. The living con
ditions would be similar to that of an
overseas campus though the professor
would not be required to drop his own
work or leave the center of his re
search. Class loads could be lessened
for the faculty participating because
they would be in essence only relocat
ing their teaching commitments, not
dropping them. They would have a
more flexible time schedule that might
be convenient to their purposes. This
position would also be in effect on a
rotating basis.
Resident Assistants and Tutors
The role of resident assistant should
be eliminated. In other words, we
would eliminate the role of the nice
guy disciplinarian, the liaison between
the administration and the students
who has been for too long forced into
an unfortunate position of hypocrisy.
As he is employed by the administra
tion he has an obligation to enforce
University policies, but if he is to be
at all effective with the students his
identification is with them. Too often
he has resolved the conflict by the
statement, "I don't care what you do,
just do it quietly so I don't see it."
Caught in this bind he has been in
effective as a man playing to two mas
ters. It is not enough to react to stu
dent needs and problems, for the role
we see must be one of creative action —
one of initiative and not merely re
sponse. Similarly, the present tutor
system is limited because its goal is
only to answer questions, not raise
them.
The present role of tutor, however,
is closer to our purpose than the RA's.
But this role must be expanded to be
effective. Thus, the idea of tutors
should be maintained, but its purpose
significantly broadened. Like faculty
residents > (and unlike RA's)' tutors

must have autonomy from primarily ad
ministrative policy and must be respon
sible primarily to the students below.
They should be linked to the resident
director, who is then responsible to the
administration. Although academic
assistance is undeniably important, tu
tors must do more than merely toot.
Their role should be to stimulate dis
cussion, to promote all types of inter
change, and to actively work towards
an educational atmosphere. At present
RA's and tutors tend to preserve rather
than promote and to be problem
solvers, rather than catalysts. The
tutor, like the faculty resident, must
approach his job with a new vitality
and commitment.
Sponsors
When the freshman class has been
entirely integrated into the university
community then the sponsor system
will become an anachronism. But until
that point the need remains and the
present system of sponsors and tutors
should be maintained.
There are two more important con
siderations before any system is put
Into operation. How will the faculty
and tutors be selected? And what are
the costs for the program as a whole?
These problems become relevant and
solvable only after the initial commit
ment and go ahead has been made.
Therefore discussion of these aspects
of the program will be included in
the proposal for next year.
VIII. Brief Assessment of Experience
At Other Institutions
While it is not our intention to base
the justification for our proposals on
the successes and failures of other in
stitutions with their necessarily dif
ferent circumstances, it is interesting
to note the results of a study con
ducted by the Faculty Committee on
Student Residences at Stanford in 1959.
Studying twenty-one similar universities
in this country they found that they
were about equally divided between
integrated and segregated freshman
living facilities. In general each school
seem satisfied with the system it then
had. However, while all of these with
the integrated system found it the most
workable, about 25 per cent of those
with segregated freshmen replied that
they were dissatisfied with their situ
ation and it certainly increases the
noisy freshman atmosphere which is
inimical to good study habits and con
ditions." Some schools reported that
the only reason for maintaining fresh
man segregation was pressure from
the fraternities who "objected stren
uously to placing their pledges under
the influence of hard bitten rugged in
dependents."
The many success of coeducational
housing on other campuses are too well
known to require documentation.
The institutions interviewed were
Cal Tech, Reed, Pembroke, Swarth
more, Oberlin, Pomona, Carleton, Rad
clifTe, Occidental, Ohio Wesleyan, Chi
cago, Brown, Dartmouth, Princeton,
Yale, Harvard, Northwestern, Washing
ton State, Oregon, Cornell, and Ohio
State.
IX. A Proposal:
The Wilbur Experiment
The committee has set forth its ar
guments for coeducational and inte
grated residences. It has suggested that
the residence should be a center of
intellectual life, and through residence
education the rigid separation of the
student's social and intellectual lives
could be ended. It remains for the com
mittee to propose how these aims can
be fulfilled at Stanford.
It is the feeling of the committee
that significant experimentation in resi
dence education is altogether feasible
for next year. There is a wide range
of possibilities. The committee initially
considered a massive scrambling of the
university residence pattern, convert
ing most dormitories on campus to
coeducation and integration. This pro
posal was rejected for two reasons:
(1) Full integration, or anything ap
proaching it, would at this time pro
duce an undesirable ratio of freshmen
to upperclass men. (2) It would be im
possible to supply the staff necessary
to introduce residence education in any
meaningful way if the scope of the
housing experiment is so broad.
The committee decided that its aims
could best be fulfilled by an experiment
of more limited scope. Instead of dras
tically overhauling the university resi
dence pattern, one dormitory complex
could be used as a rather large "pilot"
project, in which * Integratiorr and • eo
education could be complete and intel
lectual life could be given the proper
attention. Wilbur Hall is ideal for this
purpose. It is the largest complex on
campus, with space for approximately
720 people. It is divided into eight
houses, each of which constitutes a
separate identity unit. Each house has
an adjacent cottage for a faculty resi
dent and a tutorial room where semin
ars can be held.
The committee recommends that
next fall each Wilbur house be occu
pied by two floors of men and one
floor of women, and that each house
be integrated by class at a rate of one
freshman to three upperclassmen. Con
stituted as such, Wilbur Hall would be
the site of meaningful experimentation
in residential education.
The Wilbur experiment will of neces
sity affect some of the other university
residences. Freshman men will move to
Stern and Branner, retaining the spon
sor system in its present form. Fresh
man women will remain in Roble, with
sponsors, and those living in neither
Roble or Wilbur will be integrated with
upperclass women in Florence Moore.
Lagunita, Hoskins, and Toyon will be
unaffected. The remaining upperclass
men will live in three of the row
houses. The statistical breakdown is
as follows.
Total Frosh Upcl. Total Frosh Upcl.
Men Men Men W'ran W'mn Wmn
Wilbur 480 120 360 240 60 180
Stem 590 570 20
Branner 170 160 10
Roble 260 250 10
Florence
Moore 350 90 260
Lagunita 290 0 290
Hoskins 120 0 120
Toyon 200 0 200
Row
Houses (3)100 0 100
(5) 180 0 180
Totals 1540 850 690 1440 400 1040
(Note: If women are allowed to move
off campus, adjustments can be made
easily. If the number of women moving
off is under 180, an appropriate num
ber of row houses can be converted
from women to men. Compensation
can also be made by admitting more
freshman and transfer women. If

necessary the measures can be com
bined. )
Students will be chosen for the Wil
bur experiment on a draw basis. It is
reasonable to expect an excess demand
for on-campus housing by upperclass
men, since a new option is being of
fered that will presumably attract men
who presently or would otherwise live
off campus, or in fraternities. The com
ration of the upperclassmen's popu
lation in Wilbur would thus differ
from the present composition of Stem.
If women are allowed off campus, there
would be a greater possibility of satis
fying the demand for men's housing.
The likelihood of vacant dormitory
space, with the introduction of the
Wilbur option, is highly improbable.
The logistics of putting the bodies
into Wilbur for the pilot project is
only half of our task in our proposal.
The problems of staffing the complex
and from there working out feasible
programs is the next step. Hopefully
to make this pilot project a real step
toward achieving the residential uni
versity, as much of the general report
as possible will be included, only the
scope has changed not the purpose of
the program.
Selection for next year's faculty resi
dents could be turned over to a com
mittee composed of one faculty and
one student member of the ASSU
Housing Commission and two members
from the Dean of Students Office, with
the advice of the present Committee.
Once this task has been completed, the
faculty can participate in choosing the
tutors and drawing up more detailed
plans for the program.
The committee realizes that a com
mitment to this kind of residential
education will require an overt shift
in educational effort from the class
room and lab to the residence, with
both compensation for it and relief
from other teaching duties—and quite
probably the replacement of their
other more formal academic functions
by other personnel. We also realize
that there will be a budget problem,
but emphatically deny that worthwhile
educational goals should not be pro
posed and slated because of current
pragmatic limitations.
The committee hopes that, through

further study—best done in conjunc
tion with the study of education at
Stanford—that it will be possible to
rearrange and reemphasize the com
ponents of freshman education in such
a way that existing resources would
permit a serious upgrading of resi
dence education, and the possibility
that such education could replace some
aspects of the present program. This
might well allow the same total re
sources of money and people to meet
the desired objectives by shifting the
locale and method of teaching, rather
than just adding to the staff and pro
gram.
Presently in Wilbur there are three
sponsor rooms and one tutor room
which can accommodate the new tutors.
Hopefully as many of these rooms will
be used for that purpose, but if for
any reason four tutors per house is im
possible, then the rooms could be used
for offices which would at least bring
more graduate level contact into the
residence.
One possible suggestion for Wilbur's
eight houses next year would be to
have five of them centered around a
general theme, one international house,
and two left unstructured. There has
been much agitation for an interna
tional house on campus and many pro
posals have been drawn up. Five sug
gested topics for the theme houses are
"Religion and Society," "Literature and
Fine Arts," "Science and Human Prob
lems," "The Urban Threat," and "So
cial Change."
To take only one of these themes and
speculate what the given house of
faculty, tutors and students will make
of it is another of those endless first
steps in imagination potential. The
house that was using the topic "Science
and Human Problems," for example,
would bring in a diversity of fields
from the natural sciences to the hu
manities. Many of the poignant prob
lems facing students and faculty are
centered in this topic but the same
could probably be said in a different
context for each of the five topics. The
impact of technology on our economic
and social system, the moral contro
versy over the newest discoveries in
genetics, the myth of the scientific
method are all themes to be explored.

What happens to a world view when
scientific discoveries puncture com
fortable philosophies? What is time
and how does man control it and how
docs it control man? These are ques
tions to be asked. Above all, it is im
portant to remember that the direc
tion of intellectual thrust must not be
too well defined in advance. One of
the most valuable experiences for the
living group will be coming to grips
with the topic, deciding for themselves
how the general area should be ap
proached, and then proceeding to de
velop programs and structures on their
own.
The committee is highly enthusiastic
about the creative possibilities pre
sented by the Wilbur experiment—the
first step in the direction of a fully
integrated and coeducational residence.
If the experiment even approaches the
measure of success the committee en
visions, it could prove a major innova
tion in the history of American higher
education. A well developed program
of residential education offers a poten
tial of immeasurable dimension.
X. Correlation of this report with the
overall review of education at Stanford
The key problems of residence edu
cational stimulus and the kind of staff
and budget commitments necessary
need further specific elucidations which
the committee hopes can be under
taken by the Executive Committee for
the study of education at the earliest
opportunity, in order to agree on ob
jectives and make necessary staff and
financial plans for the Wilbur Project
to be able to start in the Fall of 1967.
The committee takes this oppor
tunity to thank the following people
for individual contributions to our
meetings: Dwight Clark, Dr. Lawrence
Thomas, Miss Sally Mahoney, Dr. Mar
tin Evans, Dick Williams, Mike Roster,
Howie Holmes, Doug Davis, Bob Gor
don, Dean Hind, and Dean Novak.
February 6, 1967
Subcommittee on the Freshmen Resi
dence Program ASSU Housing Com
mission. Barbara Levin, Judy Bader.
Barbara Warren, David Koval, Chris
topher Harte, Douglas Sorenson, Scott
Soames (Co-Chairman) Elizabeth
Cohen, B. Davie Napier, Max
Maurice M. Osborne Jr. (Co-Chairman).
Doubts of the ability of Stanford's
present educational system to provide
for the needs of its students, and speci
fic questions about the relevance of
the residence program in its present
form, have stimulated students, faculty,
and staff to seek more appropriate
solutions.
The A.S.S.U., concerned about the
quality of residential experience at
Stanford — particularly in contrast to
that at the Overseas Campuses —
created through its Legislature a Hous
ing Commission, one task of which was
to review and make recommendations
concerning the freshman residence
program in its relation to education.
At about the same time, Associate
Dean of Students Robert Gordon was
asked to present proposals for a new
model of freshman residential educa
tion.
Both A.S.S.U. and Dean Gordon al
most simultaneously appointed com
mittees in the early Fall of 1966 to ad
vise them in the making of recommen
dations in this important area, and
rather than continue a too-familiar pat
tern of separate committees working
independently (and often divergently)
it was decided to merge the two.
In the merger, the Dean's Advisory
Committee agreed to accept the A.S.S.U.
invitation to become an integral part,
of its group. Dean Gordon agreed to
accept the report of the entire group
in the same light as he would have the
recommendations of his originally ap
pointed committee, and the merged
group in turn agreed to attempt in
good faith to assist him in meeting his
deadlines and obligations as best it
could.
Despite particular questions existing
about the Sponsor system, the Commit
tee felt from the outset that to limit
its discussions and report to such par
ticulars, or to start out with them,
would be to avoid the main Issues sur
rounding ,the quality and meaning of

residential education at Stanford, par
ticularly the freshman program.
The Committee thus firmly decided
that it would start from a fresh con
sideration of the issues and principles
involved, relating its recommendations
to them. It was recognized that such
an approach would be time consuming,
that it might seem Utopian to some;
yet a critque and basic statement about
the ideas of a residence university
seemed vital for future planning and
growth.
At the same time, the practical ne
cessity for more immediate recommen
dations and action was realized. The
present report is in this sense a pre
liminary, or interim report, which at
tempts to set forth and justify some
practical recommendations for residence
programs that could be adopted in
1967-68 — steps within the framework
of progression towards a more ideal
situation.
The Case for the Residential Commu
nity — The Personal Committment to
Learning
The impossibility of considering the
freshman experience in isolation from
the life and purposes of the entire un
dergraduate program has been a ma
jor premise in the subcommittee's
study of the Freshman Residence Pro
gram. Two main assumptions underlie
this approach.
One is that the university experience,
as a whole, is only one part of the con
tinuum of the educational process, a
process which neither begins nor ends
at the university gates. The educational
ideals should be the same for all four
undergraduate years in terms of what
they declare for the growth of persons.
The freshman year is only a step in
a span of development, having a spe
cial function as the first step but not
a separate one.
The second is a new conception which
views the university as a community
for learning through personal, interac
,tjon, find development,. .nsp, of

all its facilities for education. This view
emphasizes that the classroom, library
or laboratory cannot — indeed does not
even now — have a monopoly on pro
viding for the education and develop
ment of students. Else, why a residen
tial university? Why not subcontract
all residential arrangements and avoid
hotel problems?
The Committee felt strongly that
there was urgent need for institutional
endorsement of the fact that without
growth and development in personal,
social, and emotional dimensions, the
achievements of intellect are shallow
and stand in isolation from the indivi
dual and his world. The conviction that
gives personal meaning to knowledge
is a product of direct human relation
ship, and we make far too little use
of its potential.
In a more settled and comfortable
past, with much greater mutuality of
expectations and values both between
peers and between generations, the ur
gency of such questions was less, the
scope more limited and the answers
more predictable. The bull-session quite
effectively handled many aspects of
this personal-social side of development.
For this, and other reasons, relatively
little formal attention to it was felt
to be necessary, aside from some for
mal lectures on hygiene, the evils of
sex and booze, and the Fundamental
Standard. After all, boys were (and
would be) boys, and pretty soon they'd
grow up into men, producers and fa
thers. Home and society would take
care somehow that they grew up right,
and the college would provide an ac
cepted transition station on the way,
some academic input, and try to keep
the lid on boyish spirit getting out of
hand.
By contrast today, for many students
questions about one's nature, and about
one's relationship to an uncertain
world, and about this world itself are
more insistent, and more pre-occupying
.before The V&iefttipns a#?, -real,

and require believable answers from
within the individual. And, until he can
find them, this quest, this preoccupa
tion has top priority, while academics
suffer through seeming less relevant.
And though there are many students
who are relatively unconcerned about
such questions, we feel their total edu
cation would be enriched if they could
be purposefully involved.
The history of formal didactic at
tempts to speak to these burning ques
tions is rather dismal, and all over the
country, there has been a steady atro
phy of required, and even of voluntary
courses relative to personal hygiene,
sex, morals, and behavior. Both stu
dents and educators sense that because
a viable set of personal ethics and
values just grow within the individual,
attempts simply to impose them from
without are relatively futile.
Not only have curricular approaches
to such questions atrophied (happi
ly!), but American education is nearing
the end of a decade in which the entire
necessity of addressing itself to the
problem of personal growth has been
quite deliberately rejected. Sputnik was
the symbol, and such spokesmen as
Hyman Rickover took up the cudgels,
with articulate and seathing denuncia
tions of "Education for Living" — of
concepts of "adjustment," and insisted,
along with many others, on intellectual
excellence (for "excellence" read "a
chievement") as the right, and only
purpose of education.
Growth of population; of national
wealth with its stimulus to upward so
cial mobility; increasing complexity
and diversity of knowledge with its
concommitant of faculty pre-occupa
tion and relatively-narrower fields; and
increased competition have sharpened
the pressures for achievement, leaving
even loss time, thought, or energy for
development as a person.
The need to pay most serious atten
tion to this is most keenly felt by many
studetitfi hy their eldprs.
There has been some re-emergence of
an expressed need for leadership and
cooperation in working out better ways
to assist and support the individual in
his personal education and develop
ment, and when students do not raise
these questions, their education should
raise them, and speak to them.
Unstructured and spontaneous stu
dent discussion, particularly at the
freshman level, is heavily-flavored with
the need to sort oneself out, but as it
now operates, it tends less to growth
than to its more traditional social func
tion of settling into "bird-of-a-feather"
groupings in which the individual
can find comfort and support for his
own sets of values and seekings. With
in this spontaneously-forming group
ings, the dialogue tends to become in
creasingly circular, the values increas
ingly exclusive, and there is decreased
permeability to fresh ideas and ex
perience.
In an educational situation where
concentration is placed on the formal
aspects of education there is an imbal
ance which produces distortion, which
too often takes the form of rejection
of the academic sphere as "irrelevant."
Another consequence is the dangerous
polarization of university life into two
worlds; that of the classroom, and that
of social life, setting them to work
against each other instead of with each
other toward the individual's goals. The
acceptance of the residence university
ideal as being vital to education can
be one important factor in keeping
the two worlds together and moving in
the same direction, whereas the pres
ent residence program presents too
many forces that divide living from
learning.
The Committee takes as self-evident
that a truly liberal education is in fact
liberating — in making both wider and
deeper the individual's ability to per
ceive, absorb, analyze, and choose in a
vastly-increasing array of people,
events, and issues, and not in forcing
the premature adoption of limited, and
constricting attitudes. In effect this
seems the necessity of the student's
continuous and repeated exposure to
and challenge by diversity of ideas, of
values, styles, and of course people.
It is here that the meaning of residen
tial education springs to life, for it of
fers potentially the best milieu for
daily face-to-face interaction with peers,
with older students, and faculty mem
bers of both sexes — offering diversity
of age, sex, discipline and values in
the highly personal way so necessary
for exposure to lead to involvement,
and knowledge to become commitment.
The necessity of direct personal in
teraction is most strongly endorsed by
the Committee, for it is the set of
values and mental attitudes formed in
such day-in, day-out exchange that set
tle most deeply into one's fiber. Thus
to narrow the range, or dilute the qual
ity of this exchange seems antiethical
to education. Kenneth Benne, in his
article "The Uses of Fraternity" states
in this regard, "People learn value sys
tems in the first instance as they form
relations with others. These relations
in turn develop norms with corres
ponding rationales which the individual
then internalizes. If people, young or
old, can build groups with standards
that reward and strengthen honest
self - expression and self - acceptance,
creativity, mutual helpfulness and the
capacity to cope with conflict, then the
members of such groups will assimilate
these values as conditions of member
ship."
Choice, and learning to choose ra
tionally, are important educational
tasks, but should not be forced on the
individual too hurriedly, without
enough exposure to a wide range of
choices, nor without some room for
trial and error.
In summary then, the Committee
firmly believes that:
1. As education is, or should be, a con
tinuum, the freshman year cannot
be considered in isolation from the
entire undergraduate program, and al
though it has a special function as
the first step, it is an integral part
of the whole.
2. There is a grave imbalance in the
university's educational emphasis,
which tends to widen the needless,
and in our view harmful, gap be
tween the getting of knowledge and
the important business of living.
3. The deepest personal and intellectual
cpncems of students — their rela
tionships to themselves, and to an

uncertain world, — are not receiving
the institutional recognition and ef
fort they deserve.
4. That people learn most deeply by
living, and by forming personal re
lationships, and that when the resi
dence program, as at present, is
oriented to bed, board, and social
needs, the opportunities for inter
nalizing intellectual knowledge and
values are meager, and the tenden
cies to reject academic values as per
sonally-irrelevant are reinforced.
5. That choice, and learning to choose
critically are central educational
goals, but that it must depend on
close and repeated exposure to a
wide range of ideas, values, styles,
and people — people of different
ages, disciplines, sexes, and back
grounds, — and not be prematurely
forced into constricting channels
based primarily on social and not in
tellectual values.
6. Such close exposure to diversity, over
sufficient time, and if taken as the
norm, would go far in preventing
the formation of narrowed and
sterotypic attitudes and thought —
the surest signs of the ill-educated
man.
7. The way in which students live very
directly affects the whole quality of
their education: this single principle
underpins the whole concept of the
residential university.
"THE FRESHMAN CONDITION"
The paraphrase above in intentional,
— and designed to point out that being
a freshman at Stanford, or anywhere,
is an intensely personal experience of
transition. Although the general ideals
of education apply equally, — and es
pecially, — to him, the freshman also
has attributes which make him special,
but not separate.
It is the feeling of this committee
that freshmen can and should receive
the benefit of special experiences de
signed for their particular problems.
The assumption that we would like to
question is whether this need for some
special orientation experiences necessi
tates their living in a segragated fash
ion. Although it is expedient from an
"efficiency" point of view, it may gen
erate excessive anxiety over perfor
mance in freshman courses and a rein
forcement for essentially juvenile
modes of facing college stresses. His
special attributes can be summed up as
follows:
A. He obviously needs early and reli
able information about his new com
munity — where things are, what he
is to do, and so forth.
B. He is making the transition most
traditionally accepted in America as
the line between family dependency
and personal autonomy.
In actuality, the line, if there is one,
is blurred, and varies greatly from one
freshman to another. In general, the
freshman comes equipped with the cre
dentials of previous achievement and
approval — hoping he will be accepted
in his new college world, and fearing
that he may not. At the same time he
hopes that his performance and life
will be freer and larger than before.
The freshman, more poignantly than
any other undergraduate, in his transi
tion from a narrower to a hopefully
wider identity, wants the understand
ing of his old world, personal accep
tance by the new — and fears he may
have neither.
He is thus enormously vulnerable,
and as Steve Hurlbut has written in
his excellent paper, is characterized by
a "pervasive anxiety." Until he has as
similated workable norms, he feels he's
got to satisfy some kind of external
standard, and is anxious until he does.
Some more specific stresses that tend
to promote anxiety are:
I.The sudden change of status that
comes from being taken out of a
high school situation where one is
enormously successful and being put
in a class of similar big frogs from
small ponds, and feeling that they
are tougher frogs than he is:
2. The doubt about being able to live up
to tough academic demands:
3. Doubts about his being accepted by
his peers — of both sexes;
4. Being away from home;
5. Confrontation with different reli
gious and social values than those
the student has learned in his family
and home community;
6. Ambivalence about authority, and
older peopje in general.
This araciety and vulnerability are by

no means bad in themselves — and in
deed offer the most fertile soil for cul
tivation of the seeking young mind.
But the thrust of this searching anxiety
is in essence social, and approval-seek
ing — and therefore related to persons
and social groups, or the winning of ac
ceptable symbols of achievement.
The Committee feels that the perva
sive, and expectable freshman anxiety
and search for some group identity is
a double-edged sword, with potential
for both regression and for growth.
On one side, if there is failure of
approval from home, or personal ac
ceptance at college, or fewer grade
points "in the bank" than expected,
anxiety may well become dysfunction
al, with consequences such as neurotic
disturbance, refusal to compete aca
demically, and even regressive and
anti-social group-adolescent behavior,
and the reinforcement of pre-college
values.
CRITIQUE OF THE PRESENT
FRESHMAN RESIDENCE PROGRAM
The Committee feels that too many
features of the present freshman resi
dence program serve:
1. To reinforce natural anxieties among
the newest members of the Univer
sity, and
2. To promote the seeking of solutions
to this anxiety that have little if any
thing to do with educational pur
poses, but tend to promote prema
ture and mutually exclusive social
groupings.
As he moves into a freshman resi
dence, he is thrown into close contact
with a large peer-group of greater
diversity in background, attitudes, and
talent than he is likely to have known.
And, because competition and fears of
failure are keenest among peers (par
ticularly of neophytes performing simi
lar tasks,) these differences within the
larger peer-group tend to move the stu
dent into protective subgroups of
peers with attitudes and pre-college
backgrounds similar to his own, within
which he finds support. In such mutual
ly-supportive social groups, the student
can arm himself and defend himself
psychologically against any new ideas
to which he is being exposed, from fel
low students, members of the opposite
sex, and his professors. Studies will
never be taken at all seriously but will
be dealt with in a purely cognitive
fashion, ingested for the purpose of
passing exams and discarded soon af
terwards. Under these conditions, we
may have done away with the prob
lems of anxiety, but are faced with the
possibility of at least two other un
desirable consequences, 1) His atti
tudes and values may remain totally
unquestioned throughout his college
career; and 2) a group devoted to de
fending itself against the climate of an
institution may exhibit anti-social char
acteristics of alienated people every
where.
That present groups formed for mu
tual support emerge after a limited
exposure to new, and possible better
models, is certainly true, and groupings
tend to occur along pre-college lines
and values, or in rebellion against
them.
The present segregated freshman
residence situation also tends:
3. To promote the seeking of achieve
ment symbols (i.e. grades) rather
than knowledge of self or substance;
4. By a residence administration seen
as primarily regulatory and manger
ial, to aggravate the natural ambi
valence of freshmen towards author
ity with results ranging from thought
less docility to destructive rebellion;
or apathetic alienation;
5. To provide too much pressure for
distortion and ritualization of rela
tionships between the sexes — the
"dating syndrome" — and a poverty
of opportunities for simple, friendly
interaction of people, a lack fre
quently deplored by both freshmen
and upperclassmen.
Both architecture and group pres
sures, as well as well-institutionalized
pressures for achieving good grades
in a heavy curriculum conspire to rob
the freshman of privacy — both physi
cal privacy, and temporal privacy; i.e.
some time simply to be himself, to spin
his wheels, and to think, with room for
trial and error.
There is, at least in Wilbur, no at
mosphere in the dining halls in the
least conducive to conversation — and
for some reason, plastic and formica
encourage one to get In and out fast,

with emphasis on feeding the face, but
none on nourishing friendship.
All of these (observable) results are
Inimical to the purposes of stimulating
interest in new subjects, of promoting
constructive reaction to diversity, of
the discouragement of stereotypic
thinking and behavior, and of trust in
older people as human beings.
More importantly, the positive po
tentials of freshman vulnerability go
relatively untapped — or are being tap
ped for outworn purposes. For this
vulnerability is personal, and if pro
vided with daily personal interaction
with a wide range of interesting
people of different ages and different
disciplines, there is more than a good
chance that Stanford freshmen would
attach their enthusiasms and their
hearts to the new models they need
and seek — models of greater depth
and diversity, but providing the identi
ty and security they need.
The interaction between freshman
men in Wilbur and the Faculty Resi
dents has varied greatly in its intensity
and impact — with instances of great
fruitfulness, or relative neutrality and
harmony, and a very few of a truly
negative quality.
Faculty Associates to freshman resi
dences have often provided important
personal interactions between fresh
men and the faculty — but just as
often these contacts have been super
ficial and ritualized.
Sponsors, while providing the great
est impact in personal exchange, pre
sent, because of their small number,
relatively limited contact with upper
classmen's values and experiences.
While all these personal contacts in
the freshman residences do in fact en
rich the education of many freshmen,
the other fact remains that there are
simply not enough such contacts, nor
sufficient support and time for these
few people to give residential educa
tion the emphasis it deserves.
EVOLUTION OF THE PRESENT
FRESHMAN RESIDENCE PROGRAM
Whatever rationalizations may be
adduced in support of the present
freshman residence program, it ap
pears to the Committee that it is in
large measure a holdover from an
earlier set of norms — norms that re
ceived wide acceptance and support in
those times, but that are under serious
question *oday.
In the Teens, the Twenties, and even
well into the Thirties, there was more
general acceptance (in society at large
as well as in the university commu
nity) of a particular hierarchical order,
and the particular authority structure
such an order implies. One tended to
know where one stood in relation to
the order at any given period, and to
be confident that one would ascend the
ladder by predictable steps.
Perhaps because of the relative sta
bility of the social order, personal de
velopment was thought of more along
the lines of advancement within that
order — with of course the acquisition
of enough "knowledge" and academic
polish to secure preference in vocations
and the status of a college-educated
man. It was important in itself to be
a senior, or for that matter an upper
classman, and the class structure had
in itself real meaning to the student.
Hence, the development of class spirit
and cohesiveness was valued, encour
aged, and ritualized. Even the major
steps in progression along the well
worn rungs were ritualized in such
rites of passage as the annual "Frosh-
Soph War," a ritual which would have
been impossible had there been no such
open class distinction.
The residence arrangements prob
ably reflected an accept? e of this
order according to social and culture
values of the day, and were aimed at
initiating the freshman into them. A
deliberate segration of the neophyte —
either by residence, by distinguishing
badges (viz. the "Beanie"), by restric
tion of privilege, or by combinations
of these has in many human organiza
tions, served to reinforce acculturation
to desired social and behavioral norms,
and whether anyone was purposefully
aware of this or not, such considera
tions surely operated in freshman resi
dential segragation. Aside from "home
work" performed in a dorm, there was
a rather strict geographic separation
of intellectual-academic concerns and
the personal-social sphere. The class
room and laboratory (and one's closed
~oom or the stacks) were meant for
the'one — while the dorm was really
for the other, and largely designed for
it.
The early history of the sponsor
program, when Encina Hall was the
freshman men's dorm, illustrates well
its use as an instrument for indoctri
nation of the "hapless Frosh" into pre
vailing upperclassmen's values.
Most sponsors wore a block "S", and
embodied a prevailing ideal of social
and athletic prowess, coupled with a
sense of loyalty to the group, respect
for authority, and an obligation to be
exemplary to their potential succes
sors. As recently as 1955, the effective
ness of a sponsor was measured, among
other things, by the percentage of his
charges attending the pregame rallies
and intercollegiate games.
Most sponsors were also fraternity
men, and another measure of his suc
cess as a sponsor was the number of
his freshmen pledged. For the spon
sors, there was little conflict involved
in serving simultaneously the fresh
men, one's own upperclassman values,
and those of the institution and its
authorities, for all constituents had
pretty much the same understanding
of the system, and of each of their
places within it.
In the intervening years, particularly
those since World War 11, there have
been profound changes in the social
order — a disruption of settled commu
nity, sharpened preoccupations with
material competition, and a culture less
and less sure of where it stood, or what
it believed in. Particularly among those
intelligent enough to attend such col
leges as Stanford, there has been in
creasing criticism of existing institu
tions which seem to them to produce
as leaders men with narrowed vision,
preoccupation with power, and too
little time or love for people. In this
climate of malaise, and in the absence
of once tacitly-held assurances, the
young person's search for personal
identity, relevance, and belief has
emerged as a very important difference
between many students of today and
of the previous generation, and again
underscores the vital importance of the
living group experience.
Despite some expressed dissatisfac
tions with the existing sponsor system,
the sponsors and a few feculty resi
dents at Wilbur were quite probably
the first to sense both this new and
urgent need among the freshmen (and
of course in themselves,) and that the
approach to it had to be met at the
level of day-in, day-out personal inter
action.
The evolution of the present sponsor
system has been a response both to
the growing need for attention to per
sonal education and development, and
to the need to substitute a drive for
continuous search and openness for the
more comfortable, but rather water
tight, social groupings which they saw
taking place.
For the past few years, the sponsors
have been the real pioneers in residen
ital education in the freshman resi
dence program. To condemn them as
"politically motivated" or irresponsible
seems a rather defensive and negative
reaction to the admitted mistakes of
a few members, and more importantly
fails to recognize that, without much
help or understanding, they are on the
track of something very important.
There have, to be sure, been other
efforts in the direction of residential
education for freshmen — relatively
cautious additions which have been in
the general direction of enriching per
sonal experience and contact in the.
residences, and may represent an in
choate recognition of this need.
Such additions have been the Facul
ty Residents, the Faculty Associates,
the Student Associates — at first men,
later women — and later, more free
dom for dining exchanges. More for
mally, in-residence seminars, guests-in
residence, panel discussions, and even
classes have been introduced.
But the former additions (with the
exception of a few Faculty Residents)
have in general provided only super
ficial interactions, while the latter
(again with a few notable exceptions)
have borne little relation to life and
living education other than physical
proximity. There is a heavy implica
tion of the mere introduction of more
academics into residences — while the
.ru#ot iT.nortant questions to students
go, for the most part, unanswered.
Th< present freshmen residence pro
gram, in its segregation by class, by

sex, by its continued reinforcement of
separation of living from learning, is
anachronistic, and reflects values that
have become less relevant and ideas that
are no longer true — such as assump
tions that satisfactory personal devel
opment takes care of itself within an
accepted and orderly framework, (of
which the freshman class is one clear
step, houses and all); that personal
education and development are irrele
vant to, or at least peripheral to the
purposes of "Higher Education"; that
mutually-deaf social groupings are ac
ceptable parts of the social mosaic —
when the fact of the matter is that we
are badly failing to meet these now
paramount questions. Despite our be
ginning attentions to this need, the
main thrust of the freshman resi
dence program and the academic pro
gram, still tends to leave the freshman
alone in his search and to force him
into protective groupings.
FRESHMAN IN3PEORATION INTO
UNIVERSITY IJFE
As discussed above, the Committee
feels strongly that the present segre
gation of freshmen reflects values no
longer taken seriously, reinforces the
separation of learning from living
(with impoverishment of both), height
ens some dysfunctional anxieties, and
tends to force premature and relative
ly narrow security groupings, rein
forces the artificiality of contact be
tween the sexes, and alienates students
from the faculty.
Thus, segregation is in itself a cen
tral problem, and, of course, the alter
natives must be aimed at integration
of the freshman in one or more ways.
A. Coeducational Housing
As noted earlier, a major problem
for freshmen is the difficulty of estab
lishing relationships with members of
the opposite sex on any basis other
than a social or dating level. For fresh
man men, the problem is especially
acute, manifesting itself in a heighten
ing anxiety, increased insecurity, and
frustration. The institution of a sys
tem of coeducational housing would
not only ameliorate the undesirable so
cial position of freshman men but also
provide an atmosphere conducive to
more natural (spontaneous) and per
sonal relationships. Upperclassmen al
so face similar problems as the results
of a segragated housing system, and
they too could gain much from having
the option of a coeducational residence
program.
That such a program is both prac
tical and desirable is supported by the
acknowledged success of the overseas
campus program as a living and learn
ing experience. In addition, the appar
ent success of the Grove Project as a
coeducational residence suggests that
coeducation can be successful on the
home campus.
The committee believes that, in the
long run, coeducational housing should
be the prevailing, although not exclu
sive, pattern for residential education
at Stanford, and that significant steps
can and should be taken toward this
goal during the coming year, 1967-68.
Although some houses segregated by
sex should be retained for these stu
dents who do not wish to live in a co
educational residence, a major effort
should be directed toward providing
coeducational housing in its most sig
nificant sense, men and women living
in the same house. Even these houses
which remain segregated could be
placed in juxtaposition to increase the
interaction among men and women.
The goal of a residence housing both
men and women would be most effect
ively realized if the ratio is approxi
mately 1:1. Although the 1:1 ratio Is
most desirable, a ratio of 2:1 would,
we feel, be successful.
As a long range goal the Committee
recommends changing of th« admis
sions ratio to one that is closer to 1:1
as a step towards this ideal.
B. Integration of classes:
As discussed more fully in Section
111 of this report, the freshman year is
a period of growth in which freshmen
must adjust to what for many of them
is a totally new culture, with new and
demanding standards. This situation re
quires a certain amount of social sup
port to prevent excessive and destruc
tive anxiety.
The committee is convinced that the
freshman residence program too often
promotes a seeurity that reduces expo
sure to challenging and growth-moti
vating aspects of university life, there
by retarding development, rather than

preparing the freshman to meet the
challenges which are in a large mea
sure responsible for his insecurity. In
addition, individual anxieties often re
inforce each other to the detriment of
all concerned.
While it is agreed that there is val
uable support and learning through
contact with others engaged in the
same experience, this by no means re
quires that most of one's contacts be
freshmen, nor does it exclude the pos
sibility or desirability of living in con
tact with others.
In a maximally integrated system in
which freshmen constitute approxi
mately 30 per cent of the population,
reinforcement of pre-college values
would be healthily reduced, while
freshmen, still pursuing similar curri
cula, would not suffer from a dearth of
contact and interaction with other
freshmen. In a fully integrated system,
the freshman could contribute to the
atmosphere of the residence, but could
not dominate it. Social support would
be provided not only by contact with
other freshmen, but also by the pres
ence of upperclassmen who have gone
through similar experiences and who
can contribute to the freshman's sense
of social support both by advice or ex
ample and by providing living evidence
that students actually survive the
freshmen year. This system would, of
course, have the further advantage of
more fully orienting freshmen to the
challenges and opportunities of the
university, a need which can be only
partially fulfilled by the present spon
sor system.
C. Partial Integration
In the preceding discussion the mini
mum ratio of upperclassmen to fresh
men in an integrated residence is as
sumed to be well in excess of 1:1. Any
system of partial integration with ra
tios well below this minimum faces se
vere difficulties:
1. Although the population would be
enriched by the addition of more ex
perienced upperclass models, fresh
men would still dominate the dormi
tory; the balance between security
and growth would not be significant
ly changed.
2. Under one suggestion for partial in
tegration offered by Dean Gordon's
staff, upperclassmen would essential
ly be guests whose rooms happened
to be in a freshman dormitory. It is
difficult to understand what would
motivate 147 upperclassmen to accept
such a position, or why they would
feel any dedication to close personal
interaction with the freshmen in an
educational sense.
3. The sponsor system is successful
largely because a few individuals are
committed to making the best of an
unfortunate living situation for
freshmen. It is not clear that the sub
stitution of five guests for one spon
sor dedicated to working with fresh
men is desirable.
4. Partial integration in itself has never
been suggested as an optimal resi
dence system, and it is not clear that
it is a desirable step toward total
integration. The committee is con
vinced that change for its own sake
is an unsound policy at any stage in
the development of a more viable
residence system.
Freshmen have the most to gain in
a campus-wide residence program
founded on the principles of co-educa
tion and integration. The institution of
this program requires not only the
support of freshmen, but also that of
upperclassmen. It could be argued that
upperclassmen would not want to give
up their present housing system. In
answer to this objection three points
can be made:
1. It is not clear that upperclassmen
are satisfied with the present sys
tem. Every spring quarter freshmen
express dissatisfaction with the hous
ing alternatives open to them: the
success of the overseas program as
a living experience has prompted
many to call for a more desirable
program at Stanford at-Stanford;
there were five applicants for each
place in the Grove Project, and if
the seminar hadn't been required
there would have been more upper
classmen seeking this exciting new
living alternative.
2. Tn our model of a fully integrated,
coeducational house, the percentage
of freshmen living in should be kept
well below 50 per cent. Freshmen
could contribute their real enthusi
asm and the challenge of their ques
tions without dominating the houses,

so that integration would benefit
both freshmen and upperclassmen.
3. In our residence program some inde
pendent npperclass houses would re
main, if there were a demand for
them. We believe that most students
would choose to live in a coed, inte
grated house, however, if some stu
dents wished something akin to the
present system such alternatives
would be open to them. The assump
tion we are making is that the new
residenco opportunities will sell them
selves.
E. Diversity and Self-Selection
Diversity among housing alternatives
is desirable. In addition, diversity with
in each house must be maintained to
avoid provincialism within the various
alternatives. Free choice, particularly
too early in the college career, among
various living styles will eventually
produce self-selective, provincial group
ings which will contradict the ideal
of developing acceptance of individual
differences within the residence. Three
points can be made to this problem:
1. No house needs to represent a cross
section of the student body. When
too great diversity exists in a living
group, cohesiveness is lost and frag
mentation takes the form of break
ing up into small sub-groups between
which little communication exists.
Therefore, some commonality, espe
cially by interests, is desirable.
2. It may not be the case that giving
students free choice among really
worthwhile alternatives will result
in serious problems of self-selection.
At any rate, it will take time for this
to happen and if indeed problems do
arise, we should be able to deal with
them early.
3. Assuming that such problems do
arise and call for some restriction of
free choice, one possible solution
would be to limit the amount of time
that an individual could live in a par
ticular residence. By encouraging
switching and moving among stu
dents, no system would be allowed
to lock itself in and stagnate.
VII. The Tone and Character of the
Living Group: Staff and Program
The residential components of most
universities are now basically eating
and sleeping facilities, structurally like
barracks, motels, or high-rise Hiltons,
surrounded by parking lots. To become
a truly residential university, the resi
dence hall must become a center of
learning and development equal in im
portance to the lecture hall. Ideally
their staffing, planning, and adminis
tration should be the responsibility of
faculty members rather than housing
directors or business offices.
While Stanford now is a far cry from
the suggested ideal of a residence uni
versity, many steps have been pro
posed which work toward the ideal. In
tegration by class and co-education are
two strong recommendations made by
the committee, which as discussed
above have considerable value in them
selves.
However, these steps will not by
themselves result in genuine centers
for learning. The mechanical bod>
shuffling is only one step in preparing
a more conducive atmosphere for total
education; the other is the purposeful
stimulation of intellectual activities
within the residence. The character and
quality of such activities, and their
relevance to students' concerns will be
come a crucial measure and determi
ned of the contribution that residence
is providing for its component mem
bers. The program for each residence
would decide for itself what input to
organize as a stimulus for the desired
enrichment of the quality of living that
contributes to the total education of
the individual and of the group's stu
dents, faculty, ideas, and the unending
list of resources of a university com
munity are all potential and powerful
inputs. The interaction of these compo
nents now creates the particular ex
citement of a university, but these
components are being comparatively
wasted in one of the areas in which
they could be the most effective ... the
living situation. The challenge of a
idential program is to organize and
bring the components together in the
most imaginative ways to utilize the
potential to the lullest.
One of the major areas of waste Is
student-faculty relations. Both the stu
donts and the faculty complain about
the distance and seeming disinterest of
the two groups. The section in the re
port which* deals with the faculty rol£
in the residence university is only a
very small start on the road to killing
this unhealthy and unproductive gap.
(See section on faculty residents.)
Too often students miss out on much
of the university experience because of
communication gaps. A face-to-face liv
ing unit is the most obvious place for
communication and contact between
students and faculty. Often the pre
vailing ethos of a dormitory can work
against this ground level communica
tion and antithetically to the explora
tory ventures of the individual. A dorm
which is oriented around a strictly so
cial purpose may even squelch the mo
tivation branding it as "intellectual," a
word that has been mistreated from all
directions in our society. While many
houses do not fall into this trap, there
is another pitfall of ruts and habit that
restricts the growing of experience in
a different way. The entire responsi
bility of taking advantage of the under
graduate experience is on the individ
ual. and some people find themselves
vorking against odds that would dis
courage the most aggressive. Fresh
man in particular belong to this cate
gory. They need to be exposed to the
broad ranges of opportunity but also
need help to make use of them. An
adolescent peer culture reinforcing high
school anti-intellectualism is not one
)f the best possible ways to meet this
need. The outside stimulus and help
will not best be provided by authority
figures who tell people what to do. or
beat off the anti-intellectual bullies. The
best assurance that free exchange and
.sharing of experience will occur will
be found in the atmosphere of the liv
ing group and in the character of its
leadership. A lively house where there
is a constant influx of new and differ
ent stimuli where all things that need
expression can find it, has the best
chance against apathy or unspoken
social taboos. House organized activi
ties such as art exhibits, musical per
formances, seminars, or small scale
lecture series suffer the same fate as
the individual's struggle for expres
sion and exploration. Not everyone
would want to participate and now
many of those who do want to can,
"but to those who find it difficult, en
couragement, not brick walls, should
be present in the tone of the house.
The possibility of organizing houses
around special interests has been sug
gested; experimentation is in order.
Houses with distinctive interests—fine
arts, social issues, foreign policy—may
well bring together students and fac
ulty from various disciplines who
could more meaningfully and readily
develop a learning community than a
house whose residents and loosely
affiliated faculty can only share pleas
antries. There would still be ample
diversity by virtue of differences in
personality, background, majors, ca
reer plans and so on, but there would
also be a major intellectual and social
oncern they all share. More detail
for this kind of program is discussed
in the specific proposal for next year.
The program of input is just the
beginning to what happens to the life
n a particular house. It provides pos
sibly a focus or direction as well as the
important underlying communication
and resource network of faculty, tutor,
and student. It must be emphasized
that what is going to happen in every
house is going to be determined most
by the people who live there. There
is a give-and-take natural exchange
between the program of ideas for the
living group and the group's response.
Reuniting the sphere of living as a
meaningful and integral part of a stu
dent's education in no way signifies
the creation of a twenty-four-hour
classroom. The residential education
urogram is not an extension of the
formal academic structure; it is its
complement. Although the opportun
,fy for experimenting with courses
given for credit should be open, it is
only one of the myriad of possibilities
with residential education. While
proper planning, particularly in the
■'election of good faculty, is necessary
it would be unrealistic to lose sight
of the interaction from the other di
rection. A structure too rigid would
kill the potential of a residential pro
gram just as the naive assumption
that body shuffling is the whole
answer.
Flexibility and spontaneity are key
<*ords in the concept of what a pro
gram should be prepared to provide.
Fvrit the program should be externally

flexible. The development of the house
spirit would depend upon the inter
action between the particular members
and particular faculty and tutors. This
matter of orientation or direction for
the house could bow with the interest
and demand for a particular living sit
uation. Some programs would last
longer than others, some undoubtedly
will be less successful, some would
evolve of themselves into a new area.
There is flexibility to let the good pro
grams grow and let the bad ones kill
themselves without bringing the entire
system to ruin. A diversity of choice
between residences could be main
tained.
There should in addition be an in
ternal flexibility within each group.
There must be room for growth and
change within the group. If topics were
to be the basis for a house, they would
always have to be picked with enough
latitude to allow each member of the
house to approach it in his own way.
This casua', unstructured opportunity
for close faculty contact speaks directly
to the need of students who are con
cerned with relevance as a criterion of
education, relevance to themselves or
to the contemporary world. There is
much opportunity for the student to
become very involved in the formation
and execution of his own education.
People who are involved and interested
in their own work tend to be more in
terested and able to contribute to the
work of others.
Another possibility that should be
included in the program is the oppor
tunity for experimentation with self
government. All sorts of opportunities
exist outside of the adoption of a hier
archy handed from above of president,
social chairman, etc. . .
There is much to be said for the edu
cationally valuable experience of learn
ing to live with ambiguity and without
automatically following tradition or
the dictates of an authority figure to
create the quality of life of a house
out of what is there ... to create an
educationally meaningful experience.
"The ideas sound great on paper!" is
the old comment at the outset of any
innovation with the rejoiner "But how
do you make it work in reality?" usu
ally not far behind. Why doesn't this
all happen now? Wilbur, the recom
mended site for next year's project,
already has many of the features out
lined in this report. "Is there really
going to be any significant difference?"
might be one question. The answer is
twofold. Some of the kinds of things
this report talks about are already
happening. If they weren't then there
would really be no use in trying to
maximize the interaction. But so much
more could be happening, and many of
the detrimental currents that run con
trary to the purpose of attending a
university could be reduced. All sys
tems are implemented by men. There
is not any system of law, morality or
of a residence university which can
overcome the fallibility of man. There
is not a magical formula implied in this
program, it rests very heavily on the
people who participate but so does
every other system. Good systems help
him along and the committee firmly
feels that a true residential university,
is a better system than one which only
claims to be and is somewhere in the
middle.
The people involved therefore are at
the core of the program. But their
effectiveness will depend to a large
degree upon how they see their role.
Their conception of their role in this
new system must undergo as much
fundamental reinterpretation as the
system itself.
How will the inertia of the present
resident conditions be overcome? Who
will set the tone, provide the mo
mentum, and contribute the leader
ship? Our first answer to these ques
tions is the students themselves. In any
residence system students will unde
niably be the major constituency.. But
how the resident staff can contribute
is also an important issue. At the pres
ent time Stanford has faculty residents,
tutors, resident assistants, and spon
sors. The role of each should be re
viewed.
Faculty Resident*
The committee would certainly not
deny the valuable contribution of the
faculty residents toward improving the
living situation at Stanford, but in
general, the faculty resident program
simply is not given the support neces
sary to tree Its members from -other

tasks and to allow them to devote
more time, thought and emphasis to
the residence education program. The
basic change would be that of increased
commitment to the living situation. The
primary responsibility of the faculty
resident should not be to the dorm di
rector or the administration, but to the
student within the living group or com
plex. To be effective, the faculty resi
dent must be willing to accept a de
manding and time consuming involve
ment in the living situation. His pres
ence there will be much more than a
face at meals or even that of a good
friend. Presumably the resident would
be a full time member of the faculty,
for the success of the residence pro
gram would greatly depend upon his
response to the intellectual needs of the
students. Doctoral candidates, coaches,
university officials, and administrators,
however, could still participate if they
would be willing to make the same
kind of commitment to the ideal of a
residence university. The interpersonal
factor is extremely important in this
kind of situation. Most every student
complains about the brilliant man who
can't give a good lecture. The same
argument will have to be taken into
account that not everyone can fulfill
this particular kind of a role. The fac
ulty resident must, above all, be sensi
tive to the interaction among students
in the group.
The things a faculty member could
contribute are bounded only by their
individual creativity but a few sug
gestions are in order.
1. In certain living units, seminars for
academic credit could be offered.
2. Directed reading could be made avail
able to certain students under the
resident.
3. Informal and noncredit seminars
should be encourage by the faculty
resident or when an idea came out
of the group he or some of his col
leagues could serve as resource per
son.
4. A student chairman and the faculty
resident could set up a meaningful
faculty associate program. The resi
dent can draw upon close friends and
colleagues which would supply an
internal identification missing in the
present program.
What would bring the faculty to par
ticipate in this program? Much of the
same dissatisfaction with student-fac
ulty relations that would bring the
students. Where something lively is
going on, something which the faculty
member is part there would not be
the embarassed ordeals that now take
place in dormitories on campus where
everyone involved is on their best and
most strained behavior. The living con
ditions would be similar to that of an
overseas campus though the professor
would not be required to drop his own
work or leave the center of his re
search. Class loads could be lessened
for the faculty participating because
they would be in essence only relocat
ing their teaching commitments, not
dropping them. They would have a
more flexible time schedule that might
be convenient to their purposes. This
position would also be in effect on a
rotating basis.
Resident Assistants and Tutors
The role of resident assistant should
be eliminated. In other words, we
would eliminate the role of the nice
guy disciplinarian, the liaison between
the administration and the students
who has been for too long forced into
an unfortunate position of hypocrisy.
As he is employed by the administra
tion he has an obligation to enforce
University policies, but if he is to be
at all effective with the students his
identification is with them. Too often
he has resolved the conflict by the
statement, "I don't care what you do,
just do it quietly so I don't see it."
Caught in this bind he has been in
effective as a man playing to two mas
ters. It is not enough to react to stu
dent needs and problems, for the role
we see must be one of creative action —
one of initiative and not merely re
sponse. Similarly, the present tutor
system is limited because its goal is
only to answer questions, not raise
them.
The present role of tutor, however,
is closer to our purpose than the RA's.
But this role must be expanded to be
effective. Thus, the idea of tutors
should be maintained, but its purpose
significantly broadened. Like faculty
residents > (and unlike RA's)' tutors

must have autonomy from primarily ad
ministrative policy and must be respon
sible primarily to the students below.
They should be linked to the resident
director, who is then responsible to the
administration. Although academic
assistance is undeniably important, tu
tors must do more than merely toot.
Their role should be to stimulate dis
cussion, to promote all types of inter
change, and to actively work towards
an educational atmosphere. At present
RA's and tutors tend to preserve rather
than promote and to be problem
solvers, rather than catalysts. The
tutor, like the faculty resident, must
approach his job with a new vitality
and commitment.
Sponsors
When the freshman class has been
entirely integrated into the university
community then the sponsor system
will become an anachronism. But until
that point the need remains and the
present system of sponsors and tutors
should be maintained.
There are two more important con
siderations before any system is put
Into operation. How will the faculty
and tutors be selected? And what are
the costs for the program as a whole?
These problems become relevant and
solvable only after the initial commit
ment and go ahead has been made.
Therefore discussion of these aspects
of the program will be included in
the proposal for next year.
VIII. Brief Assessment of Experience
At Other Institutions
While it is not our intention to base
the justification for our proposals on
the successes and failures of other in
stitutions with their necessarily dif
ferent circumstances, it is interesting
to note the results of a study con
ducted by the Faculty Committee on
Student Residences at Stanford in 1959.
Studying twenty-one similar universities
in this country they found that they
were about equally divided between
integrated and segregated freshman
living facilities. In general each school
seem satisfied with the system it then
had. However, while all of these with
the integrated system found it the most
workable, about 25 per cent of those
with segregated freshmen replied that
they were dissatisfied with their situ
ation and it certainly increases the
noisy freshman atmosphere which is
inimical to good study habits and con
ditions." Some schools reported that
the only reason for maintaining fresh
man segregation was pressure from
the fraternities who "objected stren
uously to placing their pledges under
the influence of hard bitten rugged in
dependents."
The many success of coeducational
housing on other campuses are too well
known to require documentation.
The institutions interviewed were
Cal Tech, Reed, Pembroke, Swarth
more, Oberlin, Pomona, Carleton, Rad
clifTe, Occidental, Ohio Wesleyan, Chi
cago, Brown, Dartmouth, Princeton,
Yale, Harvard, Northwestern, Washing
ton State, Oregon, Cornell, and Ohio
State.
IX. A Proposal:
The Wilbur Experiment
The committee has set forth its ar
guments for coeducational and inte
grated residences. It has suggested that
the residence should be a center of
intellectual life, and through residence
education the rigid separation of the
student's social and intellectual lives
could be ended. It remains for the com
mittee to propose how these aims can
be fulfilled at Stanford.
It is the feeling of the committee
that significant experimentation in resi
dence education is altogether feasible
for next year. There is a wide range
of possibilities. The committee initially
considered a massive scrambling of the
university residence pattern, convert
ing most dormitories on campus to
coeducation and integration. This pro
posal was rejected for two reasons:
(1) Full integration, or anything ap
proaching it, would at this time pro
duce an undesirable ratio of freshmen
to upperclass men. (2) It would be im
possible to supply the staff necessary
to introduce residence education in any
meaningful way if the scope of the
housing experiment is so broad.
The committee decided that its aims
could best be fulfilled by an experiment
of more limited scope. Instead of dras
tically overhauling the university resi
dence pattern, one dormitory complex
could be used as a rather large "pilot"
project, in which * Integratiorr and • eo
education could be complete and intel
lectual life could be given the proper
attention. Wilbur Hall is ideal for this
purpose. It is the largest complex on
campus, with space for approximately
720 people. It is divided into eight
houses, each of which constitutes a
separate identity unit. Each house has
an adjacent cottage for a faculty resi
dent and a tutorial room where semin
ars can be held.
The committee recommends that
next fall each Wilbur house be occu
pied by two floors of men and one
floor of women, and that each house
be integrated by class at a rate of one
freshman to three upperclassmen. Con
stituted as such, Wilbur Hall would be
the site of meaningful experimentation
in residential education.
The Wilbur experiment will of neces
sity affect some of the other university
residences. Freshman men will move to
Stern and Branner, retaining the spon
sor system in its present form. Fresh
man women will remain in Roble, with
sponsors, and those living in neither
Roble or Wilbur will be integrated with
upperclass women in Florence Moore.
Lagunita, Hoskins, and Toyon will be
unaffected. The remaining upperclass
men will live in three of the row
houses. The statistical breakdown is
as follows.
Total Frosh Upcl. Total Frosh Upcl.
Men Men Men W'ran W'mn Wmn
Wilbur 480 120 360 240 60 180
Stem 590 570 20
Branner 170 160 10
Roble 260 250 10
Florence
Moore 350 90 260
Lagunita 290 0 290
Hoskins 120 0 120
Toyon 200 0 200
Row
Houses (3)100 0 100
(5) 180 0 180
Totals 1540 850 690 1440 400 1040
(Note: If women are allowed to move
off campus, adjustments can be made
easily. If the number of women moving
off is under 180, an appropriate num
ber of row houses can be converted
from women to men. Compensation
can also be made by admitting more
freshman and transfer women. If

necessary the measures can be com
bined. )
Students will be chosen for the Wil
bur experiment on a draw basis. It is
reasonable to expect an excess demand
for on-campus housing by upperclass
men, since a new option is being of
fered that will presumably attract men
who presently or would otherwise live
off campus, or in fraternities. The com
ration of the upperclassmen's popu
lation in Wilbur would thus differ
from the present composition of Stem.
If women are allowed off campus, there
would be a greater possibility of satis
fying the demand for men's housing.
The likelihood of vacant dormitory
space, with the introduction of the
Wilbur option, is highly improbable.
The logistics of putting the bodies
into Wilbur for the pilot project is
only half of our task in our proposal.
The problems of staffing the complex
and from there working out feasible
programs is the next step. Hopefully
to make this pilot project a real step
toward achieving the residential uni
versity, as much of the general report
as possible will be included, only the
scope has changed not the purpose of
the program.
Selection for next year's faculty resi
dents could be turned over to a com
mittee composed of one faculty and
one student member of the ASSU
Housing Commission and two members
from the Dean of Students Office, with
the advice of the present Committee.
Once this task has been completed, the
faculty can participate in choosing the
tutors and drawing up more detailed
plans for the program.
The committee realizes that a com
mitment to this kind of residential
education will require an overt shift
in educational effort from the class
room and lab to the residence, with
both compensation for it and relief
from other teaching duties—and quite
probably the replacement of their
other more formal academic functions
by other personnel. We also realize
that there will be a budget problem,
but emphatically deny that worthwhile
educational goals should not be pro
posed and slated because of current
pragmatic limitations.
The committee hopes that, through

further study—best done in conjunc
tion with the study of education at
Stanford—that it will be possible to
rearrange and reemphasize the com
ponents of freshman education in such
a way that existing resources would
permit a serious upgrading of resi
dence education, and the possibility
that such education could replace some
aspects of the present program. This
might well allow the same total re
sources of money and people to meet
the desired objectives by shifting the
locale and method of teaching, rather
than just adding to the staff and pro
gram.
Presently in Wilbur there are three
sponsor rooms and one tutor room
which can accommodate the new tutors.
Hopefully as many of these rooms will
be used for that purpose, but if for
any reason four tutors per house is im
possible, then the rooms could be used
for offices which would at least bring
more graduate level contact into the
residence.
One possible suggestion for Wilbur's
eight houses next year would be to
have five of them centered around a
general theme, one international house,
and two left unstructured. There has
been much agitation for an interna
tional house on campus and many pro
posals have been drawn up. Five sug
gested topics for the theme houses are
"Religion and Society," "Literature and
Fine Arts," "Science and Human Prob
lems," "The Urban Threat," and "So
cial Change."
To take only one of these themes and
speculate what the given house of
faculty, tutors and students will make
of it is another of those endless first
steps in imagination potential. The
house that was using the topic "Science
and Human Problems," for example,
would bring in a diversity of fields
from the natural sciences to the hu
manities. Many of the poignant prob
lems facing students and faculty are
centered in this topic but the same
could probably be said in a different
context for each of the five topics. The
impact of technology on our economic
and social system, the moral contro
versy over the newest discoveries in
genetics, the myth of the scientific
method are all themes to be explored.

What happens to a world view when
scientific discoveries puncture com
fortable philosophies? What is time
and how does man control it and how
docs it control man? These are ques
tions to be asked. Above all, it is im
portant to remember that the direc
tion of intellectual thrust must not be
too well defined in advance. One of
the most valuable experiences for the
living group will be coming to grips
with the topic, deciding for themselves
how the general area should be ap
proached, and then proceeding to de
velop programs and structures on their
own.
The committee is highly enthusiastic
about the creative possibilities pre
sented by the Wilbur experiment—the
first step in the direction of a fully
integrated and coeducational residence.
If the experiment even approaches the
measure of success the committee en
visions, it could prove a major innova
tion in the history of American higher
education. A well developed program
of residential education offers a poten
tial of immeasurable dimension.
X. Correlation of this report with the
overall review of education at Stanford
The key problems of residence edu
cational stimulus and the kind of staff
and budget commitments necessary
need further specific elucidations which
the committee hopes can be under
taken by the Executive Committee for
the study of education at the earliest
opportunity, in order to agree on ob
jectives and make necessary staff and
financial plans for the Wilbur Project
to be able to start in the Fall of 1967.
The committee takes this oppor
tunity to thank the following people
for individual contributions to our
meetings: Dwight Clark, Dr. Lawrence
Thomas, Miss Sally Mahoney, Dr. Mar
tin Evans, Dick Williams, Mike Roster,
Howie Holmes, Doug Davis, Bob Gor
don, Dean Hind, and Dean Novak.
February 6, 1967
Subcommittee on the Freshmen Resi
dence Program ASSU Housing Com
mission. Barbara Levin, Judy Bader.
Barbara Warren, David Koval, Chris
topher Harte, Douglas Sorenson, Scott
Soames (Co-Chairman) Elizabeth
Cohen, B. Davie Napier, Max
Maurice M. Osborne Jr. (Co-Chairman).
Doubts of the ability of Stanford's
present educational system to provide
for the needs of its students, and speci
fic questions about the relevance of
the residence program in its present
form, have stimulated students, faculty,
and staff to seek more appropriate
solutions.
The A.S.S.U., concerned about the
quality of residential experience at
Stanford — particularly in contrast to
that at the Overseas Campuses —
created through its Legislature a Hous
ing Commission, one task of which was
to review and make recommendations
concerning the freshman residence
program in its relation to education.
At about the same time, Associate
Dean of Students Robert Gordon was
asked to present proposals for a new
model of freshman residential educa
tion.
Both A.S.S.U. and Dean Gordon al
most simultaneously appointed com
mittees in the early Fall of 1966 to ad
vise them in the making of recommen
dations in this important area, and
rather than continue a too-familiar pat
tern of separate committees working
independently (and often divergently)
it was decided to merge the two.
In the merger, the Dean's Advisory
Committee agreed to accept the A.S.S.U.
invitation to become an integral part,
of its group. Dean Gordon agreed to
accept the report of the entire group
in the same light as he would have the
recommendations of his originally ap
pointed committee, and the merged
group in turn agreed to attempt in
good faith to assist him in meeting his
deadlines and obligations as best it
could.
Despite particular questions existing
about the Sponsor system, the Commit
tee felt from the outset that to limit
its discussions and report to such par
ticulars, or to start out with them,
would be to avoid the main Issues sur
rounding ,the quality and meaning of

residential education at Stanford, par
ticularly the freshman program.
The Committee thus firmly decided
that it would start from a fresh con
sideration of the issues and principles
involved, relating its recommendations
to them. It was recognized that such
an approach would be time consuming,
that it might seem Utopian to some;
yet a critque and basic statement about
the ideas of a residence university
seemed vital for future planning and
growth.
At the same time, the practical ne
cessity for more immediate recommen
dations and action was realized. The
present report is in this sense a pre
liminary, or interim report, which at
tempts to set forth and justify some
practical recommendations for residence
programs that could be adopted in
1967-68 — steps within the framework
of progression towards a more ideal
situation.
The Case for the Residential Commu
nity — The Personal Committment to
Learning
The impossibility of considering the
freshman experience in isolation from
the life and purposes of the entire un
dergraduate program has been a ma
jor premise in the subcommittee's
study of the Freshman Residence Pro
gram. Two main assumptions underlie
this approach.
One is that the university experience,
as a whole, is only one part of the con
tinuum of the educational process, a
process which neither begins nor ends
at the university gates. The educational
ideals should be the same for all four
undergraduate years in terms of what
they declare for the growth of persons.
The freshman year is only a step in
a span of development, having a spe
cial function as the first step but not
a separate one.
The second is a new conception which
views the university as a community
for learning through personal, interac
,tjon, find development,. .nsp, of

all its facilities for education. This view
emphasizes that the classroom, library
or laboratory cannot — indeed does not
even now — have a monopoly on pro
viding for the education and develop
ment of students. Else, why a residen
tial university? Why not subcontract
all residential arrangements and avoid
hotel problems?
The Committee felt strongly that
there was urgent need for institutional
endorsement of the fact that without
growth and development in personal,
social, and emotional dimensions, the
achievements of intellect are shallow
and stand in isolation from the indivi
dual and his world. The conviction that
gives personal meaning to knowledge
is a product of direct human relation
ship, and we make far too little use
of its potential.
In a more settled and comfortable
past, with much greater mutuality of
expectations and values both between
peers and between generations, the ur
gency of such questions was less, the
scope more limited and the answers
more predictable. The bull-session quite
effectively handled many aspects of
this personal-social side of development.
For this, and other reasons, relatively
little formal attention to it was felt
to be necessary, aside from some for
mal lectures on hygiene, the evils of
sex and booze, and the Fundamental
Standard. After all, boys were (and
would be) boys, and pretty soon they'd
grow up into men, producers and fa
thers. Home and society would take
care somehow that they grew up right,
and the college would provide an ac
cepted transition station on the way,
some academic input, and try to keep
the lid on boyish spirit getting out of
hand.
By contrast today, for many students
questions about one's nature, and about
one's relationship to an uncertain
world, and about this world itself are
more insistent, and more pre-occupying
.before The V&iefttipns a#?, -real,

and require believable answers from
within the individual. And, until he can
find them, this quest, this preoccupa
tion has top priority, while academics
suffer through seeming less relevant.
And though there are many students
who are relatively unconcerned about
such questions, we feel their total edu
cation would be enriched if they could
be purposefully involved.
The history of formal didactic at
tempts to speak to these burning ques
tions is rather dismal, and all over the
country, there has been a steady atro
phy of required, and even of voluntary
courses relative to personal hygiene,
sex, morals, and behavior. Both stu
dents and educators sense that because
a viable set of personal ethics and
values just grow within the individual,
attempts simply to impose them from
without are relatively futile.
Not only have curricular approaches
to such questions atrophied (happi
ly!), but American education is nearing
the end of a decade in which the entire
necessity of addressing itself to the
problem of personal growth has been
quite deliberately rejected. Sputnik was
the symbol, and such spokesmen as
Hyman Rickover took up the cudgels,
with articulate and seathing denuncia
tions of "Education for Living" — of
concepts of "adjustment," and insisted,
along with many others, on intellectual
excellence (for "excellence" read "a
chievement") as the right, and only
purpose of education.
Growth of population; of national
wealth with its stimulus to upward so
cial mobility; increasing complexity
and diversity of knowledge with its
concommitant of faculty pre-occupa
tion and relatively-narrower fields; and
increased competition have sharpened
the pressures for achievement, leaving
even loss time, thought, or energy for
development as a person.
The need to pay most serious atten
tion to this is most keenly felt by many
studetitfi hy their eldprs.
There has been some re-emergence of
an expressed need for leadership and
cooperation in working out better ways
to assist and support the individual in
his personal education and develop
ment, and when students do not raise
these questions, their education should
raise them, and speak to them.
Unstructured and spontaneous stu
dent discussion, particularly at the
freshman level, is heavily-flavored with
the need to sort oneself out, but as it
now operates, it tends less to growth
than to its more traditional social func
tion of settling into "bird-of-a-feather"
groupings in which the individual
can find comfort and support for his
own sets of values and seekings. With
in this spontaneously-forming group
ings, the dialogue tends to become in
creasingly circular, the values increas
ingly exclusive, and there is decreased
permeability to fresh ideas and ex
perience.
In an educational situation where
concentration is placed on the formal
aspects of education there is an imbal
ance which produces distortion, which
too often takes the form of rejection
of the academic sphere as "irrelevant."
Another consequence is the dangerous
polarization of university life into two
worlds; that of the classroom, and that
of social life, setting them to work
against each other instead of with each
other toward the individual's goals. The
acceptance of the residence university
ideal as being vital to education can
be one important factor in keeping
the two worlds together and moving in
the same direction, whereas the pres
ent residence program presents too
many forces that divide living from
learning.
The Committee takes as self-evident
that a truly liberal education is in fact
liberating — in making both wider and
deeper the individual's ability to per
ceive, absorb, analyze, and choose in a
vastly-increasing array of people,
events, and issues, and not in forcing
the premature adoption of limited, and
constricting attitudes. In effect this
seems the necessity of the student's
continuous and repeated exposure to
and challenge by diversity of ideas, of
values, styles, and of course people.
It is here that the meaning of residen
tial education springs to life, for it of
fers potentially the best milieu for
daily face-to-face interaction with peers,
with older students, and faculty mem
bers of both sexes — offering diversity
of age, sex, discipline and values in
the highly personal way so necessary
for exposure to lead to involvement,
and knowledge to become commitment.
The necessity of direct personal in
teraction is most strongly endorsed by
the Committee, for it is the set of
values and mental attitudes formed in
such day-in, day-out exchange that set
tle most deeply into one's fiber. Thus
to narrow the range, or dilute the qual
ity of this exchange seems antiethical
to education. Kenneth Benne, in his
article "The Uses of Fraternity" states
in this regard, "People learn value sys
tems in the first instance as they form
relations with others. These relations
in turn develop norms with corres
ponding rationales which the individual
then internalizes. If people, young or
old, can build groups with standards
that reward and strengthen honest
self - expression and self - acceptance,
creativity, mutual helpfulness and the
capacity to cope with conflict, then the
members of such groups will assimilate
these values as conditions of member
ship."
Choice, and learning to choose ra
tionally, are important educational
tasks, but should not be forced on the
individual too hurriedly, without
enough exposure to a wide range of
choices, nor without some room for
trial and error.
In summary then, the Committee
firmly believes that:
1. As education is, or should be, a con
tinuum, the freshman year cannot
be considered in isolation from the
entire undergraduate program, and al
though it has a special function as
the first step, it is an integral part
of the whole.
2. There is a grave imbalance in the
university's educational emphasis,
which tends to widen the needless,
and in our view harmful, gap be
tween the getting of knowledge and
the important business of living.
3. The deepest personal and intellectual
cpncems of students — their rela
tionships to themselves, and to an

uncertain world, — are not receiving
the institutional recognition and ef
fort they deserve.
4. That people learn most deeply by
living, and by forming personal re
lationships, and that when the resi
dence program, as at present, is
oriented to bed, board, and social
needs, the opportunities for inter
nalizing intellectual knowledge and
values are meager, and the tenden
cies to reject academic values as per
sonally-irrelevant are reinforced.
5. That choice, and learning to choose
critically are central educational
goals, but that it must depend on
close and repeated exposure to a
wide range of ideas, values, styles,
and people — people of different
ages, disciplines, sexes, and back
grounds, — and not be prematurely
forced into constricting channels
based primarily on social and not in
tellectual values.
6. Such close exposure to diversity, over
sufficient time, and if taken as the
norm, would go far in preventing
the formation of narrowed and
sterotypic attitudes and thought —
the surest signs of the ill-educated
man.
7. The way in which students live very
directly affects the whole quality of
their education: this single principle
underpins the whole concept of the
residential university.
"THE FRESHMAN CONDITION"
The paraphrase above in intentional,
— and designed to point out that being
a freshman at Stanford, or anywhere,
is an intensely personal experience of
transition. Although the general ideals
of education apply equally, — and es
pecially, — to him, the freshman also
has attributes which make him special,
but not separate.
It is the feeling of this committee
that freshmen can and should receive
the benefit of special experiences de
signed for their particular problems.
The assumption that we would like to
question is whether this need for some
special orientation experiences necessi
tates their living in a segragated fash
ion. Although it is expedient from an
"efficiency" point of view, it may gen
erate excessive anxiety over perfor
mance in freshman courses and a rein
forcement for essentially juvenile
modes of facing college stresses. His
special attributes can be summed up as
follows:
A. He obviously needs early and reli
able information about his new com
munity — where things are, what he
is to do, and so forth.
B. He is making the transition most
traditionally accepted in America as
the line between family dependency
and personal autonomy.
In actuality, the line, if there is one,
is blurred, and varies greatly from one
freshman to another. In general, the
freshman comes equipped with the cre
dentials of previous achievement and
approval — hoping he will be accepted
in his new college world, and fearing
that he may not. At the same time he
hopes that his performance and life
will be freer and larger than before.
The freshman, more poignantly than
any other undergraduate, in his transi
tion from a narrower to a hopefully
wider identity, wants the understand
ing of his old world, personal accep
tance by the new — and fears he may
have neither.
He is thus enormously vulnerable,
and as Steve Hurlbut has written in
his excellent paper, is characterized by
a "pervasive anxiety." Until he has as
similated workable norms, he feels he's
got to satisfy some kind of external
standard, and is anxious until he does.
Some more specific stresses that tend
to promote anxiety are:
I.The sudden change of status that
comes from being taken out of a
high school situation where one is
enormously successful and being put
in a class of similar big frogs from
small ponds, and feeling that they
are tougher frogs than he is:
2. The doubt about being able to live up
to tough academic demands:
3. Doubts about his being accepted by
his peers — of both sexes;
4. Being away from home;
5. Confrontation with different reli
gious and social values than those
the student has learned in his family
and home community;
6. Ambivalence about authority, and
older peopje in general.
This araciety and vulnerability are by

no means bad in themselves — and in
deed offer the most fertile soil for cul
tivation of the seeking young mind.
But the thrust of this searching anxiety
is in essence social, and approval-seek
ing — and therefore related to persons
and social groups, or the winning of ac
ceptable symbols of achievement.
The Committee feels that the perva
sive, and expectable freshman anxiety
and search for some group identity is
a double-edged sword, with potential
for both regression and for growth.
On one side, if there is failure of
approval from home, or personal ac
ceptance at college, or fewer grade
points "in the bank" than expected,
anxiety may well become dysfunction
al, with consequences such as neurotic
disturbance, refusal to compete aca
demically, and even regressive and
anti-social group-adolescent behavior,
and the reinforcement of pre-college
values.
CRITIQUE OF THE PRESENT
FRESHMAN RESIDENCE PROGRAM
The Committee feels that too many
features of the present freshman resi
dence program serve:
1. To reinforce natural anxieties among
the newest members of the Univer
sity, and
2. To promote the seeking of solutions
to this anxiety that have little if any
thing to do with educational pur
poses, but tend to promote prema
ture and mutually exclusive social
groupings.
As he moves into a freshman resi
dence, he is thrown into close contact
with a large peer-group of greater
diversity in background, attitudes, and
talent than he is likely to have known.
And, because competition and fears of
failure are keenest among peers (par
ticularly of neophytes performing simi
lar tasks,) these differences within the
larger peer-group tend to move the stu
dent into protective subgroups of
peers with attitudes and pre-college
backgrounds similar to his own, within
which he finds support. In such mutual
ly-supportive social groups, the student
can arm himself and defend himself
psychologically against any new ideas
to which he is being exposed, from fel
low students, members of the opposite
sex, and his professors. Studies will
never be taken at all seriously but will
be dealt with in a purely cognitive
fashion, ingested for the purpose of
passing exams and discarded soon af
terwards. Under these conditions, we
may have done away with the prob
lems of anxiety, but are faced with the
possibility of at least two other un
desirable consequences, 1) His atti
tudes and values may remain totally
unquestioned throughout his college
career; and 2) a group devoted to de
fending itself against the climate of an
institution may exhibit anti-social char
acteristics of alienated people every
where.
That present groups formed for mu
tual support emerge after a limited
exposure to new, and possible better
models, is certainly true, and groupings
tend to occur along pre-college lines
and values, or in rebellion against
them.
The present segregated freshman
residence situation also tends:
3. To promote the seeking of achieve
ment symbols (i.e. grades) rather
than knowledge of self or substance;
4. By a residence administration seen
as primarily regulatory and manger
ial, to aggravate the natural ambi
valence of freshmen towards author
ity with results ranging from thought
less docility to destructive rebellion;
or apathetic alienation;
5. To provide too much pressure for
distortion and ritualization of rela
tionships between the sexes — the
"dating syndrome" — and a poverty
of opportunities for simple, friendly
interaction of people, a lack fre
quently deplored by both freshmen
and upperclassmen.
Both architecture and group pres
sures, as well as well-institutionalized
pressures for achieving good grades
in a heavy curriculum conspire to rob
the freshman of privacy — both physi
cal privacy, and temporal privacy; i.e.
some time simply to be himself, to spin
his wheels, and to think, with room for
trial and error.
There is, at least in Wilbur, no at
mosphere in the dining halls in the
least conducive to conversation — and
for some reason, plastic and formica
encourage one to get In and out fast,

with emphasis on feeding the face, but
none on nourishing friendship.
All of these (observable) results are
Inimical to the purposes of stimulating
interest in new subjects, of promoting
constructive reaction to diversity, of
the discouragement of stereotypic
thinking and behavior, and of trust in
older people as human beings.
More importantly, the positive po
tentials of freshman vulnerability go
relatively untapped — or are being tap
ped for outworn purposes. For this
vulnerability is personal, and if pro
vided with daily personal interaction
with a wide range of interesting
people of different ages and different
disciplines, there is more than a good
chance that Stanford freshmen would
attach their enthusiasms and their
hearts to the new models they need
and seek — models of greater depth
and diversity, but providing the identi
ty and security they need.
The interaction between freshman
men in Wilbur and the Faculty Resi
dents has varied greatly in its intensity
and impact — with instances of great
fruitfulness, or relative neutrality and
harmony, and a very few of a truly
negative quality.
Faculty Associates to freshman resi
dences have often provided important
personal interactions between fresh
men and the faculty — but just as
often these contacts have been super
ficial and ritualized.
Sponsors, while providing the great
est impact in personal exchange, pre
sent, because of their small number,
relatively limited contact with upper
classmen's values and experiences.
While all these personal contacts in
the freshman residences do in fact en
rich the education of many freshmen,
the other fact remains that there are
simply not enough such contacts, nor
sufficient support and time for these
few people to give residential educa
tion the emphasis it deserves.
EVOLUTION OF THE PRESENT
FRESHMAN RESIDENCE PROGRAM
Whatever rationalizations may be
adduced in support of the present
freshman residence program, it ap
pears to the Committee that it is in
large measure a holdover from an
earlier set of norms — norms that re
ceived wide acceptance and support in
those times, but that are under serious
question *oday.
In the Teens, the Twenties, and even
well into the Thirties, there was more
general acceptance (in society at large
as well as in the university commu
nity) of a particular hierarchical order,
and the particular authority structure
such an order implies. One tended to
know where one stood in relation to
the order at any given period, and to
be confident that one would ascend the
ladder by predictable steps.
Perhaps because of the relative sta
bility of the social order, personal de
velopment was thought of more along
the lines of advancement within that
order — with of course the acquisition
of enough "knowledge" and academic
polish to secure preference in vocations
and the status of a college-educated
man. It was important in itself to be
a senior, or for that matter an upper
classman, and the class structure had
in itself real meaning to the student.
Hence, the development of class spirit
and cohesiveness was valued, encour
aged, and ritualized. Even the major
steps in progression along the well
worn rungs were ritualized in such
rites of passage as the annual "Frosh-
Soph War," a ritual which would have
been impossible had there been no such
open class distinction.
The residence arrangements prob
ably reflected an accept? e of this
order according to social and culture
values of the day, and were aimed at
initiating the freshman into them. A
deliberate segration of the neophyte —
either by residence, by distinguishing
badges (viz. the "Beanie"), by restric
tion of privilege, or by combinations
of these has in many human organiza
tions, served to reinforce acculturation
to desired social and behavioral norms,
and whether anyone was purposefully
aware of this or not, such considera
tions surely operated in freshman resi
dential segragation. Aside from "home
work" performed in a dorm, there was
a rather strict geographic separation
of intellectual-academic concerns and
the personal-social sphere. The class
room and laboratory (and one's closed
~oom or the stacks) were meant for
the'one — while the dorm was really
for the other, and largely designed for
it.
The early history of the sponsor
program, when Encina Hall was the
freshman men's dorm, illustrates well
its use as an instrument for indoctri
nation of the "hapless Frosh" into pre
vailing upperclassmen's values.
Most sponsors wore a block "S", and
embodied a prevailing ideal of social
and athletic prowess, coupled with a
sense of loyalty to the group, respect
for authority, and an obligation to be
exemplary to their potential succes
sors. As recently as 1955, the effective
ness of a sponsor was measured, among
other things, by the percentage of his
charges attending the pregame rallies
and intercollegiate games.
Most sponsors were also fraternity
men, and another measure of his suc
cess as a sponsor was the number of
his freshmen pledged. For the spon
sors, there was little conflict involved
in serving simultaneously the fresh
men, one's own upperclassman values,
and those of the institution and its
authorities, for all constituents had
pretty much the same understanding
of the system, and of each of their
places within it.
In the intervening years, particularly
those since World War 11, there have
been profound changes in the social
order — a disruption of settled commu
nity, sharpened preoccupations with
material competition, and a culture less
and less sure of where it stood, or what
it believed in. Particularly among those
intelligent enough to attend such col
leges as Stanford, there has been in
creasing criticism of existing institu
tions which seem to them to produce
as leaders men with narrowed vision,
preoccupation with power, and too
little time or love for people. In this
climate of malaise, and in the absence
of once tacitly-held assurances, the
young person's search for personal
identity, relevance, and belief has
emerged as a very important difference
between many students of today and
of the previous generation, and again
underscores the vital importance of the
living group experience.
Despite some expressed dissatisfac
tions with the existing sponsor system,
the sponsors and a few feculty resi
dents at Wilbur were quite probably
the first to sense both this new and
urgent need among the freshmen (and
of course in themselves,) and that the
approach to it had to be met at the
level of day-in, day-out personal inter
action.
The evolution of the present sponsor
system has been a response both to
the growing need for attention to per
sonal education and development, and
to the need to substitute a drive for
continuous search and openness for the
more comfortable, but rather water
tight, social groupings which they saw
taking place.
For the past few years, the sponsors
have been the real pioneers in residen
ital education in the freshman resi
dence program. To condemn them as
"politically motivated" or irresponsible
seems a rather defensive and negative
reaction to the admitted mistakes of
a few members, and more importantly
fails to recognize that, without much
help or understanding, they are on the
track of something very important.
There have, to be sure, been other
efforts in the direction of residential
education for freshmen — relatively
cautious additions which have been in
the general direction of enriching per
sonal experience and contact in the.
residences, and may represent an in
choate recognition of this need.
Such additions have been the Facul
ty Residents, the Faculty Associates,
the Student Associates — at first men,
later women — and later, more free
dom for dining exchanges. More for
mally, in-residence seminars, guests-in
residence, panel discussions, and even
classes have been introduced.
But the former additions (with the
exception of a few Faculty Residents)
have in general provided only super
ficial interactions, while the latter
(again with a few notable exceptions)
have borne little relation to life and
living education other than physical
proximity. There is a heavy implica
tion of the mere introduction of more
academics into residences — while the
.ru#ot iT.nortant questions to students
go, for the most part, unanswered.
Th< present freshmen residence pro
gram, in its segregation by class, by

sex, by its continued reinforcement of
separation of living from learning, is
anachronistic, and reflects values that
have become less relevant and ideas that
are no longer true — such as assump
tions that satisfactory personal devel
opment takes care of itself within an
accepted and orderly framework, (of
which the freshman class is one clear
step, houses and all); that personal
education and development are irrele
vant to, or at least peripheral to the
purposes of "Higher Education"; that
mutually-deaf social groupings are ac
ceptable parts of the social mosaic —
when the fact of the matter is that we
are badly failing to meet these now
paramount questions. Despite our be
ginning attentions to this need, the
main thrust of the freshman resi
dence program and the academic pro
gram, still tends to leave the freshman
alone in his search and to force him
into protective groupings.
FRESHMAN IN3PEORATION INTO
UNIVERSITY IJFE
As discussed above, the Committee
feels strongly that the present segre
gation of freshmen reflects values no
longer taken seriously, reinforces the
separation of learning from living
(with impoverishment of both), height
ens some dysfunctional anxieties, and
tends to force premature and relative
ly narrow security groupings, rein
forces the artificiality of contact be
tween the sexes, and alienates students
from the faculty.
Thus, segregation is in itself a cen
tral problem, and, of course, the alter
natives must be aimed at integration
of the freshman in one or more ways.
A. Coeducational Housing
As noted earlier, a major problem
for freshmen is the difficulty of estab
lishing relationships with members of
the opposite sex on any basis other
than a social or dating level. For fresh
man men, the problem is especially
acute, manifesting itself in a heighten
ing anxiety, increased insecurity, and
frustration. The institution of a sys
tem of coeducational housing would
not only ameliorate the undesirable so
cial position of freshman men but also
provide an atmosphere conducive to
more natural (spontaneous) and per
sonal relationships. Upperclassmen al
so face similar problems as the results
of a segragated housing system, and
they too could gain much from having
the option of a coeducational residence
program.
That such a program is both prac
tical and desirable is supported by the
acknowledged success of the overseas
campus program as a living and learn
ing experience. In addition, the appar
ent success of the Grove Project as a
coeducational residence suggests that
coeducation can be successful on the
home campus.
The committee believes that, in the
long run, coeducational housing should
be the prevailing, although not exclu
sive, pattern for residential education
at Stanford, and that significant steps
can and should be taken toward this
goal during the coming year, 1967-68.
Although some houses segregated by
sex should be retained for these stu
dents who do not wish to live in a co
educational residence, a major effort
should be directed toward providing
coeducational housing in its most sig
nificant sense, men and women living
in the same house. Even these houses
which remain segregated could be
placed in juxtaposition to increase the
interaction among men and women.
The goal of a residence housing both
men and women would be most effect
ively realized if the ratio is approxi
mately 1:1. Although the 1:1 ratio Is
most desirable, a ratio of 2:1 would,
we feel, be successful.
As a long range goal the Committee
recommends changing of th« admis
sions ratio to one that is closer to 1:1
as a step towards this ideal.
B. Integration of classes:
As discussed more fully in Section
111 of this report, the freshman year is
a period of growth in which freshmen
must adjust to what for many of them
is a totally new culture, with new and
demanding standards. This situation re
quires a certain amount of social sup
port to prevent excessive and destruc
tive anxiety.
The committee is convinced that the
freshman residence program too often
promotes a seeurity that reduces expo
sure to challenging and growth-moti
vating aspects of university life, there
by retarding development, rather than

preparing the freshman to meet the
challenges which are in a large mea
sure responsible for his insecurity. In
addition, individual anxieties often re
inforce each other to the detriment of
all concerned.
While it is agreed that there is val
uable support and learning through
contact with others engaged in the
same experience, this by no means re
quires that most of one's contacts be
freshmen, nor does it exclude the pos
sibility or desirability of living in con
tact with others.
In a maximally integrated system in
which freshmen constitute approxi
mately 30 per cent of the population,
reinforcement of pre-college values
would be healthily reduced, while
freshmen, still pursuing similar curri
cula, would not suffer from a dearth of
contact and interaction with other
freshmen. In a fully integrated system,
the freshman could contribute to the
atmosphere of the residence, but could
not dominate it. Social support would
be provided not only by contact with
other freshmen, but also by the pres
ence of upperclassmen who have gone
through similar experiences and who
can contribute to the freshman's sense
of social support both by advice or ex
ample and by providing living evidence
that students actually survive the
freshmen year. This system would, of
course, have the further advantage of
more fully orienting freshmen to the
challenges and opportunities of the
university, a need which can be only
partially fulfilled by the present spon
sor system.
C. Partial Integration
In the preceding discussion the mini
mum ratio of upperclassmen to fresh
men in an integrated residence is as
sumed to be well in excess of 1:1. Any
system of partial integration with ra
tios well below this minimum faces se
vere difficulties:
1. Although the population would be
enriched by the addition of more ex
perienced upperclass models, fresh
men would still dominate the dormi
tory; the balance between security
and growth would not be significant
ly changed.
2. Under one suggestion for partial in
tegration offered by Dean Gordon's
staff, upperclassmen would essential
ly be guests whose rooms happened
to be in a freshman dormitory. It is
difficult to understand what would
motivate 147 upperclassmen to accept
such a position, or why they would
feel any dedication to close personal
interaction with the freshmen in an
educational sense.
3. The sponsor system is successful
largely because a few individuals are
committed to making the best of an
unfortunate living situation for
freshmen. It is not clear that the sub
stitution of five guests for one spon
sor dedicated to working with fresh
men is desirable.
4. Partial integration in itself has never
been suggested as an optimal resi
dence system, and it is not clear that
it is a desirable step toward total
integration. The committee is con
vinced that change for its own sake
is an unsound policy at any stage in
the development of a more viable
residence system.
Freshmen have the most to gain in
a campus-wide residence program
founded on the principles of co-educa
tion and integration. The institution of
this program requires not only the
support of freshmen, but also that of
upperclassmen. It could be argued that
upperclassmen would not want to give
up their present housing system. In
answer to this objection three points
can be made:
1. It is not clear that upperclassmen
are satisfied with the present sys
tem. Every spring quarter freshmen
express dissatisfaction with the hous
ing alternatives open to them: the
success of the overseas program as
a living experience has prompted
many to call for a more desirable
program at Stanford at-Stanford;
there were five applicants for each
place in the Grove Project, and if
the seminar hadn't been required
there would have been more upper
classmen seeking this exciting new
living alternative.
2. Tn our model of a fully integrated,
coeducational house, the percentage
of freshmen living in should be kept
well below 50 per cent. Freshmen
could contribute their real enthusi
asm and the challenge of their ques
tions without dominating the houses,

so that integration would benefit
both freshmen and upperclassmen.
3. In our residence program some inde
pendent npperclass houses would re
main, if there were a demand for
them. We believe that most students
would choose to live in a coed, inte
grated house, however, if some stu
dents wished something akin to the
present system such alternatives
would be open to them. The assump
tion we are making is that the new
residenco opportunities will sell them
selves.
E. Diversity and Self-Selection
Diversity among housing alternatives
is desirable. In addition, diversity with
in each house must be maintained to
avoid provincialism within the various
alternatives. Free choice, particularly
too early in the college career, among
various living styles will eventually
produce self-selective, provincial group
ings which will contradict the ideal
of developing acceptance of individual
differences within the residence. Three
points can be made to this problem:
1. No house needs to represent a cross
section of the student body. When
too great diversity exists in a living
group, cohesiveness is lost and frag
mentation takes the form of break
ing up into small sub-groups between
which little communication exists.
Therefore, some commonality, espe
cially by interests, is desirable.
2. It may not be the case that giving
students free choice among really
worthwhile alternatives will result
in serious problems of self-selection.
At any rate, it will take time for this
to happen and if indeed problems do
arise, we should be able to deal with
them early.
3. Assuming that such problems do
arise and call for some restriction of
free choice, one possible solution
would be to limit the amount of time
that an individual could live in a par
ticular residence. By encouraging
switching and moving among stu
dents, no system would be allowed
to lock itself in and stagnate.
VII. The Tone and Character of the
Living Group: Staff and Program
The residential components of most
universities are now basically eating
and sleeping facilities, structurally like
barracks, motels, or high-rise Hiltons,
surrounded by parking lots. To become
a truly residential university, the resi
dence hall must become a center of
learning and development equal in im
portance to the lecture hall. Ideally
their staffing, planning, and adminis
tration should be the responsibility of
faculty members rather than housing
directors or business offices.
While Stanford now is a far cry from
the suggested ideal of a residence uni
versity, many steps have been pro
posed which work toward the ideal. In
tegration by class and co-education are
two strong recommendations made by
the committee, which as discussed
above have considerable value in them
selves.
However, these steps will not by
themselves result in genuine centers
for learning. The mechanical bod>
shuffling is only one step in preparing
a more conducive atmosphere for total
education; the other is the purposeful
stimulation of intellectual activities
within the residence. The character and
quality of such activities, and their
relevance to students' concerns will be
come a crucial measure and determi
ned of the contribution that residence
is providing for its component mem
bers. The program for each residence
would decide for itself what input to
organize as a stimulus for the desired
enrichment of the quality of living that
contributes to the total education of
the individual and of the group's stu
dents, faculty, ideas, and the unending
list of resources of a university com
munity are all potential and powerful
inputs. The interaction of these compo
nents now creates the particular ex
citement of a university, but these
components are being comparatively
wasted in one of the areas in which
they could be the most effective ... the
living situation. The challenge of a
idential program is to organize and
bring the components together in the
most imaginative ways to utilize the
potential to the lullest.
One of the major areas of waste Is
student-faculty relations. Both the stu
donts and the faculty complain about
the distance and seeming disinterest of
the two groups. The section in the re
port which* deals with the faculty rol£
in the residence university is only a
very small start on the road to killing
this unhealthy and unproductive gap.
(See section on faculty residents.)
Too often students miss out on much
of the university experience because of
communication gaps. A face-to-face liv
ing unit is the most obvious place for
communication and contact between
students and faculty. Often the pre
vailing ethos of a dormitory can work
against this ground level communica
tion and antithetically to the explora
tory ventures of the individual. A dorm
which is oriented around a strictly so
cial purpose may even squelch the mo
tivation branding it as "intellectual," a
word that has been mistreated from all
directions in our society. While many
houses do not fall into this trap, there
is another pitfall of ruts and habit that
restricts the growing of experience in
a different way. The entire responsi
bility of taking advantage of the under
graduate experience is on the individ
ual. and some people find themselves
vorking against odds that would dis
courage the most aggressive. Fresh
man in particular belong to this cate
gory. They need to be exposed to the
broad ranges of opportunity but also
need help to make use of them. An
adolescent peer culture reinforcing high
school anti-intellectualism is not one
)f the best possible ways to meet this
need. The outside stimulus and help
will not best be provided by authority
figures who tell people what to do. or
beat off the anti-intellectual bullies. The
best assurance that free exchange and
.sharing of experience will occur will
be found in the atmosphere of the liv
ing group and in the character of its
leadership. A lively house where there
is a constant influx of new and differ
ent stimuli where all things that need
expression can find it, has the best
chance against apathy or unspoken
social taboos. House organized activi
ties such as art exhibits, musical per
formances, seminars, or small scale
lecture series suffer the same fate as
the individual's struggle for expres
sion and exploration. Not everyone
would want to participate and now
many of those who do want to can,
"but to those who find it difficult, en
couragement, not brick walls, should
be present in the tone of the house.
The possibility of organizing houses
around special interests has been sug
gested; experimentation is in order.
Houses with distinctive interests—fine
arts, social issues, foreign policy—may
well bring together students and fac
ulty from various disciplines who
could more meaningfully and readily
develop a learning community than a
house whose residents and loosely
affiliated faculty can only share pleas
antries. There would still be ample
diversity by virtue of differences in
personality, background, majors, ca
reer plans and so on, but there would
also be a major intellectual and social
oncern they all share. More detail
for this kind of program is discussed
in the specific proposal for next year.
The program of input is just the
beginning to what happens to the life
n a particular house. It provides pos
sibly a focus or direction as well as the
important underlying communication
and resource network of faculty, tutor,
and student. It must be emphasized
that what is going to happen in every
house is going to be determined most
by the people who live there. There
is a give-and-take natural exchange
between the program of ideas for the
living group and the group's response.
Reuniting the sphere of living as a
meaningful and integral part of a stu
dent's education in no way signifies
the creation of a twenty-four-hour
classroom. The residential education
urogram is not an extension of the
formal academic structure; it is its
complement. Although the opportun
,fy for experimenting with courses
given for credit should be open, it is
only one of the myriad of possibilities
with residential education. While
proper planning, particularly in the
■'election of good faculty, is necessary
it would be unrealistic to lose sight
of the interaction from the other di
rection. A structure too rigid would
kill the potential of a residential pro
gram just as the naive assumption
that body shuffling is the whole
answer.
Flexibility and spontaneity are key
<*ords in the concept of what a pro
gram should be prepared to provide.
Fvrit the program should be externally

flexible. The development of the house
spirit would depend upon the inter
action between the particular members
and particular faculty and tutors. This
matter of orientation or direction for
the house could bow with the interest
and demand for a particular living sit
uation. Some programs would last
longer than others, some undoubtedly
will be less successful, some would
evolve of themselves into a new area.
There is flexibility to let the good pro
grams grow and let the bad ones kill
themselves without bringing the entire
system to ruin. A diversity of choice
between residences could be main
tained.
There should in addition be an in
ternal flexibility within each group.
There must be room for growth and
change within the group. If topics were
to be the basis for a house, they would
always have to be picked with enough
latitude to allow each member of the
house to approach it in his own way.
This casua', unstructured opportunity
for close faculty contact speaks directly
to the need of students who are con
cerned with relevance as a criterion of
education, relevance to themselves or
to the contemporary world. There is
much opportunity for the student to
become very involved in the formation
and execution of his own education.
People who are involved and interested
in their own work tend to be more in
terested and able to contribute to the
work of others.
Another possibility that should be
included in the program is the oppor
tunity for experimentation with self
government. All sorts of opportunities
exist outside of the adoption of a hier
archy handed from above of president,
social chairman, etc. . .
There is much to be said for the edu
cationally valuable experience of learn
ing to live with ambiguity and without
automatically following tradition or
the dictates of an authority figure to
create the quality of life of a house
out of what is there ... to create an
educationally meaningful experience.
"The ideas sound great on paper!" is
the old comment at the outset of any
innovation with the rejoiner "But how
do you make it work in reality?" usu
ally not far behind. Why doesn't this
all happen now? Wilbur, the recom
mended site for next year's project,
already has many of the features out
lined in this report. "Is there really
going to be any significant difference?"
might be one question. The answer is
twofold. Some of the kinds of things
this report talks about are already
happening. If they weren't then there
would really be no use in trying to
maximize the interaction. But so much
more could be happening, and many of
the detrimental currents that run con
trary to the purpose of attending a
university could be reduced. All sys
tems are implemented by men. There
is not any system of law, morality or
of a residence university which can
overcome the fallibility of man. There
is not a magical formula implied in this
program, it rests very heavily on the
people who participate but so does
every other system. Good systems help
him along and the committee firmly
feels that a true residential university,
is a better system than one which only
claims to be and is somewhere in the
middle.
The people involved therefore are at
the core of the program. But their
effectiveness will depend to a large
degree upon how they see their role.
Their conception of their role in this
new system must undergo as much
fundamental reinterpretation as the
system itself.
How will the inertia of the present
resident conditions be overcome? Who
will set the tone, provide the mo
mentum, and contribute the leader
ship? Our first answer to these ques
tions is the students themselves. In any
residence system students will unde
niably be the major constituency.. But
how the resident staff can contribute
is also an important issue. At the pres
ent time Stanford has faculty residents,
tutors, resident assistants, and spon
sors. The role of each should be re
viewed.
Faculty Resident*
The committee would certainly not
deny the valuable contribution of the
faculty residents toward improving the
living situation at Stanford, but in
general, the faculty resident program
simply is not given the support neces
sary to tree Its members from -other

tasks and to allow them to devote
more time, thought and emphasis to
the residence education program. The
basic change would be that of increased
commitment to the living situation. The
primary responsibility of the faculty
resident should not be to the dorm di
rector or the administration, but to the
student within the living group or com
plex. To be effective, the faculty resi
dent must be willing to accept a de
manding and time consuming involve
ment in the living situation. His pres
ence there will be much more than a
face at meals or even that of a good
friend. Presumably the resident would
be a full time member of the faculty,
for the success of the residence pro
gram would greatly depend upon his
response to the intellectual needs of the
students. Doctoral candidates, coaches,
university officials, and administrators,
however, could still participate if they
would be willing to make the same
kind of commitment to the ideal of a
residence university. The interpersonal
factor is extremely important in this
kind of situation. Most every student
complains about the brilliant man who
can't give a good lecture. The same
argument will have to be taken into
account that not everyone can fulfill
this particular kind of a role. The fac
ulty resident must, above all, be sensi
tive to the interaction among students
in the group.
The things a faculty member could
contribute are bounded only by their
individual creativity but a few sug
gestions are in order.
1. In certain living units, seminars for
academic credit could be offered.
2. Directed reading could be made avail
able to certain students under the
resident.
3. Informal and noncredit seminars
should be encourage by the faculty
resident or when an idea came out
of the group he or some of his col
leagues could serve as resource per
son.
4. A student chairman and the faculty
resident could set up a meaningful
faculty associate program. The resi
dent can draw upon close friends and
colleagues which would supply an
internal identification missing in the
present program.
What would bring the faculty to par
ticipate in this program? Much of the
same dissatisfaction with student-fac
ulty relations that would bring the
students. Where something lively is
going on, something which the faculty
member is part there would not be
the embarassed ordeals that now take
place in dormitories on campus where
everyone involved is on their best and
most strained behavior. The living con
ditions would be similar to that of an
overseas campus though the professor
would not be required to drop his own
work or leave the center of his re
search. Class loads could be lessened
for the faculty participating because
they would be in essence only relocat
ing their teaching commitments, not
dropping them. They would have a
more flexible time schedule that might
be convenient to their purposes. This
position would also be in effect on a
rotating basis.
Resident Assistants and Tutors
The role of resident assistant should
be eliminated. In other words, we
would eliminate the role of the nice
guy disciplinarian, the liaison between
the administration and the students
who has been for too long forced into
an unfortunate position of hypocrisy.
As he is employed by the administra
tion he has an obligation to enforce
University policies, but if he is to be
at all effective with the students his
identification is with them. Too often
he has resolved the conflict by the
statement, "I don't care what you do,
just do it quietly so I don't see it."
Caught in this bind he has been in
effective as a man playing to two mas
ters. It is not enough to react to stu
dent needs and problems, for the role
we see must be one of creative action —
one of initiative and not merely re
sponse. Similarly, the present tutor
system is limited because its goal is
only to answer questions, not raise
them.
The present role of tutor, however,
is closer to our purpose than the RA's.
But this role must be expanded to be
effective. Thus, the idea of tutors
should be maintained, but its purpose
significantly broadened. Like faculty
residents > (and unlike RA's)' tutors

must have autonomy from primarily ad
ministrative policy and must be respon
sible primarily to the students below.
They should be linked to the resident
director, who is then responsible to the
administration. Although academic
assistance is undeniably important, tu
tors must do more than merely toot.
Their role should be to stimulate dis
cussion, to promote all types of inter
change, and to actively work towards
an educational atmosphere. At present
RA's and tutors tend to preserve rather
than promote and to be problem
solvers, rather than catalysts. The
tutor, like the faculty resident, must
approach his job with a new vitality
and commitment.
Sponsors
When the freshman class has been
entirely integrated into the university
community then the sponsor system
will become an anachronism. But until
that point the need remains and the
present system of sponsors and tutors
should be maintained.
There are two more important con
siderations before any system is put
Into operation. How will the faculty
and tutors be selected? And what are
the costs for the program as a whole?
These problems become relevant and
solvable only after the initial commit
ment and go ahead has been made.
Therefore discussion of these aspects
of the program will be included in
the proposal for next year.
VIII. Brief Assessment of Experience
At Other Institutions
While it is not our intention to base
the justification for our proposals on
the successes and failures of other in
stitutions with their necessarily dif
ferent circumstances, it is interesting
to note the results of a study con
ducted by the Faculty Committee on
Student Residences at Stanford in 1959.
Studying twenty-one similar universities
in this country they found that they
were about equally divided between
integrated and segregated freshman
living facilities. In general each school
seem satisfied with the system it then
had. However, while all of these with
the integrated system found it the most
workable, about 25 per cent of those
with segregated freshmen replied that
they were dissatisfied with their situ
ation and it certainly increases the
noisy freshman atmosphere which is
inimical to good study habits and con
ditions." Some schools reported that
the only reason for maintaining fresh
man segregation was pressure from
the fraternities who "objected stren
uously to placing their pledges under
the influence of hard bitten rugged in
dependents."
The many success of coeducational
housing on other campuses are too well
known to require documentation.
The institutions interviewed were
Cal Tech, Reed, Pembroke, Swarth
more, Oberlin, Pomona, Carleton, Rad
clifTe, Occidental, Ohio Wesleyan, Chi
cago, Brown, Dartmouth, Princeton,
Yale, Harvard, Northwestern, Washing
ton State, Oregon, Cornell, and Ohio
State.
IX. A Proposal:
The Wilbur Experiment
The committee has set forth its ar
guments for coeducational and inte
grated residences. It has suggested that
the residence should be a center of
intellectual life, and through residence
education the rigid separation of the
student's social and intellectual lives
could be ended. It remains for the com
mittee to propose how these aims can
be fulfilled at Stanford.
It is the feeling of the committee
that significant experimentation in resi
dence education is altogether feasible
for next year. There is a wide range
of possibilities. The committee initially
considered a massive scrambling of the
university residence pattern, convert
ing most dormitories on campus to
coeducation and integration. This pro
posal was rejected for two reasons:
(1) Full integration, or anything ap
proaching it, would at this time pro
duce an undesirable ratio of freshmen
to upperclass men. (2) It would be im
possible to supply the staff necessary
to introduce residence education in any
meaningful way if the scope of the
housing experiment is so broad.
The committee decided that its aims
could best be fulfilled by an experiment
of more limited scope. Instead of dras
tically overhauling the university resi
dence pattern, one dormitory complex
could be used as a rather large "pilot"
project, in which * Integratiorr and • eo
education could be complete and intel
lectual life could be given the proper
attention. Wilbur Hall is ideal for this
purpose. It is the largest complex on
campus, with space for approximately
720 people. It is divided into eight
houses, each of which constitutes a
separate identity unit. Each house has
an adjacent cottage for a faculty resi
dent and a tutorial room where semin
ars can be held.
The committee recommends that
next fall each Wilbur house be occu
pied by two floors of men and one
floor of women, and that each house
be integrated by class at a rate of one
freshman to three upperclassmen. Con
stituted as such, Wilbur Hall would be
the site of meaningful experimentation
in residential education.
The Wilbur experiment will of neces
sity affect some of the other university
residences. Freshman men will move to
Stern and Branner, retaining the spon
sor system in its present form. Fresh
man women will remain in Roble, with
sponsors, and those living in neither
Roble or Wilbur will be integrated with
upperclass women in Florence Moore.
Lagunita, Hoskins, and Toyon will be
unaffected. The remaining upperclass
men will live in three of the row
houses. The statistical breakdown is
as follows.
Total Frosh Upcl. Total Frosh Upcl.
Men Men Men W'ran W'mn Wmn
Wilbur 480 120 360 240 60 180
Stem 590 570 20
Branner 170 160 10
Roble 260 250 10
Florence
Moore 350 90 260
Lagunita 290 0 290
Hoskins 120 0 120
Toyon 200 0 200
Row
Houses (3)100 0 100
(5) 180 0 180
Totals 1540 850 690 1440 400 1040
(Note: If women are allowed to move
off campus, adjustments can be made
easily. If the number of women moving
off is under 180, an appropriate num
ber of row houses can be converted
from women to men. Compensation
can also be made by admitting more
freshman and transfer women. If

necessary the measures can be com
bined. )
Students will be chosen for the Wil
bur experiment on a draw basis. It is
reasonable to expect an excess demand
for on-campus housing by upperclass
men, since a new option is being of
fered that will presumably attract men
who presently or would otherwise live
off campus, or in fraternities. The com
ration of the upperclassmen's popu
lation in Wilbur would thus differ
from the present composition of Stem.
If women are allowed off campus, there
would be a greater possibility of satis
fying the demand for men's housing.
The likelihood of vacant dormitory
space, with the introduction of the
Wilbur option, is highly improbable.
The logistics of putting the bodies
into Wilbur for the pilot project is
only half of our task in our proposal.
The problems of staffing the complex
and from there working out feasible
programs is the next step. Hopefully
to make this pilot project a real step
toward achieving the residential uni
versity, as much of the general report
as possible will be included, only the
scope has changed not the purpose of
the program.
Selection for next year's faculty resi
dents could be turned over to a com
mittee composed of one faculty and
one student member of the ASSU
Housing Commission and two members
from the Dean of Students Office, with
the advice of the present Committee.
Once this task has been completed, the
faculty can participate in choosing the
tutors and drawing up more detailed
plans for the program.
The committee realizes that a com
mitment to this kind of residential
education will require an overt shift
in educational effort from the class
room and lab to the residence, with
both compensation for it and relief
from other teaching duties—and quite
probably the replacement of their
other more formal academic functions
by other personnel. We also realize
that there will be a budget problem,
but emphatically deny that worthwhile
educational goals should not be pro
posed and slated because of current
pragmatic limitations.
The committee hopes that, through

further study—best done in conjunc
tion with the study of education at
Stanford—that it will be possible to
rearrange and reemphasize the com
ponents of freshman education in such
a way that existing resources would
permit a serious upgrading of resi
dence education, and the possibility
that such education could replace some
aspects of the present program. This
might well allow the same total re
sources of money and people to meet
the desired objectives by shifting the
locale and method of teaching, rather
than just adding to the staff and pro
gram.
Presently in Wilbur there are three
sponsor rooms and one tutor room
which can accommodate the new tutors.
Hopefully as many of these rooms will
be used for that purpose, but if for
any reason four tutors per house is im
possible, then the rooms could be used
for offices which would at least bring
more graduate level contact into the
residence.
One possible suggestion for Wilbur's
eight houses next year would be to
have five of them centered around a
general theme, one international house,
and two left unstructured. There has
been much agitation for an interna
tional house on campus and many pro
posals have been drawn up. Five sug
gested topics for the theme houses are
"Religion and Society," "Literature and
Fine Arts," "Science and Human Prob
lems," "The Urban Threat," and "So
cial Change."
To take only one of these themes and
speculate what the given house of
faculty, tutors and students will make
of it is another of those endless first
steps in imagination potential. The
house that was using the topic "Science
and Human Problems," for example,
would bring in a diversity of fields
from the natural sciences to the hu
manities. Many of the poignant prob
lems facing students and faculty are
centered in this topic but the same
could probably be said in a different
context for each of the five topics. The
impact of technology on our economic
and social system, the moral contro
versy over the newest discoveries in
genetics, the myth of the scientific
method are all themes to be explored.

What happens to a world view when
scientific discoveries puncture com
fortable philosophies? What is time
and how does man control it and how
docs it control man? These are ques
tions to be asked. Above all, it is im
portant to remember that the direc
tion of intellectual thrust must not be
too well defined in advance. One of
the most valuable experiences for the
living group will be coming to grips
with the topic, deciding for themselves
how the general area should be ap
proached, and then proceeding to de
velop programs and structures on their
own.
The committee is highly enthusiastic
about the creative possibilities pre
sented by the Wilbur experiment—the
first step in the direction of a fully
integrated and coeducational residence.
If the experiment even approaches the
measure of success the committee en
visions, it could prove a major innova
tion in the history of American higher
education. A well developed program
of residential education offers a poten
tial of immeasurable dimension.
X. Correlation of this report with the
overall review of education at Stanford
The key problems of residence edu
cational stimulus and the kind of staff
and budget commitments necessary
need further specific elucidations which
the committee hopes can be under
taken by the Executive Committee for
the study of education at the earliest
opportunity, in order to agree on ob
jectives and make necessary staff and
financial plans for the Wilbur Project
to be able to start in the Fall of 1967.
The committee takes this oppor
tunity to thank the following people
for individual contributions to our
meetings: Dwight Clark, Dr. Lawrence
Thomas, Miss Sally Mahoney, Dr. Mar
tin Evans, Dick Williams, Mike Roster,
Howie Holmes, Doug Davis, Bob Gor
don, Dean Hind, and Dean Novak.
February 6, 1967
Subcommittee on the Freshmen Resi
dence Program ASSU Housing Com
mission. Barbara Levin, Judy Bader.
Barbara Warren, David Koval, Chris
topher Harte, Douglas Sorenson, Scott
Soames (Co-Chairman) Elizabeth
Cohen, B. Davie Napier, Max
Maurice M. Osborne Jr. (Co-Chairman).
Doubts of the ability of Stanford's
present educational system to provide
for the needs of its students, and speci
fic questions about the relevance of
the residence program in its present
form, have stimulated students, faculty,
and staff to seek more appropriate
solutions.
The A.S.S.U., concerned about the
quality of residential experience at
Stanford — particularly in contrast to
that at the Overseas Campuses —
created through its Legislature a Hous
ing Commission, one task of which was
to review and make recommendations
concerning the freshman residence
program in its relation to education.
At about the same time, Associate
Dean of Students Robert Gordon was
asked to present proposals for a new
model of freshman residential educa
tion.
Both A.S.S.U. and Dean Gordon al
most simultaneously appointed com
mittees in the early Fall of 1966 to ad
vise them in the making of recommen
dations in this important area, and
rather than continue a too-familiar pat
tern of separate committees working
independently (and often divergently)
it was decided to merge the two.
In the merger, the Dean's Advisory
Committee agreed to accept the A.S.S.U.
invitation to become an integral part,
of its group. Dean Gordon agreed to
accept the report of the entire group
in the same light as he would have the
recommendations of his originally ap
pointed committee, and the merged
group in turn agreed to attempt in
good faith to assist him in meeting his
deadlines and obligations as best it
could.
Despite particular questions existing
about the Sponsor system, the Commit
tee felt from the outset that to limit
its discussions and report to such par
ticulars, or to start out with them,
would be to avoid the main Issues sur
rounding ,the quality and meaning of

residential education at Stanford, par
ticularly the freshman program.
The Committee thus firmly decided
that it would start from a fresh con
sideration of the issues and principles
involved, relating its recommendations
to them. It was recognized that such
an approach would be time consuming,
that it might seem Utopian to some;
yet a critque and basic statement about
the ideas of a residence university
seemed vital for future planning and
growth.
At the same time, the practical ne
cessity for more immediate recommen
dations and action was realized. The
present report is in this sense a pre
liminary, or interim report, which at
tempts to set forth and justify some
practical recommendations for residence
programs that could be adopted in
1967-68 — steps within the framework
of progression towards a more ideal
situation.
The Case for the Residential Commu
nity — The Personal Committment to
Learning
The impossibility of considering the
freshman experience in isolation from
the life and purposes of the entire un
dergraduate program has been a ma
jor premise in the subcommittee's
study of the Freshman Residence Pro
gram. Two main assumptions underlie
this approach.
One is that the university experience,
as a whole, is only one part of the con
tinuum of the educational process, a
process which neither begins nor ends
at the university gates. The educational
ideals should be the same for all four
undergraduate years in terms of what
they declare for the growth of persons.
The freshman year is only a step in
a span of development, having a spe
cial function as the first step but not
a separate one.
The second is a new conception which
views the university as a community
for learning through personal, interac
,tjon, find development,. .nsp, of

all its facilities for education. This view
emphasizes that the classroom, library
or laboratory cannot — indeed does not
even now — have a monopoly on pro
viding for the education and develop
ment of students. Else, why a residen
tial university? Why not subcontract
all residential arrangements and avoid
hotel problems?
The Committee felt strongly that
there was urgent need for institutional
endorsement of the fact that without
growth and development in personal,
social, and emotional dimensions, the
achievements of intellect are shallow
and stand in isolation from the indivi
dual and his world. The conviction that
gives personal meaning to knowledge
is a product of direct human relation
ship, and we make far too little use
of its potential.
In a more settled and comfortable
past, with much greater mutuality of
expectations and values both between
peers and between generations, the ur
gency of such questions was less, the
scope more limited and the answers
more predictable. The bull-session quite
effectively handled many aspects of
this personal-social side of development.
For this, and other reasons, relatively
little formal attention to it was felt
to be necessary, aside from some for
mal lectures on hygiene, the evils of
sex and booze, and the Fundamental
Standard. After all, boys were (and
would be) boys, and pretty soon they'd
grow up into men, producers and fa
thers. Home and society would take
care somehow that they grew up right,
and the college would provide an ac
cepted transition station on the way,
some academic input, and try to keep
the lid on boyish spirit getting out of
hand.
By contrast today, for many students
questions about one's nature, and about
one's relationship to an uncertain
world, and about this world itself are
more insistent, and more pre-occupying
.before The V&iefttipns a#?, -real,

and require believable answers from
within the individual. And, until he can
find them, this quest, this preoccupa
tion has top priority, while academics
suffer through seeming less relevant.
And though there are many students
who are relatively unconcerned about
such questions, we feel their total edu
cation would be enriched if they could
be purposefully involved.
The history of formal didactic at
tempts to speak to these burning ques
tions is rather dismal, and all over the
country, there has been a steady atro
phy of required, and even of voluntary
courses relative to personal hygiene,
sex, morals, and behavior. Both stu
dents and educators sense that because
a viable set of personal ethics and
values just grow within the individual,
attempts simply to impose them from
without are relatively futile.
Not only have curricular approaches
to such questions atrophied (happi
ly!), but American education is nearing
the end of a decade in which the entire
necessity of addressing itself to the
problem of personal growth has been
quite deliberately rejected. Sputnik was
the symbol, and such spokesmen as
Hyman Rickover took up the cudgels,
with articulate and seathing denuncia
tions of "Education for Living" — of
concepts of "adjustment," and insisted,
along with many others, on intellectual
excellence (for "excellence" read "a
chievement") as the right, and only
purpose of education.
Growth of population; of national
wealth with its stimulus to upward so
cial mobility; increasing complexity
and diversity of knowledge with its
concommitant of faculty pre-occupa
tion and relatively-narrower fields; and
increased competition have sharpened
the pressures for achievement, leaving
even loss time, thought, or energy for
development as a person.
The need to pay most serious atten
tion to this is most keenly felt by many
studetitfi hy their eldprs.
There has been some re-emergence of
an expressed need for leadership and
cooperation in working out better ways
to assist and support the individual in
his personal education and develop
ment, and when students do not raise
these questions, their education should
raise them, and speak to them.
Unstructured and spontaneous stu
dent discussion, particularly at the
freshman level, is heavily-flavored with
the need to sort oneself out, but as it
now operates, it tends less to growth
than to its more traditional social func
tion of settling into "bird-of-a-feather"
groupings in which the individual
can find comfort and support for his
own sets of values and seekings. With
in this spontaneously-forming group
ings, the dialogue tends to become in
creasingly circular, the values increas
ingly exclusive, and there is decreased
permeability to fresh ideas and ex
perience.
In an educational situation where
concentration is placed on the formal
aspects of education there is an imbal
ance which produces distortion, which
too often takes the form of rejection
of the academic sphere as "irrelevant."
Another consequence is the dangerous
polarization of university life into two
worlds; that of the classroom, and that
of social life, setting them to work
against each other instead of with each
other toward the individual's goals. The
acceptance of the residence university
ideal as being vital to education can
be one important factor in keeping
the two worlds together and moving in
the same direction, whereas the pres
ent residence program presents too
many forces that divide living from
learning.
The Committee takes as self-evident
that a truly liberal education is in fact
liberating — in making both wider and
deeper the individual's ability to per
ceive, absorb, analyze, and choose in a
vastly-increasing array of people,
events, and issues, and not in forcing
the premature adoption of limited, and
constricting attitudes. In effect this
seems the necessity of the student's
continuous and repeated exposure to
and challenge by diversity of ideas, of
values, styles, and of course people.
It is here that the meaning of residen
tial education springs to life, for it of
fers potentially the best milieu for
daily face-to-face interaction with peers,
with older students, and faculty mem
bers of both sexes — offering diversity
of age, sex, discipline and values in
the highly personal way so necessary
for exposure to lead to involvement,
and knowledge to become commitment.
The necessity of direct personal in
teraction is most strongly endorsed by
the Committee, for it is the set of
values and mental attitudes formed in
such day-in, day-out exchange that set
tle most deeply into one's fiber. Thus
to narrow the range, or dilute the qual
ity of this exchange seems antiethical
to education. Kenneth Benne, in his
article "The Uses of Fraternity" states
in this regard, "People learn value sys
tems in the first instance as they form
relations with others. These relations
in turn develop norms with corres
ponding rationales which the individual
then internalizes. If people, young or
old, can build groups with standards
that reward and strengthen honest
self - expression and self - acceptance,
creativity, mutual helpfulness and the
capacity to cope with conflict, then the
members of such groups will assimilate
these values as conditions of member
ship."
Choice, and learning to choose ra
tionally, are important educational
tasks, but should not be forced on the
individual too hurriedly, without
enough exposure to a wide range of
choices, nor without some room for
trial and error.
In summary then, the Committee
firmly believes that:
1. As education is, or should be, a con
tinuum, the freshman year cannot
be considered in isolation from the
entire undergraduate program, and al
though it has a special function as
the first step, it is an integral part
of the whole.
2. There is a grave imbalance in the
university's educational emphasis,
which tends to widen the needless,
and in our view harmful, gap be
tween the getting of knowledge and
the important business of living.
3. The deepest personal and intellectual
cpncems of students — their rela
tionships to themselves, and to an

uncertain world, — are not receiving
the institutional recognition and ef
fort they deserve.
4. That people learn most deeply by
living, and by forming personal re
lationships, and that when the resi
dence program, as at present, is
oriented to bed, board, and social
needs, the opportunities for inter
nalizing intellectual knowledge and
values are meager, and the tenden
cies to reject academic values as per
sonally-irrelevant are reinforced.
5. That choice, and learning to choose
critically are central educational
goals, but that it must depend on
close and repeated exposure to a
wide range of ideas, values, styles,
and people — people of different
ages, disciplines, sexes, and back
grounds, — and not be prematurely
forced into constricting channels
based primarily on social and not in
tellectual values.
6. Such close exposure to diversity, over
sufficient time, and if taken as the
norm, would go far in preventing
the formation of narrowed and
sterotypic attitudes and thought —
the surest signs of the ill-educated
man.
7. The way in which students live very
directly affects the whole quality of
their education: this single principle
underpins the whole concept of the
residential university.
"THE FRESHMAN CONDITION"
The paraphrase above in intentional,
— and designed to point out that being
a freshman at Stanford, or anywhere,
is an intensely personal experience of
transition. Although the general ideals
of education apply equally, — and es
pecially, — to him, the freshman also
has attributes which make him special,
but not separate.
It is the feeling of this committee
that freshmen can and should receive
the benefit of special experiences de
signed for their particular problems.
The assumption that we would like to
question is whether this need for some
special orientation experiences necessi
tates their living in a segragated fash
ion. Although it is expedient from an
"efficiency" point of view, it may gen
erate excessive anxiety over perfor
mance in freshman courses and a rein
forcement for essentially juvenile
modes of facing college stresses. His
special attributes can be summed up as
follows:
A. He obviously needs early and reli
able information about his new com
munity — where things are, what he
is to do, and so forth.
B. He is making the transition most
traditionally accepted in America as
the line between family dependency
and personal autonomy.
In actuality, the line, if there is one,
is blurred, and varies greatly from one
freshman to another. In general, the
freshman comes equipped with the cre
dentials of previous achievement and
approval — hoping he will be accepted
in his new college world, and fearing
that he may not. At the same time he
hopes that his performance and life
will be freer and larger than before.
The freshman, more poignantly than
any other undergraduate, in his transi
tion from a narrower to a hopefully
wider identity, wants the understand
ing of his old world, personal accep
tance by the new — and fears he may
have neither.
He is thus enormously vulnerable,
and as Steve Hurlbut has written in
his excellent paper, is characterized by
a "pervasive anxiety." Until he has as
similated workable norms, he feels he's
got to satisfy some kind of external
standard, and is anxious until he does.
Some more specific stresses that tend
to promote anxiety are:
I.The sudden change of status that
comes from being taken out of a
high school situation where one is
enormously successful and being put
in a class of similar big frogs from
small ponds, and feeling that they
are tougher frogs than he is:
2. The doubt about being able to live up
to tough academic demands:
3. Doubts about his being accepted by
his peers — of both sexes;
4. Being away from home;
5. Confrontation with different reli
gious and social values than those
the student has learned in his family
and home community;
6. Ambivalence about authority, and
older peopje in general.
This araciety and vulnerability are by

no means bad in themselves — and in
deed offer the most fertile soil for cul
tivation of the seeking young mind.
But the thrust of this searching anxiety
is in essence social, and approval-seek
ing — and therefore related to persons
and social groups, or the winning of ac
ceptable symbols of achievement.
The Committee feels that the perva
sive, and expectable freshman anxiety
and search for some group identity is
a double-edged sword, with potential
for both regression and for growth.
On one side, if there is failure of
approval from home, or personal ac
ceptance at college, or fewer grade
points "in the bank" than expected,
anxiety may well become dysfunction
al, with consequences such as neurotic
disturbance, refusal to compete aca
demically, and even regressive and
anti-social group-adolescent behavior,
and the reinforcement of pre-college
values.
CRITIQUE OF THE PRESENT
FRESHMAN RESIDENCE PROGRAM
The Committee feels that too many
features of the present freshman resi
dence program serve:
1. To reinforce natural anxieties among
the newest members of the Univer
sity, and
2. To promote the seeking of solutions
to this anxiety that have little if any
thing to do with educational pur
poses, but tend to promote prema
ture and mutually exclusive social
groupings.
As he moves into a freshman resi
dence, he is thrown into close contact
with a large peer-group of greater
diversity in background, attitudes, and
talent than he is likely to have known.
And, because competition and fears of
failure are keenest among peers (par
ticularly of neophytes performing simi
lar tasks,) these differences within the
larger peer-group tend to move the stu
dent into protective subgroups of
peers with attitudes and pre-college
backgrounds similar to his own, within
which he finds support. In such mutual
ly-supportive social groups, the student
can arm himself and defend himself
psychologically against any new ideas
to which he is being exposed, from fel
low students, members of the opposite
sex, and his professors. Studies will
never be taken at all seriously but will
be dealt with in a purely cognitive
fashion, ingested for the purpose of
passing exams and discarded soon af
terwards. Under these conditions, we
may have done away with the prob
lems of anxiety, but are faced with the
possibility of at least two other un
desirable consequences, 1) His atti
tudes and values may remain totally
unquestioned throughout his college
career; and 2) a group devoted to de
fending itself against the climate of an
institution may exhibit anti-social char
acteristics of alienated people every
where.
That present groups formed for mu
tual support emerge after a limited
exposure to new, and possible better
models, is certainly true, and groupings
tend to occur along pre-college lines
and values, or in rebellion against
them.
The present segregated freshman
residence situation also tends:
3. To promote the seeking of achieve
ment symbols (i.e. grades) rather
than knowledge of self or substance;
4. By a residence administration seen
as primarily regulatory and manger
ial, to aggravate the natural ambi
valence of freshmen towards author
ity with results ranging from thought
less docility to destructive rebellion;
or apathetic alienation;
5. To provide too much pressure for
distortion and ritualization of rela
tionships between the sexes — the
"dating syndrome" — and a poverty
of opportunities for simple, friendly
interaction of people, a lack fre
quently deplored by both freshmen
and upperclassmen.
Both architecture and group pres
sures, as well as well-institutionalized
pressures for achieving good grades
in a heavy curriculum conspire to rob
the freshman of privacy — both physi
cal privacy, and temporal privacy; i.e.
some time simply to be himself, to spin
his wheels, and to think, with room for
trial and error.
There is, at least in Wilbur, no at
mosphere in the dining halls in the
least conducive to conversation — and
for some reason, plastic and formica
encourage one to get In and out fast,

with emphasis on feeding the face, but
none on nourishing friendship.
All of these (observable) results are
Inimical to the purposes of stimulating
interest in new subjects, of promoting
constructive reaction to diversity, of
the discouragement of stereotypic
thinking and behavior, and of trust in
older people as human beings.
More importantly, the positive po
tentials of freshman vulnerability go
relatively untapped — or are being tap
ped for outworn purposes. For this
vulnerability is personal, and if pro
vided with daily personal interaction
with a wide range of interesting
people of different ages and different
disciplines, there is more than a good
chance that Stanford freshmen would
attach their enthusiasms and their
hearts to the new models they need
and seek — models of greater depth
and diversity, but providing the identi
ty and security they need.
The interaction between freshman
men in Wilbur and the Faculty Resi
dents has varied greatly in its intensity
and impact — with instances of great
fruitfulness, or relative neutrality and
harmony, and a very few of a truly
negative quality.
Faculty Associates to freshman resi
dences have often provided important
personal interactions between fresh
men and the faculty — but just as
often these contacts have been super
ficial and ritualized.
Sponsors, while providing the great
est impact in personal exchange, pre
sent, because of their small number,
relatively limited contact with upper
classmen's values and experiences.
While all these personal contacts in
the freshman residences do in fact en
rich the education of many freshmen,
the other fact remains that there are
simply not enough such contacts, nor
sufficient support and time for these
few people to give residential educa
tion the emphasis it deserves.
EVOLUTION OF THE PRESENT
FRESHMAN RESIDENCE PROGRAM
Whatever rationalizations may be
adduced in support of the present
freshman residence program, it ap
pears to the Committee that it is in
large measure a holdover from an
earlier set of norms — norms that re
ceived wide acceptance and support in
those times, but that are under serious
question *oday.
In the Teens, the Twenties, and even
well into the Thirties, there was more
general acceptance (in society at large
as well as in the university commu
nity) of a particular hierarchical order,
and the particular authority structure
such an order implies. One tended to
know where one stood in relation to
the order at any given period, and to
be confident that one would ascend the
ladder by predictable steps.
Perhaps because of the relative sta
bility of the social order, personal de
velopment was thought of more along
the lines of advancement within that
order — with of course the acquisition
of enough "knowledge" and academic
polish to secure preference in vocations
and the status of a college-educated
man. It was important in itself to be
a senior, or for that matter an upper
classman, and the class structure had
in itself real meaning to the student.
Hence, the development of class spirit
and cohesiveness was valued, encour
aged, and ritualized. Even the major
steps in progression along the well
worn rungs were ritualized in such
rites of passage as the annual "Frosh-
Soph War," a ritual which would have
been impossible had there been no such
open class distinction.
The residence arrangements prob
ably reflected an accept? e of this
order according to social and culture
values of the day, and were aimed at
initiating the freshman into them. A
deliberate segration of the neophyte —
either by residence, by distinguishing
badges (viz. the "Beanie"), by restric
tion of privilege, or by combinations
of these has in many human organiza
tions, served to reinforce acculturation
to desired social and behavioral norms,
and whether anyone was purposefully
aware of this or not, such considera
tions surely operated in freshman resi
dential segragation. Aside from "home
work" performed in a dorm, there was
a rather strict geographic separation
of intellectual-academic concerns and
the personal-social sphere. The class
room and laboratory (and one's closed
~oom or the stacks) were meant for
the'one — while the dorm was really
for the other, and largely designed for
it.
The early history of the sponsor
program, when Encina Hall was the
freshman men's dorm, illustrates well
its use as an instrument for indoctri
nation of the "hapless Frosh" into pre
vailing upperclassmen's values.
Most sponsors wore a block "S", and
embodied a prevailing ideal of social
and athletic prowess, coupled with a
sense of loyalty to the group, respect
for authority, and an obligation to be
exemplary to their potential succes
sors. As recently as 1955, the effective
ness of a sponsor was measured, among
other things, by the percentage of his
charges attending the pregame rallies
and intercollegiate games.
Most sponsors were also fraternity
men, and another measure of his suc
cess as a sponsor was the number of
his freshmen pledged. For the spon
sors, there was little conflict involved
in serving simultaneously the fresh
men, one's own upperclassman values,
and those of the institution and its
authorities, for all constituents had
pretty much the same understanding
of the system, and of each of their
places within it.
In the intervening years, particularly
those since World War 11, there have
been profound changes in the social
order — a disruption of settled commu
nity, sharpened preoccupations with
material competition, and a culture less
and less sure of where it stood, or what
it believed in. Particularly among those
intelligent enough to attend such col
leges as Stanford, there has been in
creasing criticism of existing institu
tions which seem to them to produce
as leaders men with narrowed vision,
preoccupation with power, and too
little time or love for people. In this
climate of malaise, and in the absence
of once tacitly-held assurances, the
young person's search for personal
identity, relevance, and belief has
emerged as a very important difference
between many students of today and
of the previous generation, and again
underscores the vital importance of the
living group experience.
Despite some expressed dissatisfac
tions with the existing sponsor system,
the sponsors and a few feculty resi
dents at Wilbur were quite probably
the first to sense both this new and
urgent need among the freshmen (and
of course in themselves,) and that the
approach to it had to be met at the
level of day-in, day-out personal inter
action.
The evolution of the present sponsor
system has been a response both to
the growing need for attention to per
sonal education and development, and
to the need to substitute a drive for
continuous search and openness for the
more comfortable, but rather water
tight, social groupings which they saw
taking place.
For the past few years, the sponsors
have been the real pioneers in residen
ital education in the freshman resi
dence program. To condemn them as
"politically motivated" or irresponsible
seems a rather defensive and negative
reaction to the admitted mistakes of
a few members, and more importantly
fails to recognize that, without much
help or understanding, they are on the
track of something very important.
There have, to be sure, been other
efforts in the direction of residential
education for freshmen — relatively
cautious additions which have been in
the general direction of enriching per
sonal experience and contact in the.
residences, and may represent an in
choate recognition of this need.
Such additions have been the Facul
ty Residents, the Faculty Associates,
the Student Associates — at first men,
later women — and later, more free
dom for dining exchanges. More for
mally, in-residence seminars, guests-in
residence, panel discussions, and even
classes have been introduced.
But the former additions (with the
exception of a few Faculty Residents)
have in general provided only super
ficial interactions, while the latter
(again with a few notable exceptions)
have borne little relation to life and
living education other than physical
proximity. There is a heavy implica
tion of the mere introduction of more
academics into residences — while the
.ru#ot iT.nortant questions to students
go, for the most part, unanswered.
Th< present freshmen residence pro
gram, in its segregation by class, by

sex, by its continued reinforcement of
separation of living from learning, is
anachronistic, and reflects values that
have become less relevant and ideas that
are no longer true — such as assump
tions that satisfactory personal devel
opment takes care of itself within an
accepted and orderly framework, (of
which the freshman class is one clear
step, houses and all); that personal
education and development are irrele
vant to, or at least peripheral to the
purposes of "Higher Education"; that
mutually-deaf social groupings are ac
ceptable parts of the social mosaic —
when the fact of the matter is that we
are badly failing to meet these now
paramount questions. Despite our be
ginning attentions to this need, the
main thrust of the freshman resi
dence program and the academic pro
gram, still tends to leave the freshman
alone in his search and to force him
into protective groupings.
FRESHMAN IN3PEORATION INTO
UNIVERSITY IJFE
As discussed above, the Committee
feels strongly that the present segre
gation of freshmen reflects values no
longer taken seriously, reinforces the
separation of learning from living
(with impoverishment of both), height
ens some dysfunctional anxieties, and
tends to force premature and relative
ly narrow security groupings, rein
forces the artificiality of contact be
tween the sexes, and alienates students
from the faculty.
Thus, segregation is in itself a cen
tral problem, and, of course, the alter
natives must be aimed at integration
of the freshman in one or more ways.
A. Coeducational Housing
As noted earlier, a major problem
for freshmen is the difficulty of estab
lishing relationships with members of
the opposite sex on any basis other
than a social or dating level. For fresh
man men, the problem is especially
acute, manifesting itself in a heighten
ing anxiety, increased insecurity, and
frustration. The institution of a sys
tem of coeducational housing would
not only ameliorate the undesirable so
cial position of freshman men but also
provide an atmosphere conducive to
more natural (spontaneous) and per
sonal relationships. Upperclassmen al
so face similar problems as the results
of a segragated housing system, and
they too could gain much from having
the option of a coeducational residence
program.
That such a program is both prac
tical and desirable is supported by the
acknowledged success of the overseas
campus program as a living and learn
ing experience. In addition, the appar
ent success of the Grove Project as a
coeducational residence suggests that
coeducation can be successful on the
home campus.
The committee believes that, in the
long run, coeducational housing should
be the prevailing, although not exclu
sive, pattern for residential education
at Stanford, and that significant steps
can and should be taken toward this
goal during the coming year, 1967-68.
Although some houses segregated by
sex should be retained for these stu
dents who do not wish to live in a co
educational residence, a major effort
should be directed toward providing
coeducational housing in its most sig
nificant sense, men and women living
in the same house. Even these houses
which remain segregated could be
placed in juxtaposition to increase the
interaction among men and women.
The goal of a residence housing both
men and women would be most effect
ively realized if the ratio is approxi
mately 1:1. Although the 1:1 ratio Is
most desirable, a ratio of 2:1 would,
we feel, be successful.
As a long range goal the Committee
recommends changing of th« admis
sions ratio to one that is closer to 1:1
as a step towards this ideal.
B. Integration of classes:
As discussed more fully in Section
111 of this report, the freshman year is
a period of growth in which freshmen
must adjust to what for many of them
is a totally new culture, with new and
demanding standards. This situation re
quires a certain amount of social sup
port to prevent excessive and destruc
tive anxiety.
The committee is convinced that the
freshman residence program too often
promotes a seeurity that reduces expo
sure to challenging and growth-moti
vating aspects of university life, there
by retarding development, rather than

preparing the freshman to meet the
challenges which are in a large mea
sure responsible for his insecurity. In
addition, individual anxieties often re
inforce each other to the detriment of
all concerned.
While it is agreed that there is val
uable support and learning through
contact with others engaged in the
same experience, this by no means re
quires that most of one's contacts be
freshmen, nor does it exclude the pos
sibility or desirability of living in con
tact with others.
In a maximally integrated system in
which freshmen constitute approxi
mately 30 per cent of the population,
reinforcement of pre-college values
would be healthily reduced, while
freshmen, still pursuing similar curri
cula, would not suffer from a dearth of
contact and interaction with other
freshmen. In a fully integrated system,
the freshman could contribute to the
atmosphere of the residence, but could
not dominate it. Social support would
be provided not only by contact with
other freshmen, but also by the pres
ence of upperclassmen who have gone
through similar experiences and who
can contribute to the freshman's sense
of social support both by advice or ex
ample and by providing living evidence
that students actually survive the
freshmen year. This system would, of
course, have the further advantage of
more fully orienting freshmen to the
challenges and opportunities of the
university, a need which can be only
partially fulfilled by the present spon
sor system.
C. Partial Integration
In the preceding discussion the mini
mum ratio of upperclassmen to fresh
men in an integrated residence is as
sumed to be well in excess of 1:1. Any
system of partial integration with ra
tios well below this minimum faces se
vere difficulties:
1. Although the population would be
enriched by the addition of more ex
perienced upperclass models, fresh
men would still dominate the dormi
tory; the balance between security
and growth would not be significant
ly changed.
2. Under one suggestion for partial in
tegration offered by Dean Gordon's
staff, upperclassmen would essential
ly be guests whose rooms happened
to be in a freshman dormitory. It is
difficult to understand what would
motivate 147 upperclassmen to accept
such a position, or why they would
feel any dedication to close personal
interaction with the freshmen in an
educational sense.
3. The sponsor system is successful
largely because a few individuals are
committed to making the best of an
unfortunate living situation for
freshmen. It is not clear that the sub
stitution of five guests for one spon
sor dedicated to working with fresh
men is desirable.
4. Partial integration in itself has never
been suggested as an optimal resi
dence system, and it is not clear that
it is a desirable step toward total
integration. The committee is con
vinced that change for its own sake
is an unsound policy at any stage in
the development of a more viable
residence system.
Freshmen have the most to gain in
a campus-wide residence program
founded on the principles of co-educa
tion and integration. The institution of
this program requires not only the
support of freshmen, but also that of
upperclassmen. It could be argued that
upperclassmen would not want to give
up their present housing system. In
answer to this objection three points
can be made:
1. It is not clear that upperclassmen
are satisfied with the present sys
tem. Every spring quarter freshmen
express dissatisfaction with the hous
ing alternatives open to them: the
success of the overseas program as
a living experience has prompted
many to call for a more desirable
program at Stanford at-Stanford;
there were five applicants for each
place in the Grove Project, and if
the seminar hadn't been required
there would have been more upper
classmen seeking this exciting new
living alternative.
2. Tn our model of a fully integrated,
coeducational house, the percentage
of freshmen living in should be kept
well below 50 per cent. Freshmen
could contribute their real enthusi
asm and the challenge of their ques
tions without dominating the houses,

so that integration would benefit
both freshmen and upperclassmen.
3. In our residence program some inde
pendent npperclass houses would re
main, if there were a demand for
them. We believe that most students
would choose to live in a coed, inte
grated house, however, if some stu
dents wished something akin to the
present system such alternatives
would be open to them. The assump
tion we are making is that the new
residenco opportunities will sell them
selves.
E. Diversity and Self-Selection
Diversity among housing alternatives
is desirable. In addition, diversity with
in each house must be maintained to
avoid provincialism within the various
alternatives. Free choice, particularly
too early in the college career, among
various living styles will eventually
produce self-selective, provincial group
ings which will contradict the ideal
of developing acceptance of individual
differences within the residence. Three
points can be made to this problem:
1. No house needs to represent a cross
section of the student body. When
too great diversity exists in a living
group, cohesiveness is lost and frag
mentation takes the form of break
ing up into small sub-groups between
which little communication exists.
Therefore, some commonality, espe
cially by interests, is desirable.
2. It may not be the case that giving
students free choice among really
worthwhile alternatives will result
in serious problems of self-selection.
At any rate, it will take time for this
to happen and if indeed problems do
arise, we should be able to deal with
them early.
3. Assuming that such problems do
arise and call for some restriction of
free choice, one possible solution
would be to limit the amount of time
that an individual could live in a par
ticular residence. By encouraging
switching and moving among stu
dents, no system would be allowed
to lock itself in and stagnate.
VII. The Tone and Character of the
Living Group: Staff and Program
The residential components of most
universities are now basically eating
and sleeping facilities, structurally like
barracks, motels, or high-rise Hiltons,
surrounded by parking lots. To become
a truly residential university, the resi
dence hall must become a center of
learning and development equal in im
portance to the lecture hall. Ideally
their staffing, planning, and adminis
tration should be the responsibility of
faculty members rather than housing
directors or business offices.
While Stanford now is a far cry from
the suggested ideal of a residence uni
versity, many steps have been pro
posed which work toward the ideal. In
tegration by class and co-education are
two strong recommendations made by
the committee, which as discussed
above have considerable value in them
selves.
However, these steps will not by
themselves result in genuine centers
for learning. The mechanical bod>
shuffling is only one step in preparing
a more conducive atmosphere for total
education; the other is the purposeful
stimulation of intellectual activities
within the residence. The character and
quality of such activities, and their
relevance to students' concerns will be
come a crucial measure and determi
ned of the contribution that residence
is providing for its component mem
bers. The program for each residence
would decide for itself what input to
organize as a stimulus for the desired
enrichment of the quality of living that
contributes to the total education of
the individual and of the group's stu
dents, faculty, ideas, and the unending
list of resources of a university com
munity are all potential and powerful
inputs. The interaction of these compo
nents now creates the particular ex
citement of a university, but these
components are being comparatively
wasted in one of the areas in which
they could be the most effective ... the
living situation. The challenge of a
idential program is to organize and
bring the components together in the
most imaginative ways to utilize the
potential to the lullest.
One of the major areas of waste Is
student-faculty relations. Both the stu
donts and the faculty complain about
the distance and seeming disinterest of
the two groups. The section in the re
port which* deals with the faculty rol£
in the residence university is only a
very small start on the road to killing
this unhealthy and unproductive gap.
(See section on faculty residents.)
Too often students miss out on much
of the university experience because of
communication gaps. A face-to-face liv
ing unit is the most obvious place for
communication and contact between
students and faculty. Often the pre
vailing ethos of a dormitory can work
against this ground level communica
tion and antithetically to the explora
tory ventures of the individual. A dorm
which is oriented around a strictly so
cial purpose may even squelch the mo
tivation branding it as "intellectual," a
word that has been mistreated from all
directions in our society. While many
houses do not fall into this trap, there
is another pitfall of ruts and habit that
restricts the growing of experience in
a different way. The entire responsi
bility of taking advantage of the under
graduate experience is on the individ
ual. and some people find themselves
vorking against odds that would dis
courage the most aggressive. Fresh
man in particular belong to this cate
gory. They need to be exposed to the
broad ranges of opportunity but also
need help to make use of them. An
adolescent peer culture reinforcing high
school anti-intellectualism is not one
)f the best possible ways to meet this
need. The outside stimulus and help
will not best be provided by authority
figures who tell people what to do. or
beat off the anti-intellectual bullies. The
best assurance that free exchange and
.sharing of experience will occur will
be found in the atmosphere of the liv
ing group and in the character of its
leadership. A lively house where there
is a constant influx of new and differ
ent stimuli where all things that need
expression can find it, has the best
chance against apathy or unspoken
social taboos. House organized activi
ties such as art exhibits, musical per
formances, seminars, or small scale
lecture series suffer the same fate as
the individual's struggle for expres
sion and exploration. Not everyone
would want to participate and now
many of those who do want to can,
"but to those who find it difficult, en
couragement, not brick walls, should
be present in the tone of the house.
The possibility of organizing houses
around special interests has been sug
gested; experimentation is in order.
Houses with distinctive interests—fine
arts, social issues, foreign policy—may
well bring together students and fac
ulty from various disciplines who
could more meaningfully and readily
develop a learning community than a
house whose residents and loosely
affiliated faculty can only share pleas
antries. There would still be ample
diversity by virtue of differences in
personality, background, majors, ca
reer plans and so on, but there would
also be a major intellectual and social
oncern they all share. More detail
for this kind of program is discussed
in the specific proposal for next year.
The program of input is just the
beginning to what happens to the life
n a particular house. It provides pos
sibly a focus or direction as well as the
important underlying communication
and resource network of faculty, tutor,
and student. It must be emphasized
that what is going to happen in every
house is going to be determined most
by the people who live there. There
is a give-and-take natural exchange
between the program of ideas for the
living group and the group's response.
Reuniting the sphere of living as a
meaningful and integral part of a stu
dent's education in no way signifies
the creation of a twenty-four-hour
classroom. The residential education
urogram is not an extension of the
formal academic structure; it is its
complement. Although the opportun
,fy for experimenting with courses
given for credit should be open, it is
only one of the myriad of possibilities
with residential education. While
proper planning, particularly in the
■'election of good faculty, is necessary
it would be unrealistic to lose sight
of the interaction from the other di
rection. A structure too rigid would
kill the potential of a residential pro
gram just as the naive assumption
that body shuffling is the whole
answer.
Flexibility and spontaneity are key
<*ords in the concept of what a pro
gram should be prepared to provide.
Fvrit the program should be externally

flexible. The development of the house
spirit would depend upon the inter
action between the particular members
and particular faculty and tutors. This
matter of orientation or direction for
the house could bow with the interest
and demand for a particular living sit
uation. Some programs would last
longer than others, some undoubtedly
will be less successful, some would
evolve of themselves into a new area.
There is flexibility to let the good pro
grams grow and let the bad ones kill
themselves without bringing the entire
system to ruin. A diversity of choice
between residences could be main
tained.
There should in addition be an in
ternal flexibility within each group.
There must be room for growth and
change within the group. If topics were
to be the basis for a house, they would
always have to be picked with enough
latitude to allow each member of the
house to approach it in his own way.
This casua', unstructured opportunity
for close faculty contact speaks directly
to the need of students who are con
cerned with relevance as a criterion of
education, relevance to themselves or
to the contemporary world. There is
much opportunity for the student to
become very involved in the formation
and execution of his own education.
People who are involved and interested
in their own work tend to be more in
terested and able to contribute to the
work of others.
Another possibility that should be
included in the program is the oppor
tunity for experimentation with self
government. All sorts of opportunities
exist outside of the adoption of a hier
archy handed from above of president,
social chairman, etc. . .
There is much to be said for the edu
cationally valuable experience of learn
ing to live with ambiguity and without
automatically following tradition or
the dictates of an authority figure to
create the quality of life of a house
out of what is there ... to create an
educationally meaningful experience.
"The ideas sound great on paper!" is
the old comment at the outset of any
innovation with the rejoiner "But how
do you make it work in reality?" usu
ally not far behind. Why doesn't this
all happen now? Wilbur, the recom
mended site for next year's project,
already has many of the features out
lined in this report. "Is there really
going to be any significant difference?"
might be one question. The answer is
twofold. Some of the kinds of things
this report talks about are already
happening. If they weren't then there
would really be no use in trying to
maximize the interaction. But so much
more could be happening, and many of
the detrimental currents that run con
trary to the purpose of attending a
university could be reduced. All sys
tems are implemented by men. There
is not any system of law, morality or
of a residence university which can
overcome the fallibility of man. There
is not a magical formula implied in this
program, it rests very heavily on the
people who participate but so does
every other system. Good systems help
him along and the committee firmly
feels that a true residential university,
is a better system than one which only
claims to be and is somewhere in the
middle.
The people involved therefore are at
the core of the program. But their
effectiveness will depend to a large
degree upon how they see their role.
Their conception of their role in this
new system must undergo as much
fundamental reinterpretation as the
system itself.
How will the inertia of the present
resident conditions be overcome? Who
will set the tone, provide the mo
mentum, and contribute the leader
ship? Our first answer to these ques
tions is the students themselves. In any
residence system students will unde
niably be the major constituency.. But
how the resident staff can contribute
is also an important issue. At the pres
ent time Stanford has faculty residents,
tutors, resident assistants, and spon
sors. The role of each should be re
viewed.
Faculty Resident*
The committee would certainly not
deny the valuable contribution of the
faculty residents toward improving the
living situation at Stanford, but in
general, the faculty resident program
simply is not given the support neces
sary to tree Its members from -other

tasks and to allow them to devote
more time, thought and emphasis to
the residence education program. The
basic change would be that of increased
commitment to the living situation. The
primary responsibility of the faculty
resident should not be to the dorm di
rector or the administration, but to the
student within the living group or com
plex. To be effective, the faculty resi
dent must be willing to accept a de
manding and time consuming involve
ment in the living situation. His pres
ence there will be much more than a
face at meals or even that of a good
friend. Presumably the resident would
be a full time member of the faculty,
for the success of the residence pro
gram would greatly depend upon his
response to the intellectual needs of the
students. Doctoral candidates, coaches,
university officials, and administrators,
however, could still participate if they
would be willing to make the same
kind of commitment to the ideal of a
residence university. The interpersonal
factor is extremely important in this
kind of situation. Most every student
complains about the brilliant man who
can't give a good lecture. The same
argument will have to be taken into
account that not everyone can fulfill
this particular kind of a role. The fac
ulty resident must, above all, be sensi
tive to the interaction among students
in the group.
The things a faculty member could
contribute are bounded only by their
individual creativity but a few sug
gestions are in order.
1. In certain living units, seminars for
academic credit could be offered.
2. Directed reading could be made avail
able to certain students under the
resident.
3. Informal and noncredit seminars
should be encourage by the faculty
resident or when an idea came out
of the group he or some of his col
leagues could serve as resource per
son.
4. A student chairman and the faculty
resident could set up a meaningful
faculty associate program. The resi
dent can draw upon close friends and
colleagues which would supply an
internal identification missing in the
present program.
What would bring the faculty to par
ticipate in this program? Much of the
same dissatisfaction with student-fac
ulty relations that would bring the
students. Where something lively is
going on, something which the faculty
member is part there would not be
the embarassed ordeals that now take
place in dormitories on campus where
everyone involved is on their best and
most strained behavior. The living con
ditions would be similar to that of an
overseas campus though the professor
would not be required to drop his own
work or leave the center of his re
search. Class loads could be lessened
for the faculty participating because
they would be in essence only relocat
ing their teaching commitments, not
dropping them. They would have a
more flexible time schedule that might
be convenient to their purposes. This
position would also be in effect on a
rotating basis.
Resident Assistants and Tutors
The role of resident assistant should
be eliminated. In other words, we
would eliminate the role of the nice
guy disciplinarian, the liaison between
the administration and the students
who has been for too long forced into
an unfortunate position of hypocrisy.
As he is employed by the administra
tion he has an obligation to enforce
University policies, but if he is to be
at all effective with the students his
identification is with them. Too often
he has resolved the conflict by the
statement, "I don't care what you do,
just do it quietly so I don't see it."
Caught in this bind he has been in
effective as a man playing to two mas
ters. It is not enough to react to stu
dent needs and problems, for the role
we see must be one of creative action —
one of initiative and not merely re
sponse. Similarly, the present tutor
system is limited because its goal is
only to answer questions, not raise
them.
The present role of tutor, however,
is closer to our purpose than the RA's.
But this role must be expanded to be
effective. Thus, the idea of tutors
should be maintained, but its purpose
significantly broadened. Like faculty
residents > (and unlike RA's)' tutors

must have autonomy from primarily ad
ministrative policy and must be respon
sible primarily to the students below.
They should be linked to the resident
director, who is then responsible to the
administration. Although academic
assistance is undeniably important, tu
tors must do more than merely toot.
Their role should be to stimulate dis
cussion, to promote all types of inter
change, and to actively work towards
an educational atmosphere. At present
RA's and tutors tend to preserve rather
than promote and to be problem
solvers, rather than catalysts. The
tutor, like the faculty resident, must
approach his job with a new vitality
and commitment.
Sponsors
When the freshman class has been
entirely integrated into the university
community then the sponsor system
will become an anachronism. But until
that point the need remains and the
present system of sponsors and tutors
should be maintained.
There are two more important con
siderations before any system is put
Into operation. How will the faculty
and tutors be selected? And what are
the costs for the program as a whole?
These problems become relevant and
solvable only after the initial commit
ment and go ahead has been made.
Therefore discussion of these aspects
of the program will be included in
the proposal for next year.
VIII. Brief Assessment of Experience
At Other Institutions
While it is not our intention to base
the justification for our proposals on
the successes and failures of other in
stitutions with their necessarily dif
ferent circumstances, it is interesting
to note the results of a study con
ducted by the Faculty Committee on
Student Residences at Stanford in 1959.
Studying twenty-one similar universities
in this country they found that they
were about equally divided between
integrated and segregated freshman
living facilities. In general each school
seem satisfied with the system it then
had. However, while all of these with
the integrated system found it the most
workable, about 25 per cent of those
with segregated freshmen replied that
they were dissatisfied with their situ
ation and it certainly increases the
noisy freshman atmosphere which is
inimical to good study habits and con
ditions." Some schools reported that
the only reason for maintaining fresh
man segregation was pressure from
the fraternities who "objected stren
uously to placing their pledges under
the influence of hard bitten rugged in
dependents."
The many success of coeducational
housing on other campuses are too well
known to require documentation.
The institutions interviewed were
Cal Tech, Reed, Pembroke, Swarth
more, Oberlin, Pomona, Carleton, Rad
clifTe, Occidental, Ohio Wesleyan, Chi
cago, Brown, Dartmouth, Princeton,
Yale, Harvard, Northwestern, Washing
ton State, Oregon, Cornell, and Ohio
State.
IX. A Proposal:
The Wilbur Experiment
The committee has set forth its ar
guments for coeducational and inte
grated residences. It has suggested that
the residence should be a center of
intellectual life, and through residence
education the rigid separation of the
student's social and intellectual lives
could be ended. It remains for the com
mittee to propose how these aims can
be fulfilled at Stanford.
It is the feeling of the committee
that significant experimentation in resi
dence education is altogether feasible
for next year. There is a wide range
of possibilities. The committee initially
considered a massive scrambling of the
university residence pattern, convert
ing most dormitories on campus to
coeducation and integration. This pro
posal was rejected for two reasons:
(1) Full integration, or anything ap
proaching it, would at this time pro
duce an undesirable ratio of freshmen
to upperclass men. (2) It would be im
possible to supply the staff necessary
to introduce residence education in any
meaningful way if the scope of the
housing experiment is so broad.
The committee decided that its aims
could best be fulfilled by an experiment
of more limited scope. Instead of dras
tically overhauling the university resi
dence pattern, one dormitory complex
could be used as a rather large "pilot"
project, in which * Integratiorr and • eo
education could be complete and intel
lectual life could be given the proper
attention. Wilbur Hall is ideal for this
purpose. It is the largest complex on
campus, with space for approximately
720 people. It is divided into eight
houses, each of which constitutes a
separate identity unit. Each house has
an adjacent cottage for a faculty resi
dent and a tutorial room where semin
ars can be held.
The committee recommends that
next fall each Wilbur house be occu
pied by two floors of men and one
floor of women, and that each house
be integrated by class at a rate of one
freshman to three upperclassmen. Con
stituted as such, Wilbur Hall would be
the site of meaningful experimentation
in residential education.
The Wilbur experiment will of neces
sity affect some of the other university
residences. Freshman men will move to
Stern and Branner, retaining the spon
sor system in its present form. Fresh
man women will remain in Roble, with
sponsors, and those living in neither
Roble or Wilbur will be integrated with
upperclass women in Florence Moore.
Lagunita, Hoskins, and Toyon will be
unaffected. The remaining upperclass
men will live in three of the row
houses. The statistical breakdown is
as follows.
Total Frosh Upcl. Total Frosh Upcl.
Men Men Men W'ran W'mn Wmn
Wilbur 480 120 360 240 60 180
Stem 590 570 20
Branner 170 160 10
Roble 260 250 10
Florence
Moore 350 90 260
Lagunita 290 0 290
Hoskins 120 0 120
Toyon 200 0 200
Row
Houses (3)100 0 100
(5) 180 0 180
Totals 1540 850 690 1440 400 1040
(Note: If women are allowed to move
off campus, adjustments can be made
easily. If the number of women moving
off is under 180, an appropriate num
ber of row houses can be converted
from women to men. Compensation
can also be made by admitting more
freshman and transfer women. If

necessary the measures can be com
bined. )
Students will be chosen for the Wil
bur experiment on a draw basis. It is
reasonable to expect an excess demand
for on-campus housing by upperclass
men, since a new option is being of
fered that will presumably attract men
who presently or would otherwise live
off campus, or in fraternities. The com
ration of the upperclassmen's popu
lation in Wilbur would thus differ
from the present composition of Stem.
If women are allowed off campus, there
would be a greater possibility of satis
fying the demand for men's housing.
The likelihood of vacant dormitory
space, with the introduction of the
Wilbur option, is highly improbable.
The logistics of putting the bodies
into Wilbur for the pilot project is
only half of our task in our proposal.
The problems of staffing the complex
and from there working out feasible
programs is the next step. Hopefully
to make this pilot project a real step
toward achieving the residential uni
versity, as much of the general report
as possible will be included, only the
scope has changed not the purpose of
the program.
Selection for next year's faculty resi
dents could be turned over to a com
mittee composed of one faculty and
one student member of the ASSU
Housing Commission and two members
from the Dean of Students Office, with
the advice of the present Committee.
Once this task has been completed, the
faculty can participate in choosing the
tutors and drawing up more detailed
plans for the program.
The committee realizes that a com
mitment to this kind of residential
education will require an overt shift
in educational effort from the class
room and lab to the residence, with
both compensation for it and relief
from other teaching duties—and quite
probably the replacement of their
other more formal academic functions
by other personnel. We also realize
that there will be a budget problem,
but emphatically deny that worthwhile
educational goals should not be pro
posed and slated because of current
pragmatic limitations.
The committee hopes that, through

further study—best done in conjunc
tion with the study of education at
Stanford—that it will be possible to
rearrange and reemphasize the com
ponents of freshman education in such
a way that existing resources would
permit a serious upgrading of resi
dence education, and the possibility
that such education could replace some
aspects of the present program. This
might well allow the same total re
sources of money and people to meet
the desired objectives by shifting the
locale and method of teaching, rather
than just adding to the staff and pro
gram.
Presently in Wilbur there are three
sponsor rooms and one tutor room
which can accommodate the new tutors.
Hopefully as many of these rooms will
be used for that purpose, but if for
any reason four tutors per house is im
possible, then the rooms could be used
for offices which would at least bring
more graduate level contact into the
residence.
One possible suggestion for Wilbur's
eight houses next year would be to
have five of them centered around a
general theme, one international house,
and two left unstructured. There has
been much agitation for an interna
tional house on campus and many pro
posals have been drawn up. Five sug
gested topics for the theme houses are
"Religion and Society," "Literature and
Fine Arts," "Science and Human Prob
lems," "The Urban Threat," and "So
cial Change."
To take only one of these themes and
speculate what the given house of
faculty, tutors and students will make
of it is another of those endless first
steps in imagination potential. The
house that was using the topic "Science
and Human Problems," for example,
would bring in a diversity of fields
from the natural sciences to the hu
manities. Many of the poignant prob
lems facing students and faculty are
centered in this topic but the same
could probably be said in a different
context for each of the five topics. The
impact of technology on our economic
and social system, the moral contro
versy over the newest discoveries in
genetics, the myth of the scientific
method are all themes to be explored.

What happens to a world view when
scientific discoveries puncture com
fortable philosophies? What is time
and how does man control it and how
docs it control man? These are ques
tions to be asked. Above all, it is im
portant to remember that the direc
tion of intellectual thrust must not be
too well defined in advance. One of
the most valuable experiences for the
living group will be coming to grips
with the topic, deciding for themselves
how the general area should be ap
proached, and then proceeding to de
velop programs and structures on their
own.
The committee is highly enthusiastic
about the creative possibilities pre
sented by the Wilbur experiment—the
first step in the direction of a fully
integrated and coeducational residence.
If the experiment even approaches the
measure of success the committee en
visions, it could prove a major innova
tion in the history of American higher
education. A well developed program
of residential education offers a poten
tial of immeasurable dimension.
X. Correlation of this report with the
overall review of education at Stanford
The key problems of residence edu
cational stimulus and the kind of staff
and budget commitments necessary
need further specific elucidations which
the committee hopes can be under
taken by the Executive Committee for
the study of education at the earliest
opportunity, in order to agree on ob
jectives and make necessary staff and
financial plans for the Wilbur Project
to be able to start in the Fall of 1967.
The committee takes this oppor
tunity to thank the following people
for individual contributions to our
meetings: Dwight Clark, Dr. Lawrence
Thomas, Miss Sally Mahoney, Dr. Mar
tin Evans, Dick Williams, Mike Roster,
Howie Holmes, Doug Davis, Bob Gor
don, Dean Hind, and Dean Novak.
February 6, 1967
Subcommittee on the Freshmen Resi
dence Program ASSU Housing Com
mission. Barbara Levin, Judy Bader.
Barbara Warren, David Koval, Chris
topher Harte, Douglas Sorenson, Scott
Soames (Co-Chairman) Elizabeth
Cohen, B. Davie Napier, Max
Maurice M. Osborne Jr. (Co-Chairman).
Doubts of the ability of Stanford's
present educational system to provide
for the needs of its students, and speci
fic questions about the relevance of
the residence program in its present
form, have stimulated students, faculty,
and staff to seek more appropriate
solutions.
The A.S.S.U., concerned about the
quality of residential experience at
Stanford — particularly in contrast to
that at the Overseas Campuses —
created through its Legislature a Hous
ing Commission, one task of which was
to review and make recommendations
concerning the freshman residence
program in its relation to education.
At about the same time, Associate
Dean of Students Robert Gordon was
asked to present proposals for a new
model of freshman residential educa
tion.
Both A.S.S.U. and Dean Gordon al
most simultaneously appointed com
mittees in the early Fall of 1966 to ad
vise them in the making of recommen
dations in this important area, and
rather than continue a too-familiar pat
tern of separate committees working
independently (and often divergently)
it was decided to merge the two.
In the merger, the Dean's Advisory
Committee agreed to accept the A.S.S.U.
invitation to become an integral part,
of its group. Dean Gordon agreed to
accept the report of the entire group
in the same light as he would have the
recommendations of his originally ap
pointed committee, and the merged
group in turn agreed to attempt in
good faith to assist him in meeting his
deadlines and obligations as best it
could.
Despite particular questions existing
about the Sponsor system, the Commit
tee felt from the outset that to limit
its discussions and report to such par
ticulars, or to start out with them,
would be to avoid the main Issues sur
rounding ,the quality and meaning of

residential education at Stanford, par
ticularly the freshman program.
The Committee thus firmly decided
that it would start from a fresh con
sideration of the issues and principles
involved, relating its recommendations
to them. It was recognized that such
an approach would be time consuming,
that it might seem Utopian to some;
yet a critque and basic statement about
the ideas of a residence university
seemed vital for future planning and
growth.
At the same time, the practical ne
cessity for more immediate recommen
dations and action was realized. The
present report is in this sense a pre
liminary, or interim report, which at
tempts to set forth and justify some
practical recommendations for residence
programs that could be adopted in
1967-68 — steps within the framework
of progression towards a more ideal
situation.
The Case for the Residential Commu
nity — The Personal Committment to
Learning
The impossibility of considering the
freshman experience in isolation from
the life and purposes of the entire un
dergraduate program has been a ma
jor premise in the subcommittee's
study of the Freshman Residence Pro
gram. Two main assumptions underlie
this approach.
One is that the university experience,
as a whole, is only one part of the con
tinuum of the educational process, a
process which neither begins nor ends
at the university gates. The educational
ideals should be the same for all four
undergraduate years in terms of what
they declare for the growth of persons.
The freshman year is only a step in
a span of development, having a spe
cial function as the first step but not
a separate one.
The second is a new conception which
views the university as a community
for learning through personal, interac
,tjon, find development,. .nsp, of

all its facilities for education. This view
emphasizes that the classroom, library
or laboratory cannot — indeed does not
even now — have a monopoly on pro
viding for the education and develop
ment of students. Else, why a residen
tial university? Why not subcontract
all residential arrangements and avoid
hotel problems?
The Committee felt strongly that
there was urgent need for institutional
endorsement of the fact that without
growth and development in personal,
social, and emotional dimensions, the
achievements of intellect are shallow
and stand in isolation from the indivi
dual and his world. The conviction that
gives personal meaning to knowledge
is a product of direct human relation
ship, and we make far too little use
of its potential.
In a more settled and comfortable
past, with much greater mutuality of
expectations and values both between
peers and between generations, the ur
gency of such questions was less, the
scope more limited and the answers
more predictable. The bull-session quite
effectively handled many aspects of
this personal-social side of development.
For this, and other reasons, relatively
little formal attention to it was felt
to be necessary, aside from some for
mal lectures on hygiene, the evils of
sex and booze, and the Fundamental
Standard. After all, boys were (and
would be) boys, and pretty soon they'd
grow up into men, producers and fa
thers. Home and society would take
care somehow that they grew up right,
and the college would provide an ac
cepted transition station on the way,
some academic input, and try to keep
the lid on boyish spirit getting out of
hand.
By contrast today, for many students
questions about one's nature, and about
one's relationship to an uncertain
world, and about this world itself are
more insistent, and more pre-occupying
.before The V&iefttipns a#?, -real,

and require believable answers from
within the individual. And, until he can
find them, this quest, this preoccupa
tion has top priority, while academics
suffer through seeming less relevant.
And though there are many students
who are relatively unconcerned about
such questions, we feel their total edu
cation would be enriched if they could
be purposefully involved.
The history of formal didactic at
tempts to speak to these burning ques
tions is rather dismal, and all over the
country, there has been a steady atro
phy of required, and even of voluntary
courses relative to personal hygiene,
sex, morals, and behavior. Both stu
dents and educators sense that because
a viable set of personal ethics and
values just grow within the individual,
attempts simply to impose them from
without are relatively futile.
Not only have curricular approaches
to such questions atrophied (happi
ly!), but American education is nearing
the end of a decade in which the entire
necessity of addressing itself to the
problem of personal growth has been
quite deliberately rejected. Sputnik was
the symbol, and such spokesmen as
Hyman Rickover took up the cudgels,
with articulate and seathing denuncia
tions of "Education for Living" — of
concepts of "adjustment," and insisted,
along with many others, on intellectual
excellence (for "excellence" read "a
chievement") as the right, and only
purpose of education.
Growth of population; of national
wealth with its stimulus to upward so
cial mobility; increasing complexity
and diversity of knowledge with its
concommitant of faculty pre-occupa
tion and relatively-narrower fields; and
increased competition have sharpened
the pressures for achievement, leaving
even loss time, thought, or energy for
development as a person.
The need to pay most serious atten
tion to this is most keenly felt by many
studetitfi hy their eldprs.
There has been some re-emergence of
an expressed need for leadership and
cooperation in working out better ways
to assist and support the individual in
his personal education and develop
ment, and when students do not raise
these questions, their education should
raise them, and speak to them.
Unstructured and spontaneous stu
dent discussion, particularly at the
freshman level, is heavily-flavored with
the need to sort oneself out, but as it
now operates, it tends less to growth
than to its more traditional social func
tion of settling into "bird-of-a-feather"
groupings in which the individual
can find comfort and support for his
own sets of values and seekings. With
in this spontaneously-forming group
ings, the dialogue tends to become in
creasingly circular, the values increas
ingly exclusive, and there is decreased
permeability to fresh ideas and ex
perience.
In an educational situation where
concentration is placed on the formal
aspects of education there is an imbal
ance which produces distortion, which
too often takes the form of rejection
of the academic sphere as "irrelevant."
Another consequence is the dangerous
polarization of university life into two
worlds; that of the classroom, and that
of social life, setting them to work
against each other instead of with each
other toward the individual's goals. The
acceptance of the residence university
ideal as being vital to education can
be one important factor in keeping
the two worlds together and moving in
the same direction, whereas the pres
ent residence program presents too
many forces that divide living from
learning.
The Committee takes as self-evident
that a truly liberal education is in fact
liberating — in making both wider and
deeper the individual's ability to per
ceive, absorb, analyze, and choose in a
vastly-increasing array of people,
events, and issues, and not in forcing
the premature adoption of limited, and
constricting attitudes. In effect this
seems the necessity of the student's
continuous and repeated exposure to
and challenge by diversity of ideas, of
values, styles, and of course people.
It is here that the meaning of residen
tial education springs to life, for it of
fers potentially the best milieu for
daily face-to-face interaction with peers,
with older students, and faculty mem
bers of both sexes — offering diversity
of age, sex, discipline and values in
the highly personal way so necessary
for exposure to lead to involvement,
and knowledge to become commitment.
The necessity of direct personal in
teraction is most strongly endorsed by
the Committee, for it is the set of
values and mental attitudes formed in
such day-in, day-out exchange that set
tle most deeply into one's fiber. Thus
to narrow the range, or dilute the qual
ity of this exchange seems antiethical
to education. Kenneth Benne, in his
article "The Uses of Fraternity" states
in this regard, "People learn value sys
tems in the first instance as they form
relations with others. These relations
in turn develop norms with corres
ponding rationales which the individual
then internalizes. If people, young or
old, can build groups with standards
that reward and strengthen honest
self - expression and self - acceptance,
creativity, mutual helpfulness and the
capacity to cope with conflict, then the
members of such groups will assimilate
these values as conditions of member
ship."
Choice, and learning to choose ra
tionally, are important educational
tasks, but should not be forced on the
individual too hurriedly, without
enough exposure to a wide range of
choices, nor without some room for
trial and error.
In summary then, the Committee
firmly believes that:
1. As education is, or should be, a con
tinuum, the freshman year cannot
be considered in isolation from the
entire undergraduate program, and al
though it has a special function as
the first step, it is an integral part
of the whole.
2. There is a grave imbalance in the
university's educational emphasis,
which tends to widen the needless,
and in our view harmful, gap be
tween the getting of knowledge and
the important business of living.
3. The deepest personal and intellectual
cpncems of students — their rela
tionships to themselves, and to an

uncertain world, — are not receiving
the institutional recognition and ef
fort they deserve.
4. That people learn most deeply by
living, and by forming personal re
lationships, and that when the resi
dence program, as at present, is
oriented to bed, board, and social
needs, the opportunities for inter
nalizing intellectual knowledge and
values are meager, and the tenden
cies to reject academic values as per
sonally-irrelevant are reinforced.
5. That choice, and learning to choose
critically are central educational
goals, but that it must depend on
close and repeated exposure to a
wide range of ideas, values, styles,
and people — people of different
ages, disciplines, sexes, and back
grounds, — and not be prematurely
forced into constricting channels
based primarily on social and not in
tellectual values.
6. Such close exposure to diversity, over
sufficient time, and if taken as the
norm, would go far in preventing
the formation of narrowed and
sterotypic attitudes and thought —
the surest signs of the ill-educated
man.
7. The way in which students live very
directly affects the whole quality of
their education: this single principle
underpins the whole concept of the
residential university.
"THE FRESHMAN CONDITION"
The paraphrase above in intentional,
— and designed to point out that being
a freshman at Stanford, or anywhere,
is an intensely personal experience of
transition. Although the general ideals
of education apply equally, — and es
pecially, — to him, the freshman also
has attributes which make him special,
but not separate.
It is the feeling of this committee
that freshmen can and should receive
the benefit of special experiences de
signed for their particular problems.
The assumption that we would like to
question is whether this need for some
special orientation experiences necessi
tates their living in a segragated fash
ion. Although it is expedient from an
"efficiency" point of view, it may gen
erate excessive anxiety over perfor
mance in freshman courses and a rein
forcement for essentially juvenile
modes of facing college stresses. His
special attributes can be summed up as
follows:
A. He obviously needs early and reli
able information about his new com
munity — where things are, what he
is to do, and so forth.
B. He is making the transition most
traditionally accepted in America as
the line between family dependency
and personal autonomy.
In actuality, the line, if there is one,
is blurred, and varies greatly from one
freshman to another. In general, the
freshman comes equipped with the cre
dentials of previous achievement and
approval — hoping he will be accepted
in his new college world, and fearing
that he may not. At the same time he
hopes that his performance and life
will be freer and larger than before.
The freshman, more poignantly than
any other undergraduate, in his transi
tion from a narrower to a hopefully
wider identity, wants the understand
ing of his old world, personal accep
tance by the new — and fears he may
have neither.
He is thus enormously vulnerable,
and as Steve Hurlbut has written in
his excellent paper, is characterized by
a "pervasive anxiety." Until he has as
similated workable norms, he feels he's
got to satisfy some kind of external
standard, and is anxious until he does.
Some more specific stresses that tend
to promote anxiety are:
I.The sudden change of status that
comes from being taken out of a
high school situation where one is
enormously successful and being put
in a class of similar big frogs from
small ponds, and feeling that they
are tougher frogs than he is:
2. The doubt about being able to live up
to tough academic demands:
3. Doubts about his being accepted by
his peers — of both sexes;
4. Being away from home;
5. Confrontation with different reli
gious and social values than those
the student has learned in his family
and home community;
6. Ambivalence about authority, and
older peopje in general.
This araciety and vulnerability are by

no means bad in themselves — and in
deed offer the most fertile soil for cul
tivation of the seeking young mind.
But the thrust of this searching anxiety
is in essence social, and approval-seek
ing — and therefore related to persons
and social groups, or the winning of ac
ceptable symbols of achievement.
The Committee feels that the perva
sive, and expectable freshman anxiety
and search for some group identity is
a double-edged sword, with potential
for both regression and for growth.
On one side, if there is failure of
approval from home, or personal ac
ceptance at college, or fewer grade
points "in the bank" than expected,
anxiety may well become dysfunction
al, with consequences such as neurotic
disturbance, refusal to compete aca
demically, and even regressive and
anti-social group-adolescent behavior,
and the reinforcement of pre-college
values.
CRITIQUE OF THE PRESENT
FRESHMAN RESIDENCE PROGRAM
The Committee feels that too many
features of the present freshman resi
dence program serve:
1. To reinforce natural anxieties among
the newest members of the Univer
sity, and
2. To promote the seeking of solutions
to this anxiety that have little if any
thing to do with educational pur
poses, but tend to promote prema
ture and mutually exclusive social
groupings.
As he moves into a freshman resi
dence, he is thrown into close contact
with a large peer-group of greater
diversity in background, attitudes, and
talent than he is likely to have known.
And, because competition and fears of
failure are keenest among peers (par
ticularly of neophytes performing simi
lar tasks,) these differences within the
larger peer-group tend to move the stu
dent into protective subgroups of
peers with attitudes and pre-college
backgrounds similar to his own, within
which he finds support. In such mutual
ly-supportive social groups, the student
can arm himself and defend himself
psychologically against any new ideas
to which he is being exposed, from fel
low students, members of the opposite
sex, and his professors. Studies will
never be taken at all seriously but will
be dealt with in a purely cognitive
fashion, ingested for the purpose of
passing exams and discarded soon af
terwards. Under these conditions, we
may have done away with the prob
lems of anxiety, but are faced with the
possibility of at least two other un
desirable consequences, 1) His atti
tudes and values may remain totally
unquestioned throughout his college
career; and 2) a group devoted to de
fending itself against the climate of an
institution may exhibit anti-social char
acteristics of alienated people every
where.
That present groups formed for mu
tual support emerge after a limited
exposure to new, and possible better
models, is certainly true, and groupings
tend to occur along pre-college lines
and values, or in rebellion against
them.
The present segregated freshman
residence situation also tends:
3. To promote the seeking of achieve
ment symbols (i.e. grades) rather
than knowledge of self or substance;
4. By a residence administration seen
as primarily regulatory and manger
ial, to aggravate the natural ambi
valence of freshmen towards author
ity with results ranging from thought
less docility to destructive rebellion;
or apathetic alienation;
5. To provide too much pressure for
distortion and ritualization of rela
tionships between the sexes — the
"dating syndrome" — and a poverty
of opportunities for simple, friendly
interaction of people, a lack fre
quently deplored by both freshmen
and upperclassmen.
Both architecture and group pres
sures, as well as well-institutionalized
pressures for achieving good grades
in a heavy curriculum conspire to rob
the freshman of privacy — both physi
cal privacy, and temporal privacy; i.e.
some time simply to be himself, to spin
his wheels, and to think, with room for
trial and error.
There is, at least in Wilbur, no at
mosphere in the dining halls in the
least conducive to conversation — and
for some reason, plastic and formica
encourage one to get In and out fast,

with emphasis on feeding the face, but
none on nourishing friendship.
All of these (observable) results are
Inimical to the purposes of stimulating
interest in new subjects, of promoting
constructive reaction to diversity, of
the discouragement of stereotypic
thinking and behavior, and of trust in
older people as human beings.
More importantly, the positive po
tentials of freshman vulnerability go
relatively untapped — or are being tap
ped for outworn purposes. For this
vulnerability is personal, and if pro
vided with daily personal interaction
with a wide range of interesting
people of different ages and different
disciplines, there is more than a good
chance that Stanford freshmen would
attach their enthusiasms and their
hearts to the new models they need
and seek — models of greater depth
and diversity, but providing the identi
ty and security they need.
The interaction between freshman
men in Wilbur and the Faculty Resi
dents has varied greatly in its intensity
and impact — with instances of great
fruitfulness, or relative neutrality and
harmony, and a very few of a truly
negative quality.
Faculty Associates to freshman resi
dences have often provided important
personal interactions between fresh
men and the faculty — but just as
often these contacts have been super
ficial and ritualized.
Sponsors, while providing the great
est impact in personal exchange, pre
sent, because of their small number,
relatively limited contact with upper
classmen's values and experiences.
While all these personal contacts in
the freshman residences do in fact en
rich the education of many freshmen,
the other fact remains that there are
simply not enough such contacts, nor
sufficient support and time for these
few people to give residential educa
tion the emphasis it deserves.
EVOLUTION OF THE PRESENT
FRESHMAN RESIDENCE PROGRAM
Whatever rationalizations may be
adduced in support of the present
freshman residence program, it ap
pears to the Committee that it is in
large measure a holdover from an
earlier set of norms — norms that re
ceived wide acceptance and support in
those times, but that are under serious
question *oday.
In the Teens, the Twenties, and even
well into the Thirties, there was more
general acceptance (in society at large
as well as in the university commu
nity) of a particular hierarchical order,
and the particular authority structure
such an order implies. One tended to
know where one stood in relation to
the order at any given period, and to
be confident that one would ascend the
ladder by predictable steps.
Perhaps because of the relative sta
bility of the social order, personal de
velopment was thought of more along
the lines of advancement within that
order — with of course the acquisition
of enough "knowledge" and academic
polish to secure preference in vocations
and the status of a college-educated
man. It was important in itself to be
a senior, or for that matter an upper
classman, and the class structure had
in itself real meaning to the student.
Hence, the development of class spirit
and cohesiveness was valued, encour
aged, and ritualized. Even the major
steps in progression along the well
worn rungs were ritualized in such
rites of passage as the annual "Frosh-
Soph War," a ritual which would have
been impossible had there been no such
open class distinction.
The residence arrangements prob
ably reflected an accept? e of this
order according to social and culture
values of the day, and were aimed at
initiating the freshman into them. A
deliberate segration of the neophyte —
either by residence, by distinguishing
badges (viz. the "Beanie"), by restric
tion of privilege, or by combinations
of these has in many human organiza
tions, served to reinforce acculturation
to desired social and behavioral norms,
and whether anyone was purposefully
aware of this or not, such considera
tions surely operated in freshman resi
dential segragation. Aside from "home
work" performed in a dorm, there was
a rather strict geographic separation
of intellectual-academic concerns and
the personal-social sphere. The class
room and laboratory (and one's closed
~oom or the stacks) were meant for
the'one — while the dorm was really
for the other, and largely designed for
it.
The early history of the sponsor
program, when Encina Hall was the
freshman men's dorm, illustrates well
its use as an instrument for indoctri
nation of the "hapless Frosh" into pre
vailing upperclassmen's values.
Most sponsors wore a block "S", and
embodied a prevailing ideal of social
and athletic prowess, coupled with a
sense of loyalty to the group, respect
for authority, and an obligation to be
exemplary to their potential succes
sors. As recently as 1955, the effective
ness of a sponsor was measured, among
other things, by the percentage of his
charges attending the pregame rallies
and intercollegiate games.
Most sponsors were also fraternity
men, and another measure of his suc
cess as a sponsor was the number of
his freshmen pledged. For the spon
sors, there was little conflict involved
in serving simultaneously the fresh
men, one's own upperclassman values,
and those of the institution and its
authorities, for all constituents had
pretty much the same understanding
of the system, and of each of their
places within it.
In the intervening years, particularly
those since World War 11, there have
been profound changes in the social
order — a disruption of settled commu
nity, sharpened preoccupations with
material competition, and a culture less
and less sure of where it stood, or what
it believed in. Particularly among those
intelligent enough to attend such col
leges as Stanford, there has been in
creasing criticism of existing institu
tions which seem to them to produce
as leaders men with narrowed vision,
preoccupation with power, and too
little time or love for people. In this
climate of malaise, and in the absence
of once tacitly-held assurances, the
young person's search for personal
identity, relevance, and belief has
emerged as a very important difference
between many students of today and
of the previous generation, and again
underscores the vital importance of the
living group experience.
Despite some expressed dissatisfac
tions with the existing sponsor system,
the sponsors and a few feculty resi
dents at Wilbur were quite probably
the first to sense both this new and
urgent need among the freshmen (and
of course in themselves,) and that the
approach to it had to be met at the
level of day-in, day-out personal inter
action.
The evolution of the present sponsor
system has been a response both to
the growing need for attention to per
sonal education and development, and
to the need to substitute a drive for
continuous search and openness for the
more comfortable, but rather water
tight, social groupings which they saw
taking place.
For the past few years, the sponsors
have been the real pioneers in residen
ital education in the freshman resi
dence program. To condemn them as
"politically motivated" or irresponsible
seems a rather defensive and negative
reaction to the admitted mistakes of
a few members, and more importantly
fails to recognize that, without much
help or understanding, they are on the
track of something very important.
There have, to be sure, been other
efforts in the direction of residential
education for freshmen — relatively
cautious additions which have been in
the general direction of enriching per
sonal experience and contact in the.
residences, and may represent an in
choate recognition of this need.
Such additions have been the Facul
ty Residents, the Faculty Associates,
the Student Associates — at first men,
later women — and later, more free
dom for dining exchanges. More for
mally, in-residence seminars, guests-in
residence, panel discussions, and even
classes have been introduced.
But the former additions (with the
exception of a few Faculty Residents)
have in general provided only super
ficial interactions, while the latter
(again with a few notable exceptions)
have borne little relation to life and
living education other than physical
proximity. There is a heavy implica
tion of the mere introduction of more
academics into residences — while the
.ru#ot iT.nortant questions to students
go, for the most part, unanswered.
Th< present freshmen residence pro
gram, in its segregation by class, by

sex, by its continued reinforcement of
separation of living from learning, is
anachronistic, and reflects values that
have become less relevant and ideas that
are no longer true — such as assump
tions that satisfactory personal devel
opment takes care of itself within an
accepted and orderly framework, (of
which the freshman class is one clear
step, houses and all); that personal
education and development are irrele
vant to, or at least peripheral to the
purposes of "Higher Education"; that
mutually-deaf social groupings are ac
ceptable parts of the social mosaic —
when the fact of the matter is that we
are badly failing to meet these now
paramount questions. Despite our be
ginning attentions to this need, the
main thrust of the freshman resi
dence program and the academic pro
gram, still tends to leave the freshman
alone in his search and to force him
into protective groupings.
FRESHMAN IN3PEORATION INTO
UNIVERSITY IJFE
As discussed above, the Committee
feels strongly that the present segre
gation of freshmen reflects values no
longer taken seriously, reinforces the
separation of learning from living
(with impoverishment of both), height
ens some dysfunctional anxieties, and
tends to force premature and relative
ly narrow security groupings, rein
forces the artificiality of contact be
tween the sexes, and alienates students
from the faculty.
Thus, segregation is in itself a cen
tral problem, and, of course, the alter
natives must be aimed at integration
of the freshman in one or more ways.
A. Coeducational Housing
As noted earlier, a major problem
for freshmen is the difficulty of estab
lishing relationships with members of
the opposite sex on any basis other
than a social or dating level. For fresh
man men, the problem is especially
acute, manifesting itself in a heighten
ing anxiety, increased insecurity, and
frustration. The institution of a sys
tem of coeducational housing would
not only ameliorate the undesirable so
cial position of freshman men but also
provide an atmosphere conducive to
more natural (spontaneous) and per
sonal relationships. Upperclassmen al
so face similar problems as the results
of a segragated housing system, and
they too could gain much from having
the option of a coeducational residence
program.
That such a program is both prac
tical and desirable is supported by the
acknowledged success of the overseas
campus program as a living and learn
ing experience. In addition, the appar
ent success of the Grove Project as a
coeducational residence suggests that
coeducation can be successful on the
home campus.
The committee believes that, in the
long run, coeducational housing should
be the prevailing, although not exclu
sive, pattern for residential education
at Stanford, and that significant steps
can and should be taken toward this
goal during the coming year, 1967-68.
Although some houses segregated by
sex should be retained for these stu
dents who do not wish to live in a co
educational residence, a major effort
should be directed toward providing
coeducational housing in its most sig
nificant sense, men and women living
in the same house. Even these houses
which remain segregated could be
placed in juxtaposition to increase the
interaction among men and women.
The goal of a residence housing both
men and women would be most effect
ively realized if the ratio is approxi
mately 1:1. Although the 1:1 ratio Is
most desirable, a ratio of 2:1 would,
we feel, be successful.
As a long range goal the Committee
recommends changing of th« admis
sions ratio to one that is closer to 1:1
as a step towards this ideal.
B. Integration of classes:
As discussed more fully in Section
111 of this report, the freshman year is
a period of growth in which freshmen
must adjust to what for many of them
is a totally new culture, with new and
demanding standards. This situation re
quires a certain amount of social sup
port to prevent excessive and destruc
tive anxiety.
The committee is convinced that the
freshman residence program too often
promotes a seeurity that reduces expo
sure to challenging and growth-moti
vating aspects of university life, there
by retarding development, rather than

preparing the freshman to meet the
challenges which are in a large mea
sure responsible for his insecurity. In
addition, individual anxieties often re
inforce each other to the detriment of
all concerned.
While it is agreed that there is val
uable support and learning through
contact with others engaged in the
same experience, this by no means re
quires that most of one's contacts be
freshmen, nor does it exclude the pos
sibility or desirability of living in con
tact with others.
In a maximally integrated system in
which freshmen constitute approxi
mately 30 per cent of the population,
reinforcement of pre-college values
would be healthily reduced, while
freshmen, still pursuing similar curri
cula, would not suffer from a dearth of
contact and interaction with other
freshmen. In a fully integrated system,
the freshman could contribute to the
atmosphere of the residence, but could
not dominate it. Social support would
be provided not only by contact with
other freshmen, but also by the pres
ence of upperclassmen who have gone
through similar experiences and who
can contribute to the freshman's sense
of social support both by advice or ex
ample and by providing living evidence
that students actually survive the
freshmen year. This system would, of
course, have the further advantage of
more fully orienting freshmen to the
challenges and opportunities of the
university, a need which can be only
partially fulfilled by the present spon
sor system.
C. Partial Integration
In the preceding discussion the mini
mum ratio of upperclassmen to fresh
men in an integrated residence is as
sumed to be well in excess of 1:1. Any
system of partial integration with ra
tios well below this minimum faces se
vere difficulties:
1. Although the population would be
enriched by the addition of more ex
perienced upperclass models, fresh
men would still dominate the dormi
tory; the balance between security
and growth would not be significant
ly changed.
2. Under one suggestion for partial in
tegration offered by Dean Gordon's
staff, upperclassmen would essential
ly be guests whose rooms happened
to be in a freshman dormitory. It is
difficult to understand what would
motivate 147 upperclassmen to accept
such a position, or why they would
feel any dedication to close personal
interaction with the freshmen in an
educational sense.
3. The sponsor system is successful
largely because a few individuals are
committed to making the best of an
unfortunate living situation for
freshmen. It is not clear that the sub
stitution of five guests for one spon
sor dedicated to working with fresh
men is desirable.
4. Partial integration in itself has never
been suggested as an optimal resi
dence system, and it is not clear that
it is a desirable step toward total
integration. The committee is con
vinced that change for its own sake
is an unsound policy at any stage in
the development of a more viable
residence system.
Freshmen have the most to gain in
a campus-wide residence program
founded on the principles of co-educa
tion and integration. The institution of
this program requires not only the
support of freshmen, but also that of
upperclassmen. It could be argued that
upperclassmen would not want to give
up their present housing system. In
answer to this objection three points
can be made:
1. It is not clear that upperclassmen
are satisfied with the present sys
tem. Every spring quarter freshmen
express dissatisfaction with the hous
ing alternatives open to them: the
success of the overseas program as
a living experience has prompted
many to call for a more desirable
program at Stanford at-Stanford;
there were five applicants for each
place in the Grove Project, and if
the seminar hadn't been required
there would have been more upper
classmen seeking this exciting new
living alternative.
2. Tn our model of a fully integrated,
coeducational house, the percentage
of freshmen living in should be kept
well below 50 per cent. Freshmen
could contribute their real enthusi
asm and the challenge of their ques
tions without dominating the houses,

so that integration would benefit
both freshmen and upperclassmen.
3. In our residence program some inde
pendent npperclass houses would re
main, if there were a demand for
them. We believe that most students
would choose to live in a coed, inte
grated house, however, if some stu
dents wished something akin to the
present system such alternatives
would be open to them. The assump
tion we are making is that the new
residenco opportunities will sell them
selves.
E. Diversity and Self-Selection
Diversity among housing alternatives
is desirable. In addition, diversity with
in each house must be maintained to
avoid provincialism within the various
alternatives. Free choice, particularly
too early in the college career, among
various living styles will eventually
produce self-selective, provincial group
ings which will contradict the ideal
of developing acceptance of individual
differences within the residence. Three
points can be made to this problem:
1. No house needs to represent a cross
section of the student body. When
too great diversity exists in a living
group, cohesiveness is lost and frag
mentation takes the form of break
ing up into small sub-groups between
which little communication exists.
Therefore, some commonality, espe
cially by interests, is desirable.
2. It may not be the case that giving
students free choice among really
worthwhile alternatives will result
in serious problems of self-selection.
At any rate, it will take time for this
to happen and if indeed problems do
arise, we should be able to deal with
them early.
3. Assuming that such problems do
arise and call for some restriction of
free choice, one possible solution
would be to limit the amount of time
that an individual could live in a par
ticular residence. By encouraging
switching and moving among stu
dents, no system would be allowed
to lock itself in and stagnate.
VII. The Tone and Character of the
Living Group: Staff and Program
The residential components of most
universities are now basically eating
and sleeping facilities, structurally like
barracks, motels, or high-rise Hiltons,
surrounded by parking lots. To become
a truly residential university, the resi
dence hall must become a center of
learning and development equal in im
portance to the lecture hall. Ideally
their staffing, planning, and adminis
tration should be the responsibility of
faculty members rather than housing
directors or business offices.
While Stanford now is a far cry from
the suggested ideal of a residence uni
versity, many steps have been pro
posed which work toward the ideal. In
tegration by class and co-education are
two strong recommendations made by
the committee, which as discussed
above have considerable value in them
selves.
However, these steps will not by
themselves result in genuine centers
for learning. The mechanical bod>
shuffling is only one step in preparing
a more conducive atmosphere for total
education; the other is the purposeful
stimulation of intellectual activities
within the residence. The character and
quality of such activities, and their
relevance to students' concerns will be
come a crucial measure and determi
ned of the contribution that residence
is providing for its component mem
bers. The program for each residence
would decide for itself what input to
organize as a stimulus for the desired
enrichment of the quality of living that
contributes to the total education of
the individual and of the group's stu
dents, faculty, ideas, and the unending
list of resources of a university com
munity are all potential and powerful
inputs. The interaction of these compo
nents now creates the particular ex
citement of a university, but these
components are being comparatively
wasted in one of the areas in which
they could be the most effective ... the
living situation. The challenge of a
idential program is to organize and
bring the components together in the
most imaginative ways to utilize the
potential to the lullest.
One of the major areas of waste Is
student-faculty relations. Both the stu
donts and the faculty complain about
the distance and seeming disinterest of
the two groups. The section in the re
port which* deals with the faculty rol£
in the residence university is only a
very small start on the road to killing
this unhealthy and unproductive gap.
(See section on faculty residents.)
Too often students miss out on much
of the university experience because of
communication gaps. A face-to-face liv
ing unit is the most obvious place for
communication and contact between
students and faculty. Often the pre
vailing ethos of a dormitory can work
against this ground level communica
tion and antithetically to the explora
tory ventures of the individual. A dorm
which is oriented around a strictly so
cial purpose may even squelch the mo
tivation branding it as "intellectual," a
word that has been mistreated from all
directions in our society. While many
houses do not fall into this trap, there
is another pitfall of ruts and habit that
restricts the growing of experience in
a different way. The entire responsi
bility of taking advantage of the under
graduate experience is on the individ
ual. and some people find themselves
vorking against odds that would dis
courage the most aggressive. Fresh
man in particular belong to this cate
gory. They need to be exposed to the
broad ranges of opportunity but also
need help to make use of them. An
adolescent peer culture reinforcing high
school anti-intellectualism is not one
)f the best possible ways to meet this
need. The outside stimulus and help
will not best be provided by authority
figures who tell people what to do. or
beat off the anti-intellectual bullies. The
best assurance that free exchange and
.sharing of experience will occur will
be found in the atmosphere of the liv
ing group and in the character of its
leadership. A lively house where there
is a constant influx of new and differ
ent stimuli where all things that need
expression can find it, has the best
chance against apathy or unspoken
social taboos. House organized activi
ties such as art exhibits, musical per
formances, seminars, or small scale
lecture series suffer the same fate as
the individual's struggle for expres
sion and exploration. Not everyone
would want to participate and now
many of those who do want to can,
"but to those who find it difficult, en
couragement, not brick walls, should
be present in the tone of the house.
The possibility of organizing houses
around special interests has been sug
gested; experimentation is in order.
Houses with distinctive interests—fine
arts, social issues, foreign policy—may
well bring together students and fac
ulty from various disciplines who
could more meaningfully and readily
develop a learning community than a
house whose residents and loosely
affiliated faculty can only share pleas
antries. There would still be ample
diversity by virtue of differences in
personality, background, majors, ca
reer plans and so on, but there would
also be a major intellectual and social
oncern they all share. More detail
for this kind of program is discussed
in the specific proposal for next year.
The program of input is just the
beginning to what happens to the life
n a particular house. It provides pos
sibly a focus or direction as well as the
important underlying communication
and resource network of faculty, tutor,
and student. It must be emphasized
that what is going to happen in every
house is going to be determined most
by the people who live there. There
is a give-and-take natural exchange
between the program of ideas for the
living group and the group's response.
Reuniting the sphere of living as a
meaningful and integral part of a stu
dent's education in no way signifies
the creation of a twenty-four-hour
classroom. The residential education
urogram is not an extension of the
formal academic structure; it is its
complement. Although the opportun
,fy for experimenting with courses
given for credit should be open, it is
only one of the myriad of possibilities
with residential education. While
proper planning, particularly in the
■'election of good faculty, is necessary
it would be unrealistic to lose sight
of the interaction from the other di
rection. A structure too rigid would
kill the potential of a residential pro
gram just as the naive assumption
that body shuffling is the whole
answer.
Flexibility and spontaneity are key
<*ords in the concept of what a pro
gram should be prepared to provide.
Fvrit the program should be externally

flexible. The development of the house
spirit would depend upon the inter
action between the particular members
and particular faculty and tutors. This
matter of orientation or direction for
the house could bow with the interest
and demand for a particular living sit
uation. Some programs would last
longer than others, some undoubtedly
will be less successful, some would
evolve of themselves into a new area.
There is flexibility to let the good pro
grams grow and let the bad ones kill
themselves without bringing the entire
system to ruin. A diversity of choice
between residences could be main
tained.
There should in addition be an in
ternal flexibility within each group.
There must be room for growth and
change within the group. If topics were
to be the basis for a house, they would
always have to be picked with enough
latitude to allow each member of the
house to approach it in his own way.
This casua', unstructured opportunity
for close faculty contact speaks directly
to the need of students who are con
cerned with relevance as a criterion of
education, relevance to themselves or
to the contemporary world. There is
much opportunity for the student to
become very involved in the formation
and execution of his own education.
People who are involved and interested
in their own work tend to be more in
terested and able to contribute to the
work of others.
Another possibility that should be
included in the program is the oppor
tunity for experimentation with self
government. All sorts of opportunities
exist outside of the adoption of a hier
archy handed from above of president,
social chairman, etc. . .
There is much to be said for the edu
cationally valuable experience of learn
ing to live with ambiguity and without
automatically following tradition or
the dictates of an authority figure to
create the quality of life of a house
out of what is there ... to create an
educationally meaningful experience.
"The ideas sound great on paper!" is
the old comment at the outset of any
innovation with the rejoiner "But how
do you make it work in reality?" usu
ally not far behind. Why doesn't this
all happen now? Wilbur, the recom
mended site for next year's project,
already has many of the features out
lined in this report. "Is there really
going to be any significant difference?"
might be one question. The answer is
twofold. Some of the kinds of things
this report talks about are already
happening. If they weren't then there
would really be no use in trying to
maximize the interaction. But so much
more could be happening, and many of
the detrimental currents that run con
trary to the purpose of attending a
university could be reduced. All sys
tems are implemented by men. There
is not any system of law, morality or
of a residence university which can
overcome the fallibility of man. There
is not a magical formula implied in this
program, it rests very heavily on the
people who participate but so does
every other system. Good systems help
him along and the committee firmly
feels that a true residential university,
is a better system than one which only
claims to be and is somewhere in the
middle.
The people involved therefore are at
the core of the program. But their
effectiveness will depend to a large
degree upon how they see their role.
Their conception of their role in this
new system must undergo as much
fundamental reinterpretation as the
system itself.
How will the inertia of the present
resident conditions be overcome? Who
will set the tone, provide the mo
mentum, and contribute the leader
ship? Our first answer to these ques
tions is the students themselves. In any
residence system students will unde
niably be the major constituency.. But
how the resident staff can contribute
is also an important issue. At the pres
ent time Stanford has faculty residents,
tutors, resident assistants, and spon
sors. The role of each should be re
viewed.
Faculty Resident*
The committee would certainly not
deny the valuable contribution of the
faculty residents toward improving the
living situation at Stanford, but in
general, the faculty resident program
simply is not given the support neces
sary to tree Its members from -other

tasks and to allow them to devote
more time, thought and emphasis to
the residence education program. The
basic change would be that of increased
commitment to the living situation. The
primary responsibility of the faculty
resident should not be to the dorm di
rector or the administration, but to the
student within the living group or com
plex. To be effective, the faculty resi
dent must be willing to accept a de
manding and time consuming involve
ment in the living situation. His pres
ence there will be much more than a
face at meals or even that of a good
friend. Presumably the resident would
be a full time member of the faculty,
for the success of the residence pro
gram would greatly depend upon his
response to the intellectual needs of the
students. Doctoral candidates, coaches,
university officials, and administrators,
however, could still participate if they
would be willing to make the same
kind of commitment to the ideal of a
residence university. The interpersonal
factor is extremely important in this
kind of situation. Most every student
complains about the brilliant man who
can't give a good lecture. The same
argument will have to be taken into
account that not everyone can fulfill
this particular kind of a role. The fac
ulty resident must, above all, be sensi
tive to the interaction among students
in the group.
The things a faculty member could
contribute are bounded only by their
individual creativity but a few sug
gestions are in order.
1. In certain living units, seminars for
academic credit could be offered.
2. Directed reading could be made avail
able to certain students under the
resident.
3. Informal and noncredit seminars
should be encourage by the faculty
resident or when an idea came out
of the group he or some of his col
leagues could serve as resource per
son.
4. A student chairman and the faculty
resident could set up a meaningful
faculty associate program. The resi
dent can draw upon close friends and
colleagues which would supply an
internal identification missing in the
present program.
What would bring the faculty to par
ticipate in this program? Much of the
same dissatisfaction with student-fac
ulty relations that would bring the
students. Where something lively is
going on, something which the faculty
member is part there would not be
the embarassed ordeals that now take
place in dormitories on campus where
everyone involved is on their best and
most strained behavior. The living con
ditions would be similar to that of an
overseas campus though the professor
would not be required to drop his own
work or leave the center of his re
search. Class loads could be lessened
for the faculty participating because
they would be in essence only relocat
ing their teaching commitments, not
dropping them. They would have a
more flexible time schedule that might
be convenient to their purposes. This
position would also be in effect on a
rotating basis.
Resident Assistants and Tutors
The role of resident assistant should
be eliminated. In other words, we
would eliminate the role of the nice
guy disciplinarian, the liaison between
the administration and the students
who has been for too long forced into
an unfortunate position of hypocrisy.
As he is employed by the administra
tion he has an obligation to enforce
University policies, but if he is to be
at all effective with the students his
identification is with them. Too often
he has resolved the conflict by the
statement, "I don't care what you do,
just do it quietly so I don't see it."
Caught in this bind he has been in
effective as a man playing to two mas
ters. It is not enough to react to stu
dent needs and problems, for the role
we see must be one of creative action —
one of initiative and not merely re
sponse. Similarly, the present tutor
system is limited because its goal is
only to answer questions, not raise
them.
The present role of tutor, however,
is closer to our purpose than the RA's.
But this role must be expanded to be
effective. Thus, the idea of tutors
should be maintained, but its purpose
significantly broadened. Like faculty
residents > (and unlike RA's)' tutors

must have autonomy from primarily ad
ministrative policy and must be respon
sible primarily to the students below.
They should be linked to the resident
director, who is then responsible to the
administration. Although academic
assistance is undeniably important, tu
tors must do more than merely toot.
Their role should be to stimulate dis
cussion, to promote all types of inter
change, and to actively work towards
an educational atmosphere. At present
RA's and tutors tend to preserve rather
than promote and to be problem
solvers, rather than catalysts. The
tutor, like the faculty resident, must
approach his job with a new vitality
and commitment.
Sponsors
When the freshman class has been
entirely integrated into the university
community then the sponsor system
will become an anachronism. But until
that point the need remains and the
present system of sponsors and tutors
should be maintained.
There are two more important con
siderations before any system is put
Into operation. How will the faculty
and tutors be selected? And what are
the costs for the program as a whole?
These problems become relevant and
solvable only after the initial commit
ment and go ahead has been made.
Therefore discussion of these aspects
of the program will be included in
the proposal for next year.
VIII. Brief Assessment of Experience
At Other Institutions
While it is not our intention to base
the justification for our proposals on
the successes and failures of other in
stitutions with their necessarily dif
ferent circumstances, it is interesting
to note the results of a study con
ducted by the Faculty Committee on
Student Residences at Stanford in 1959.
Studying twenty-one similar universities
in this country they found that they
were about equally divided between
integrated and segregated freshman
living facilities. In general each school
seem satisfied with the system it then
had. However, while all of these with
the integrated system found it the most
workable, about 25 per cent of those
with segregated freshmen replied that
they were dissatisfied with their situ
ation and it certainly increases the
noisy freshman atmosphere which is
inimical to good study habits and con
ditions." Some schools reported that
the only reason for maintaining fresh
man segregation was pressure from
the fraternities who "objected stren
uously to placing their pledges under
the influence of hard bitten rugged in
dependents."
The many success of coeducational
housing on other campuses are too well
known to require documentation.
The institutions interviewed were
Cal Tech, Reed, Pembroke, Swarth
more, Oberlin, Pomona, Carleton, Rad
clifTe, Occidental, Ohio Wesleyan, Chi
cago, Brown, Dartmouth, Princeton,
Yale, Harvard, Northwestern, Washing
ton State, Oregon, Cornell, and Ohio
State.
IX. A Proposal:
The Wilbur Experiment
The committee has set forth its ar
guments for coeducational and inte
grated residences. It has suggested that
the residence should be a center of
intellectual life, and through residence
education the rigid separation of the
student's social and intellectual lives
could be ended. It remains for the com
mittee to propose how these aims can
be fulfilled at Stanford.
It is the feeling of the committee
that significant experimentation in resi
dence education is altogether feasible
for next year. There is a wide range
of possibilities. The committee initially
considered a massive scrambling of the
university residence pattern, convert
ing most dormitories on campus to
coeducation and integration. This pro
posal was rejected for two reasons:
(1) Full integration, or anything ap
proaching it, would at this time pro
duce an undesirable ratio of freshmen
to upperclass men. (2) It would be im
possible to supply the staff necessary
to introduce residence education in any
meaningful way if the scope of the
housing experiment is so broad.
The committee decided that its aims
could best be fulfilled by an experiment
of more limited scope. Instead of dras
tically overhauling the university resi
dence pattern, one dormitory complex
could be used as a rather large "pilot"
project, in which * Integratiorr and • eo
education could be complete and intel
lectual life could be given the proper
attention. Wilbur Hall is ideal for this
purpose. It is the largest complex on
campus, with space for approximately
720 people. It is divided into eight
houses, each of which constitutes a
separate identity unit. Each house has
an adjacent cottage for a faculty resi
dent and a tutorial room where semin
ars can be held.
The committee recommends that
next fall each Wilbur house be occu
pied by two floors of men and one
floor of women, and that each house
be integrated by class at a rate of one
freshman to three upperclassmen. Con
stituted as such, Wilbur Hall would be
the site of meaningful experimentation
in residential education.
The Wilbur experiment will of neces
sity affect some of the other university
residences. Freshman men will move to
Stern and Branner, retaining the spon
sor system in its present form. Fresh
man women will remain in Roble, with
sponsors, and those living in neither
Roble or Wilbur will be integrated with
upperclass women in Florence Moore.
Lagunita, Hoskins, and Toyon will be
unaffected. The remaining upperclass
men will live in three of the row
houses. The statistical breakdown is
as follows.
Total Frosh Upcl. Total Frosh Upcl.
Men Men Men W'ran W'mn Wmn
Wilbur 480 120 360 240 60 180
Stem 590 570 20
Branner 170 160 10
Roble 260 250 10
Florence
Moore 350 90 260
Lagunita 290 0 290
Hoskins 120 0 120
Toyon 200 0 200
Row
Houses (3)100 0 100
(5) 180 0 180
Totals 1540 850 690 1440 400 1040
(Note: If women are allowed to move
off campus, adjustments can be made
easily. If the number of women moving
off is under 180, an appropriate num
ber of row houses can be converted
from women to men. Compensation
can also be made by admitting more
freshman and transfer women. If

necessary the measures can be com
bined. )
Students will be chosen for the Wil
bur experiment on a draw basis. It is
reasonable to expect an excess demand
for on-campus housing by upperclass
men, since a new option is being of
fered that will presumably attract men
who presently or would otherwise live
off campus, or in fraternities. The com
ration of the upperclassmen's popu
lation in Wilbur would thus differ
from the present composition of Stem.
If women are allowed off campus, there
would be a greater possibility of satis
fying the demand for men's housing.
The likelihood of vacant dormitory
space, with the introduction of the
Wilbur option, is highly improbable.
The logistics of putting the bodies
into Wilbur for the pilot project is
only half of our task in our proposal.
The problems of staffing the complex
and from there working out feasible
programs is the next step. Hopefully
to make this pilot project a real step
toward achieving the residential uni
versity, as much of the general report
as possible will be included, only the
scope has changed not the purpose of
the program.
Selection for next year's faculty resi
dents could be turned over to a com
mittee composed of one faculty and
one student member of the ASSU
Housing Commission and two members
from the Dean of Students Office, with
the advice of the present Committee.
Once this task has been completed, the
faculty can participate in choosing the
tutors and drawing up more detailed
plans for the program.
The committee realizes that a com
mitment to this kind of residential
education will require an overt shift
in educational effort from the class
room and lab to the residence, with
both compensation for it and relief
from other teaching duties—and quite
probably the replacement of their
other more formal academic functions
by other personnel. We also realize
that there will be a budget problem,
but emphatically deny that worthwhile
educational goals should not be pro
posed and slated because of current
pragmatic limitations.
The committee hopes that, through

further study—best done in conjunc
tion with the study of education at
Stanford—that it will be possible to
rearrange and reemphasize the com
ponents of freshman education in such
a way that existing resources would
permit a serious upgrading of resi
dence education, and the possibility
that such education could replace some
aspects of the present program. This
might well allow the same total re
sources of money and people to meet
the desired objectives by shifting the
locale and method of teaching, rather
than just adding to the staff and pro
gram.
Presently in Wilbur there are three
sponsor rooms and one tutor room
which can accommodate the new tutors.
Hopefully as many of these rooms will
be used for that purpose, but if for
any reason four tutors per house is im
possible, then the rooms could be used
for offices which would at least bring
more graduate level contact into the
residence.
One possible suggestion for Wilbur's
eight houses next year would be to
have five of them centered around a
general theme, one international house,
and two left unstructured. There has
been much agitation for an interna
tional house on campus and many pro
posals have been drawn up. Five sug
gested topics for the theme houses are
"Religion and Society," "Literature and
Fine Arts," "Science and Human Prob
lems," "The Urban Threat," and "So
cial Change."
To take only one of these themes and
speculate what the given house of
faculty, tutors and students will make
of it is another of those endless first
steps in imagination potential. The
house that was using the topic "Science
and Human Problems," for example,
would bring in a diversity of fields
from the natural sciences to the hu
manities. Many of the poignant prob
lems facing students and faculty are
centered in this topic but the same
could probably be said in a different
context for each of the five topics. The
impact of technology on our economic
and social system, the moral contro
versy over the newest discoveries in
genetics, the myth of the scientific
method are all themes to be explored.

What happens to a world view when
scientific discoveries puncture com
fortable philosophies? What is time
and how does man control it and how
docs it control man? These are ques
tions to be asked. Above all, it is im
portant to remember that the direc
tion of intellectual thrust must not be
too well defined in advance. One of
the most valuable experiences for the
living group will be coming to grips
with the topic, deciding for themselves
how the general area should be ap
proached, and then proceeding to de
velop programs and structures on their
own.
The committee is highly enthusiastic
about the creative possibilities pre
sented by the Wilbur experiment—the
first step in the direction of a fully
integrated and coeducational residence.
If the experiment even approaches the
measure of success the committee en
visions, it could prove a major innova
tion in the history of American higher
education. A well developed program
of residential education offers a poten
tial of immeasurable dimension.
X. Correlation of this report with the
overall review of education at Stanford
The key problems of residence edu
cational stimulus and the kind of staff
and budget commitments necessary
need further specific elucidations which
the committee hopes can be under
taken by the Executive Committee for
the study of education at the earliest
opportunity, in order to agree on ob
jectives and make necessary staff and
financial plans for the Wilbur Project
to be able to start in the Fall of 1967.
The committee takes this oppor
tunity to thank the following people
for individual contributions to our
meetings: Dwight Clark, Dr. Lawrence
Thomas, Miss Sally Mahoney, Dr. Mar
tin Evans, Dick Williams, Mike Roster,
Howie Holmes, Doug Davis, Bob Gor
don, Dean Hind, and Dean Novak.
February 6, 1967
Subcommittee on the Freshmen Resi
dence Program ASSU Housing Com
mission. Barbara Levin, Judy Bader.
Barbara Warren, David Koval, Chris
topher Harte, Douglas Sorenson, Scott
Soames (Co-Chairman) Elizabeth
Cohen, B. Davie Napier, Max
Maurice M. Osborne Jr. (Co-Chairman).
Doubts of the ability of Stanford's
present educational system to provide
for the needs of its students, and speci
fic questions about the relevance of
the residence program in its present
form, have stimulated students, faculty,
and staff to seek more appropriate
solutions.
The A.S.S.U., concerned about the
quality of residential experience at
Stanford — particularly in contrast to
that at the Overseas Campuses —
created through its Legislature a Hous
ing Commission, one task of which was
to review and make recommendations
concerning the freshman residence
program in its relation to education.
At about the same time, Associate
Dean of Students Robert Gordon was
asked to present proposals for a new
model of freshman residential educa
tion.
Both A.S.S.U. and Dean Gordon al
most simultaneously appointed com
mittees in the early Fall of 1966 to ad
vise them in the making of recommen
dations in this important area, and
rather than continue a too-familiar pat
tern of separate committees working
independently (and often divergently)
it was decided to merge the two.
In the merger, the Dean's Advisory
Committee agreed to accept the A.S.S.U.
invitation to become an integral part,
of its group. Dean Gordon agreed to
accept the report of the entire group
in the same light as he would have the
recommendations of his originally ap
pointed committee, and the merged
group in turn agreed to attempt in
good faith to assist him in meeting his
deadlines and obligations as best it
could.
Despite particular questions existing
about the Sponsor system, the Commit
tee felt from the outset that to limit
its discussions and report to such par
ticulars, or to start out with them,
would be to avoid the main Issues sur
rounding ,the quality and meaning of

residential education at Stanford, par
ticularly the freshman program.
The Committee thus firmly decided
that it would start from a fresh con
sideration of the issues and principles
involved, relating its recommendations
to them. It was recognized that such
an approach would be time consuming,
that it might seem Utopian to some;
yet a critque and basic statement about
the ideas of a residence university
seemed vital for future planning and
growth.
At the same time, the practical ne
cessity for more immediate recommen
dations and action was realized. The
present report is in this sense a pre
liminary, or interim report, which at
tempts to set forth and justify some
practical recommendations for residence
programs that could be adopted in
1967-68 — steps within the framework
of progression towards a more ideal
situation.
The Case for the Residential Commu
nity — The Personal Committment to
Learning
The impossibility of considering the
freshman experience in isolation from
the life and purposes of the entire un
dergraduate program has been a ma
jor premise in the subcommittee's
study of the Freshman Residence Pro
gram. Two main assumptions underlie
this approach.
One is that the university experience,
as a whole, is only one part of the con
tinuum of the educational process, a
process which neither begins nor ends
at the university gates. The educational
ideals should be the same for all four
undergraduate years in terms of what
they declare for the growth of persons.
The freshman year is only a step in
a span of development, having a spe
cial function as the first step but not
a separate one.
The second is a new conception which
views the university as a community
for learning through personal, interac
,tjon, find development,. .nsp, of

all its facilities for education. This view
emphasizes that the classroom, library
or laboratory cannot — indeed does not
even now — have a monopoly on pro
viding for the education and develop
ment of students. Else, why a residen
tial university? Why not subcontract
all residential arrangements and avoid
hotel problems?
The Committee felt strongly that
there was urgent need for institutional
endorsement of the fact that without
growth and development in personal,
social, and emotional dimensions, the
achievements of intellect are shallow
and stand in isolation from the indivi
dual and his world. The conviction that
gives personal meaning to knowledge
is a product of direct human relation
ship, and we make far too little use
of its potential.
In a more settled and comfortable
past, with much greater mutuality of
expectations and values both between
peers and between generations, the ur
gency of such questions was less, the
scope more limited and the answers
more predictable. The bull-session quite
effectively handled many aspects of
this personal-social side of development.
For this, and other reasons, relatively
little formal attention to it was felt
to be necessary, aside from some for
mal lectures on hygiene, the evils of
sex and booze, and the Fundamental
Standard. After all, boys were (and
would be) boys, and pretty soon they'd
grow up into men, producers and fa
thers. Home and society would take
care somehow that they grew up right,
and the college would provide an ac
cepted transition station on the way,
some academic input, and try to keep
the lid on boyish spirit getting out of
hand.
By contrast today, for many students
questions about one's nature, and about
one's relationship to an uncertain
world, and about this world itself are
more insistent, and more pre-occupying
.before The V&iefttipns a#?, -real,

and require believable answers from
within the individual. And, until he can
find them, this quest, this preoccupa
tion has top priority, while academics
suffer through seeming less relevant.
And though there are many students
who are relatively unconcerned about
such questions, we feel their total edu
cation would be enriched if they could
be purposefully involved.
The history of formal didactic at
tempts to speak to these burning ques
tions is rather dismal, and all over the
country, there has been a steady atro
phy of required, and even of voluntary
courses relative to personal hygiene,
sex, morals, and behavior. Both stu
dents and educators sense that because
a viable set of personal ethics and
values just grow within the individual,
attempts simply to impose them from
without are relatively futile.
Not only have curricular approaches
to such questions atrophied (happi
ly!), but American education is nearing
the end of a decade in which the entire
necessity of addressing itself to the
problem of personal growth has been
quite deliberately rejected. Sputnik was
the symbol, and such spokesmen as
Hyman Rickover took up the cudgels,
with articulate and seathing denuncia
tions of "Education for Living" — of
concepts of "adjustment," and insisted,
along with many others, on intellectual
excellence (for "excellence" read "a
chievement") as the right, and only
purpose of education.
Growth of population; of national
wealth with its stimulus to upward so
cial mobility; increasing complexity
and diversity of knowledge with its
concommitant of faculty pre-occupa
tion and relatively-narrower fields; and
increased competition have sharpened
the pressures for achievement, leaving
even loss time, thought, or energy for
development as a person.
The need to pay most serious atten
tion to this is most keenly felt by many
studetitfi hy their eldprs.
Doubts of the ability of Stanford's
present educational system to provide
for the needs of its students, and speci
fic questions about the relevance of
the residence program in its present
form, have stimulated students, faculty,
and staff to seek more appropriate
solutions.
The A.S.S.U., concerned about the
quality of residential experience at
Stanford — particularly in contrast to
that at the Overseas Campuses —
created through its Legislature a Hous
ing Commission, one task of which was
to review and make recommendations
concerning the freshman residence
program in its relation to education.
At about the same time, Associate
Dean of Students Robert Gordon was
asked to present proposals for a new
model of freshman residential educa
tion.
Both A.S.S.U. and Dean Gordon al
most simultaneously appointed com
mittees in the early Fall of 1966 to ad
vise them in the making of recommen
dations in this important area, and
rather than continue a too-familiar pat
tern of separate committees working
independently (and often divergently)
it was decided to merge the two.
In the merger, the Dean's Advisory
Committee agreed to accept the A.S.S.U.
invitation to become an integral part,
of its group. Dean Gordon agreed to
accept the report of the entire group
in the same light as he would have the
recommendations of his originally ap
pointed committee, and the merged
group in turn agreed to attempt in
good faith to assist him in meeting his
deadlines and obligations as best it
could.
Despite particular questions existing
about the Sponsor system, the Commit
tee felt from the outset that to limit
its discussions and report to such par
ticulars, or to start out with them,
would be to avoid the main Issues sur
rounding ,the quality and meaning of

residential education at Stanford, par
ticularly the freshman program.
The Committee thus firmly decided
that it would start from a fresh con
sideration of the issues and principles
involved, relating its recommendations
to them. It was recognized that such
an approach would be time consuming,
that it might seem Utopian to some;
yet a critque and basic statement about
the ideas of a residence university
seemed vital for future planning and
growth.
At the same time, the practical ne
cessity for more immediate recommen
dations and action was realized. The
present report is in this sense a pre
liminary, or interim report, which at
tempts to set forth and justify some
practical recommendations for residence
programs that could be adopted in
1967-68 — steps within the framework
of progression towards a more ideal
situation.
The Case for the Residential Commu
nity — The Personal Committment to
Learning
The impossibility of considering the
freshman experience in isolation from
the life and purposes of the entire un
dergraduate program has been a ma
jor premise in the subcommittee's
study of the Freshman Residence Pro
gram. Two main assumptions underlie
this approach.
One is that the university experience,
as a whole, is only one part of the con
tinuum of the educational process, a
process which neither begins nor ends
at the university gates. The educational
ideals should be the same for all four
undergraduate years in terms of what
they declare for the growth of persons.
The freshman year is only a step in
a span of development, having a spe
cial function as the first step but not
a separate one.
The second is a new conception which
views the university as a community
for learning through personal, interac
,tjon, find development,. .nsp, of

all its facilities for education. This view
emphasizes that the classroom, library
or laboratory cannot — indeed does not
even now — have a monopoly on pro
viding for the education and develop
ment of students. Else, why a residen
tial university? Why not subcontract
all residential arrangements and avoid
hotel problems?
The Committee felt strongly that
there was urgent need for institutional
endorsement of the fact that without
growth and development in personal,
social, and emotional dimensions, the
achievements of intellect are shallow
and stand in isolation from the indivi
dual and his world. The conviction that
gives personal meaning to knowledge
is a product of direct human relation
ship, and we make far too little use
of its potential.
In a more settled and comfortable
past, with much greater mutuality of
expectations and values both between
peers and between generations, the ur
gency of such questions was less, the
scope more limited and the answers
more predictable. The bull-session quite
effectively handled many aspects of
this personal-social side of development.
For this, and other reasons, relatively
little formal attention to it was felt
to be necessary, aside from some for
mal lectures on hygiene, the evils of
sex and booze, and the Fundamental
Standard. After all, boys were (and
would be) boys, and pretty soon they'd
grow up into men, producers and fa
thers. Home and society would take
care somehow that they grew up right,
and the college would provide an ac
cepted transition station on the way,
some academic input, and try to keep
the lid on boyish spirit getting out of
hand.
By contrast today, for many students
questions about one's nature, and about
one's relationship to an uncertain
world, and about this world itself are
more insistent, and more pre-occupying
.before The V&iefttipns a#?, -real,

and require believable answers from
within the individual. And, until he can
find them, this quest, this preoccupa
tion has top priority, while academics
suffer through seeming less relevant.
And though there are many students
who are relatively unconcerned about
such questions, we feel their total edu
cation would be enriched if they could
be purposefully involved.
The history of formal didactic at
tempts to speak to these burning ques
tions is rather dismal, and all over the
country, there has been a steady atro
phy of required, and even of voluntary
courses relative to personal hygiene,
sex, morals, and behavior. Both stu
dents and educators sense that because
a viable set of personal ethics and
values just grow within the individual,
attempts simply to impose them from
without are relatively futile.
Not only have curricular approaches
to such questions atrophied (happi
ly!), but American education is nearing
the end of a decade in which the entire
necessity of addressing itself to the
problem of personal growth has been
quite deliberately rejected. Sputnik was
the symbol, and such spokesmen as
Hyman Rickover took up the cudgels,
with articulate and seathing denuncia
tions of "Education for Living" — of
concepts of "adjustment," and insisted,
along with many others, on intellectual
excellence (for "excellence" read "a
chievement") as the right, and only
purpose of education.
Growth of population; of national
wealth with its stimulus to upward so
cial mobility; increasing complexity
and diversity of knowledge with its
concommitant of faculty pre-occupa
tion and relatively-narrower fields; and
increased competition have sharpened
the pressures for achievement, leaving
even loss time, thought, or energy for
development as a person.
The need to pay most serious atten
tion to this is most keenly felt by many
studetitfi hy their eldprs.
There has been some re-emergence of
an expressed need for leadership and
cooperation in working out better ways
to assist and support the individual in
his personal education and develop
ment, and when students do not raise
these questions, their education should
raise them, and speak to them.
Unstructured and spontaneous stu
dent discussion, particularly at the
freshman level, is heavily-flavored with
the need to sort oneself out, but as it
now operates, it tends less to growth
than to its more traditional social func
tion of settling into "bird-of-a-feather"
groupings in which the individual
can find comfort and support for his
own sets of values and seekings. With
in this spontaneously-forming group
ings, the dialogue tends to become in
creasingly circular, the values increas
ingly exclusive, and there is decreased
permeability to fresh ideas and ex
perience.
In an educational situation where
concentration is placed on the formal
aspects of education there is an imbal
ance which produces distortion, which
too often takes the form of rejection
of the academic sphere as "irrelevant."
Another consequence is the dangerous
polarization of university life into two
worlds; that of the classroom, and that
of social life, setting them to work
against each other instead of with each
other toward the individual's goals. The
acceptance of the residence university
ideal as being vital to education can
be one important factor in keeping
the two worlds together and moving in
the same direction, whereas the pres
ent residence program presents too
many forces that divide living from
learning.
The Committee takes as self-evident
that a truly liberal education is in fact
liberating — in making both wider and
deeper the individual's ability to per
ceive, absorb, analyze, and choose in a
vastly-increasing array of people,
events, and issues, and not in forcing
the premature adoption of limited, and
constricting attitudes. In effect this
seems the necessity of the student's
continuous and repeated exposure to
and challenge by diversity of ideas, of
values, styles, and of course people.
It is here that the meaning of residen
tial education springs to life, for it of
fers potentially the best milieu for
daily face-to-face interaction with peers,
with older students, and faculty mem
bers of both sexes — offering diversity
of age, sex, discipline and values in
the highly personal way so necessary
for exposure to lead to involvement,
and knowledge to become commitment.
The necessity of direct personal in
teraction is most strongly endorsed by
the Committee, for it is the set of
values and mental attitudes formed in
such day-in, day-out exchange that set
tle most deeply into one's fiber. Thus
to narrow the range, or dilute the qual
ity of this exchange seems antiethical
to education. Kenneth Benne, in his
article "The Uses of Fraternity" states
in this regard, "People learn value sys
tems in the first instance as they form
relations with others. These relations
in turn develop norms with corres
ponding rationales which the individual
then internalizes. If people, young or
old, can build groups with standards
that reward and strengthen honest
self - expression and self - acceptance,
creativity, mutual helpfulness and the
capacity to cope with conflict, then the
members of such groups will assimilate
these values as conditions of member
ship."
Choice, and learning to choose ra
tionally, are important educational
tasks, but should not be forced on the
individual too hurriedly, without
enough exposure to a wide range of
choices, nor without some room for
trial and error.
In summary then, the Committee
firmly believes that:
1. As education is, or should be, a con
tinuum, the freshman year cannot
be considered in isolation from the
entire undergraduate program, and al
though it has a special function as
the first step, it is an integral part
of the whole.
2. There is a grave imbalance in the
university's educational emphasis,
which tends to widen the needless,
and in our view harmful, gap be
tween the getting of knowledge and
the important business of living.
3. The deepest personal and intellectual
cpncems of students — their rela
tionships to themselves, and to an

uncertain world, — are not receiving
the institutional recognition and ef
fort they deserve.
4. That people learn most deeply by
living, and by forming personal re
lationships, and that when the resi
dence program, as at present, is
oriented to bed, board, and social
needs, the opportunities for inter
nalizing intellectual knowledge and
values are meager, and the tenden
cies to reject academic values as per
sonally-irrelevant are reinforced.
5. That choice, and learning to choose
critically are central educational
goals, but that it must depend on
close and repeated exposure to a
wide range of ideas, values, styles,
and people — people of different
ages, disciplines, sexes, and back
grounds, — and not be prematurely
forced into constricting channels
based primarily on social and not in
tellectual values.
6. Such close exposure to diversity, over
sufficient time, and if taken as the
norm, would go far in preventing
the formation of narrowed and
sterotypic attitudes and thought —
the surest signs of the ill-educated
man.
7. The way in which students live very
directly affects the whole quality of
their education: this single principle
underpins the whole concept of the
residential university.
"THE FRESHMAN CONDITION"
The paraphrase above in intentional,
— and designed to point out that being
a freshman at Stanford, or anywhere,
is an intensely personal experience of
transition. Although the general ideals
of education apply equally, — and es
pecially, — to him, the freshman also
has attributes which make him special,
but not separate.
It is the feeling of this committee
that freshmen can and should receive
the benefit of special experiences de
signed for their particular problems.
The assumption that we would like to
question is whether this need for some
special orientation experiences necessi
tates their living in a segragated fash
ion. Although it is expedient from an
"efficiency" point of view, it may gen
erate excessive anxiety over perfor
mance in freshman courses and a rein
forcement for essentially juvenile
modes of facing college stresses. His
special attributes can be summed up as
follows:
A. He obviously needs early and reli
able information about his new com
munity — where things are, what he
is to do, and so forth.
B. He is making the transition most
traditionally accepted in America as
the line between family dependency
and personal autonomy.
In actuality, the line, if there is one,
is blurred, and varies greatly from one
freshman to another. In general, the
freshman comes equipped with the cre
dentials of previous achievement and
approval — hoping he will be accepted
in his new college world, and fearing
that he may not. At the same time he
hopes that his performance and life
will be freer and larger than before.
The freshman, more poignantly than
any other undergraduate, in his transi
tion from a narrower to a hopefully
wider identity, wants the understand
ing of his old world, personal accep
tance by the new — and fears he may
have neither.
He is thus enormously vulnerable,
and as Steve Hurlbut has written in
his excellent paper, is characterized by
a "pervasive anxiety." Until he has as
similated workable norms, he feels he's
got to satisfy some kind of external
standard, and is anxious until he does.
Some more specific stresses that tend
to promote anxiety are:
I.The sudden change of status that
comes from being taken out of a
high school situation where one is
enormously successful and being put
in a class of similar big frogs from
small ponds, and feeling that they
are tougher frogs than he is:
2. The doubt about being able to live up
to tough academic demands:
3. Doubts about his being accepted by
his peers — of both sexes;
4. Being away from home;
5. Confrontation with different reli
gious and social values than those
the student has learned in his family
and home community;
6. Ambivalence about authority, and
older peopje in general.
This araciety and vulnerability are by

no means bad in themselves — and in
deed offer the most fertile soil for cul
tivation of the seeking young mind.
But the thrust of this searching anxiety
is in essence social, and approval-seek
ing — and therefore related to persons
and social groups, or the winning of ac
ceptable symbols of achievement.
The Committee feels that the perva
sive, and expectable freshman anxiety
and search for some group identity is
a double-edged sword, with potential
for both regression and for growth.
On one side, if there is failure of
approval from home, or personal ac
ceptance at college, or fewer grade
points "in the bank" than expected,
anxiety may well become dysfunction
al, with consequences such as neurotic
disturbance, refusal to compete aca
demically, and even regressive and
anti-social group-adolescent behavior,
and the reinforcement of pre-college
values.
CRITIQUE OF THE PRESENT
FRESHMAN RESIDENCE PROGRAM
The Committee feels that too many
features of the present freshman resi
dence program serve:
1. To reinforce natural anxieties among
the newest members of the Univer
sity, and
2. To promote the seeking of solutions
to this anxiety that have little if any
thing to do with educational pur
poses, but tend to promote prema
ture and mutually exclusive social
groupings.
As he moves into a freshman resi
dence, he is thrown into close contact
with a large peer-group of greater
diversity in background, attitudes, and
talent than he is likely to have known.
And, because competition and fears of
failure are keenest among peers (par
ticularly of neophytes performing simi
lar tasks,) these differences within the
larger peer-group tend to move the stu
dent into protective subgroups of
peers with attitudes and pre-college
backgrounds similar to his own, within
which he finds support. In such mutual
ly-supportive social groups, the student
can arm himself and defend himself
psychologically against any new ideas
to which he is being exposed, from fel
low students, members of the opposite
sex, and his professors. Studies will
never be taken at all seriously but will
be dealt with in a purely cognitive
fashion, ingested for the purpose of
passing exams and discarded soon af
terwards. Under these conditions, we
may have done away with the prob
lems of anxiety, but are faced with the
possibility of at least two other un
desirable consequences, 1) His atti
tudes and values may remain totally
unquestioned throughout his college
career; and 2) a group devoted to de
fending itself against the climate of an
institution may exhibit anti-social char
acteristics of alienated people every
where.
That present groups formed for mu
tual support emerge after a limited
exposure to new, and possible better
models, is certainly true, and groupings
tend to occur along pre-college lines
and values, or in rebellion against
them.
The present segregated freshman
residence situation also tends:
3. To promote the seeking of achieve
ment symbols (i.e. grades) rather
than knowledge of self or substance;
4. By a residence administration seen
as primarily regulatory and manger
ial, to aggravate the natural ambi
valence of freshmen towards author
ity with results ranging from thought
less docility to destructive rebellion;
or apathetic alienation;
5. To provide too much pressure for
distortion and ritualization of rela
tionships between the sexes — the
"dating syndrome" — and a poverty
of opportunities for simple, friendly
interaction of people, a lack fre
quently deplored by both freshmen
and upperclassmen.
Both architecture and group pres
sures, as well as well-institutionalized
pressures for achieving good grades
in a heavy curriculum conspire to rob
the freshman of privacy — both physi
cal privacy, and temporal privacy; i.e.
some time simply to be himself, to spin
his wheels, and to think, with room for
trial and error.
There is, at least in Wilbur, no at
mosphere in the dining halls in the
least conducive to conversation — and
for some reason, plastic and formica
encourage one to get In and out fast,

with emphasis on feeding the face, but
none on nourishing friendship.
All of these (observable) results are
Inimical to the purposes of stimulating
interest in new subjects, of promoting
constructive reaction to diversity, of
the discouragement of stereotypic
thinking and behavior, and of trust in
older people as human beings.
More importantly, the positive po
tentials of freshman vulnerability go
relatively untapped — or are being tap
ped for outworn purposes. For this
vulnerability is personal, and if pro
vided with daily personal interaction
with a wide range of interesting
people of different ages and different
disciplines, there is more than a good
chance that Stanford freshmen would
attach their enthusiasms and their
hearts to the new models they need
and seek — models of greater depth
and diversity, but providing the identi
ty and security they need.
The interaction between freshman
men in Wilbur and the Faculty Resi
dents has varied greatly in its intensity
and impact — with instances of great
fruitfulness, or relative neutrality and
harmony, and a very few of a truly
negative quality.
Faculty Associates to freshman resi
dences have often provided important
personal interactions between fresh
men and the faculty — but just as
often these contacts have been super
ficial and ritualized.
Sponsors, while providing the great
est impact in personal exchange, pre
sent, because of their small number,
relatively limited contact with upper
classmen's values and experiences.
While all these personal contacts in
the freshman residences do in fact en
rich the education of many freshmen,
the other fact remains that there are
simply not enough such contacts, nor
sufficient support and time for these
few people to give residential educa
tion the emphasis it deserves.
EVOLUTION OF THE PRESENT
FRESHMAN RESIDENCE PROGRAM
Whatever rationalizations may be
adduced in support of the present
freshman residence program, it ap
pears to the Committee that it is in
large measure a holdover from an
earlier set of norms — norms that re
ceived wide acceptance and support in
those times, but that are under serious
question *oday.
In the Teens, the Twenties, and even
well into the Thirties, there was more
general acceptance (in society at large
as well as in the university commu
nity) of a particular hierarchical order,
and the particular authority structure
such an order implies. One tended to
know where one stood in relation to
the order at any given period, and to
be confident that one would ascend the
ladder by predictable steps.
Perhaps because of the relative sta
bility of the social order, personal de
velopment was thought of more along
the lines of advancement within that
order — with of course the acquisition
of enough "knowledge" and academic
polish to secure preference in vocations
and the status of a college-educated
man. It was important in itself to be
a senior, or for that matter an upper
classman, and the class structure had
in itself real meaning to the student.
Hence, the development of class spirit
and cohesiveness was valued, encour
aged, and ritualized. Even the major
steps in progression along the well
worn rungs were ritualized in such
rites of passage as the annual "Frosh-
Soph War," a ritual which would have
been impossible had there been no such
open class distinction.
The residence arrangements prob
ably reflected an accept? e of this
order according to social and culture
values of the day, and were aimed at
initiating the freshman into them. A
deliberate segration of the neophyte —
either by residence, by distinguishing
badges (viz. the "Beanie"), by restric
tion of privilege, or by combinations
of these has in many human organiza
tions, served to reinforce acculturation
to desired social and behavioral norms,
and whether anyone was purposefully
aware of this or not, such considera
tions surely operated in freshman resi
dential segragation. Aside from "home
work" performed in a dorm, there was
a rather strict geographic separation
of intellectual-academic concerns and
the personal-social sphere. The class
room and laboratory (and one's closed
~oom or the stacks) were meant for
the'one — while the dorm was really
There has been some re-emergence of
an expressed need for leadership and
cooperation in working out better ways
to assist and support the individual in
his personal education and develop
ment, and when students do not raise
these questions, their education should
raise them, and speak to them.
Unstructured and spontaneous stu
dent discussion, particularly at the
freshman level, is heavily-flavored with
the need to sort oneself out, but as it
now operates, it tends less to growth
than to its more traditional social func
tion of settling into "bird-of-a-feather"
groupings in which the individual
can find comfort and support for his
own sets of values and seekings. With
in this spontaneously-forming group
ings, the dialogue tends to become in
creasingly circular, the values increas
ingly exclusive, and there is decreased
permeability to fresh ideas and ex
perience.
In an educational situation where
concentration is placed on the formal
aspects of education there is an imbal
ance which produces distortion, which
too often takes the form of rejection
of the academic sphere as "irrelevant."
Another consequence is the dangerous
polarization of university life into two
worlds; that of the classroom, and that
of social life, setting them to work
against each other instead of with each
other toward the individual's goals. The
acceptance of the residence university
ideal as being vital to education can
be one important factor in keeping
the two worlds together and moving in
the same direction, whereas the pres
ent residence program presents too
many forces that divide living from
learning.
The Committee takes as self-evident
that a truly liberal education is in fact
liberating — in making both wider and
deeper the individual's ability to per
ceive, absorb, analyze, and choose in a
vastly-increasing array of people,
events, and issues, and not in forcing
the premature adoption of limited, and
constricting attitudes. In effect this
seems the necessity of the student's
continuous and repeated exposure to
and challenge by diversity of ideas, of
values, styles, and of course people.
It is here that the meaning of residen
tial education springs to life, for it of
fers potentially the best milieu for
daily face-to-face interaction with peers,
with older students, and faculty mem
bers of both sexes — offering diversity
of age, sex, discipline and values in
the highly personal way so necessary
for exposure to lead to involvement,
and knowledge to become commitment.
The necessity of direct personal in
teraction is most strongly endorsed by
the Committee, for it is the set of
values and mental attitudes formed in
such day-in, day-out exchange that set
tle most deeply into one's fiber. Thus
to narrow the range, or dilute the qual
ity of this exchange seems antiethical
to education. Kenneth Benne, in his
article "The Uses of Fraternity" states
in this regard, "People learn value sys
tems in the first instance as they form
relations with others. These relations
in turn develop norms with corres
ponding rationales which the individual
then internalizes. If people, young or
old, can build groups with standards
that reward and strengthen honest
self - expression and self - acceptance,
creativity, mutual helpfulness and the
capacity to cope with conflict, then the
members of such groups will assimilate
these values as conditions of member
ship."
Choice, and learning to choose ra
tionally, are important educational
tasks, but should not be forced on the
individual too hurriedly, without
enough exposure to a wide range of
choices, nor without some room for
trial and error.
In summary then, the Committee
firmly believes that:
1. As education is, or should be, a con
tinuum, the freshman year cannot
be considered in isolation from the
entire undergraduate program, and al
though it has a special function as
the first step, it is an integral part
of the whole.
2. There is a grave imbalance in the
university's educational emphasis,
which tends to widen the needless,
and in our view harmful, gap be
tween the getting of knowledge and
the important business of living.
3. The deepest personal and intellectual
cpncems of students — their rela
tionships to themselves, and to an

uncertain world, — are not receiving
the institutional recognition and ef
fort they deserve.
4. That people learn most deeply by
living, and by forming personal re
lationships, and that when the resi
dence program, as at present, is
oriented to bed, board, and social
needs, the opportunities for inter
nalizing intellectual knowledge and
values are meager, and the tenden
cies to reject academic values as per
sonally-irrelevant are reinforced.
5. That choice, and learning to choose
critically are central educational
goals, but that it must depend on
close and repeated exposure to a
wide range of ideas, values, styles,
and people — people of different
ages, disciplines, sexes, and back
grounds, — and not be prematurely
forced into constricting channels
based primarily on social and not in
tellectual values.
6. Such close exposure to diversity, over
sufficient time, and if taken as the
norm, would go far in preventing
the formation of narrowed and
sterotypic attitudes and thought —
the surest signs of the ill-educated
man.
7. The way in which students live very
directly affects the whole quality of
their education: this single principle
underpins the whole concept of the
residential university.
"THE FRESHMAN CONDITION"
The paraphrase above in intentional,
— and designed to point out that being
a freshman at Stanford, or anywhere,
is an intensely personal experience of
transition. Although the general ideals
of education apply equally, — and es
pecially, — to him, the freshman also
has attributes which make him special,
but not separate.
It is the feeling of this committee
that freshmen can and should receive
the benefit of special experiences de
signed for their particular problems.
The assumption that we would like to
question is whether this need for some
special orientation experiences necessi
tates their living in a segragated fash
ion. Although it is expedient from an
"efficiency" point of view, it may gen
erate excessive anxiety over perfor
mance in freshman courses and a rein
forcement for essentially juvenile
modes of facing college stresses. His
special attributes can be summed up as
follows:
A. He obviously needs early and reli
able information about his new com
munity — where things are, what he
is to do, and so forth.
B. He is making the transition most
traditionally accepted in America as
the line between family dependency
and personal autonomy.
In actuality, the line, if there is one,
is blurred, and varies greatly from one
freshman to another. In general, the
freshman comes equipped with the cre
dentials of previous achievement and
approval — hoping he will be accepted
in his new college world, and fearing
that he may not. At the same time he
hopes that his performance and life
will be freer and larger than before.
The freshman, more poignantly than
any other undergraduate, in his transi
tion from a narrower to a hopefully
wider identity, wants the understand
ing of his old world, personal accep
tance by the new — and fears he may
have neither.
He is thus enormously vulnerable,
and as Steve Hurlbut has written in
his excellent paper, is characterized by
a "pervasive anxiety." Until he has as
similated workable norms, he feels he's
got to satisfy some kind of external
standard, and is anxious until he does.
Some more specific stresses that tend
to promote anxiety are:
I.The sudden change of status that
comes from being taken out of a
high school situation where one is
enormously successful and being put
in a class of similar big frogs from
small ponds, and feeling that they
are tougher frogs than he is:
2. The doubt about being able to live up
to tough academic demands:
3. Doubts about his being accepted by
his peers — of both sexes;
4. Being away from home;
5. Confrontation with different reli
gious and social values than those
the student has learned in his family
and home community;
6. Ambivalence about authority, and
older peopje in general.
This araciety and vulnerability are by

no means bad in themselves — and in
deed offer the most fertile soil for cul
tivation of the seeking young mind.
But the thrust of this searching anxiety
is in essence social, and approval-seek
ing — and therefore related to persons
and social groups, or the winning of ac
ceptable symbols of achievement.
The Committee feels that the perva
sive, and expectable freshman anxiety
and search for some group identity is
a double-edged sword, with potential
for both regression and for growth.
On one side, if there is failure of
approval from home, or personal ac
ceptance at college, or fewer grade
points "in the bank" than expected,
anxiety may well become dysfunction
al, with consequences such as neurotic
disturbance, refusal to compete aca
demically, and even regressive and
anti-social group-adolescent behavior,
and the reinforcement of pre-college
values.
CRITIQUE OF THE PRESENT
FRESHMAN RESIDENCE PROGRAM
The Committee feels that too many
features of the present freshman resi
dence program serve:
1. To reinforce natural anxieties among
the newest members of the Univer
sity, and
2. To promote the seeking of solutions
to this anxiety that have little if any
thing to do with educational pur
poses, but tend to promote prema
ture and mutually exclusive social
groupings.
As he moves into a freshman resi
dence, he is thrown into close contact
with a large peer-group of greater
diversity in background, attitudes, and
talent than he is likely to have known.
And, because competition and fears of
failure are keenest among peers (par
ticularly of neophytes performing simi
lar tasks,) these differences within the
larger peer-group tend to move the stu
dent into protective subgroups of
peers with attitudes and pre-college
backgrounds similar to his own, within
which he finds support. In such mutual
ly-supportive social groups, the student
can arm himself and defend himself
psychologically against any new ideas
to which he is being exposed, from fel
low students, members of the opposite
sex, and his professors. Studies will
never be taken at all seriously but will
be dealt with in a purely cognitive
fashion, ingested for the purpose of
passing exams and discarded soon af
terwards. Under these conditions, we
may have done away with the prob
lems of anxiety, but are faced with the
possibility of at least two other un
desirable consequences, 1) His atti
tudes and values may remain totally
unquestioned throughout his college
career; and 2) a group devoted to de
fending itself against the climate of an
institution may exhibit anti-social char
acteristics of alienated people every
where.
That present groups formed for mu
tual support emerge after a limited
exposure to new, and possible better
models, is certainly true, and groupings
tend to occur along pre-college lines
and values, or in rebellion against
them.
The present segregated freshman
residence situation also tends:
3. To promote the seeking of achieve
ment symbols (i.e. grades) rather
than knowledge of self or substance;
4. By a residence administration seen
as primarily regulatory and manger
ial, to aggravate the natural ambi
valence of freshmen towards author
ity with results ranging from thought
less docility to destructive rebellion;
or apathetic alienation;
5. To provide too much pressure for
distortion and ritualization of rela
tionships between the sexes — the
"dating syndrome" — and a poverty
of opportunities for simple, friendly
interaction of people, a lack fre
quently deplored by both freshmen
and upperclassmen.
Both architecture and group pres
sures, as well as well-institutionalized
pressures for achieving good grades
in a heavy curriculum conspire to rob
the freshman of privacy — both physi
cal privacy, and temporal privacy; i.e.
some time simply to be himself, to spin
his wheels, and to think, with room for
trial and error.
There is, at least in Wilbur, no at
mosphere in the dining halls in the
least conducive to conversation — and
for some reason, plastic and formica
encourage one to get In and out fast,

with emphasis on feeding the face, but
none on nourishing friendship.
All of these (observable) results are
Inimical to the purposes of stimulating
interest in new subjects, of promoting
constructive reaction to diversity, of
the discouragement of stereotypic
thinking and behavior, and of trust in
older people as human beings.
More importantly, the positive po
tentials of freshman vulnerability go
relatively untapped — or are being tap
ped for outworn purposes. For this
vulnerability is personal, and if pro
vided with daily personal interaction
with a wide range of interesting
people of different ages and different
disciplines, there is more than a good
chance that Stanford freshmen would
attach their enthusiasms and their
hearts to the new models they need
and seek — models of greater depth
and diversity, but providing the identi
ty and security they need.
The interaction between freshman
men in Wilbur and the Faculty Resi
dents has varied greatly in its intensity
and impact — with instances of great
fruitfulness, or relative neutrality and
harmony, and a very few of a truly
negative quality.
Faculty Associates to freshman resi
dences have often provided important
personal interactions between fresh
men and the faculty — but just as
often these contacts have been super
ficial and ritualized.
Sponsors, while providing the great
est impact in personal exchange, pre
sent, because of their small number,
relatively limited contact with upper
classmen's values and experiences.
While all these personal contacts in
the freshman residences do in fact en
rich the education of many freshmen,
the other fact remains that there are
simply not enough such contacts, nor
sufficient support and time for these
few people to give residential educa
tion the emphasis it deserves.
EVOLUTION OF THE PRESENT
FRESHMAN RESIDENCE PROGRAM
Whatever rationalizations may be
adduced in support of the present
freshman residence program, it ap
pears to the Committee that it is in
large measure a holdover from an
earlier set of norms — norms that re
ceived wide acceptance and support in
those times, but that are under serious
question *oday.
In the Teens, the Twenties, and even
well into the Thirties, there was more
general acceptance (in society at large
as well as in the university commu
nity) of a particular hierarchical order,
and the particular authority structure
such an order implies. One tended to
know where one stood in relation to
the order at any given period, and to
be confident that one would ascend the
ladder by predictable steps.
Perhaps because of the relative sta
bility of the social order, personal de
velopment was thought of more along
the lines of advancement within that
order — with of course the acquisition
of enough "knowledge" and academic
polish to secure preference in vocations
and the status of a college-educated
man. It was important in itself to be
a senior, or for that matter an upper
classman, and the class structure had
in itself real meaning to the student.
Hence, the development of class spirit
and cohesiveness was valued, encour
aged, and ritualized. Even the major
steps in progression along the well
worn rungs were ritualized in such
rites of passage as the annual "Frosh-
Soph War," a ritual which would have
been impossible had there been no such
open class distinction.
The residence arrangements prob
ably reflected an accept? e of this
order according to social and culture
values of the day, and were aimed at
initiating the freshman into them. A
deliberate segration of the neophyte —
either by residence, by distinguishing
badges (viz. the "Beanie"), by restric
tion of privilege, or by combinations
of these has in many human organiza
tions, served to reinforce acculturation
to desired social and behavioral norms,
and whether anyone was purposefully
aware of this or not, such considera
tions surely operated in freshman resi
dential segragation. Aside from "home
work" performed in a dorm, there was
a rather strict geographic separation
of intellectual-academic concerns and
the personal-social sphere. The class
room and laboratory (and one's closed
~oom or the stacks) were meant for
the'one — while the dorm was really
for the other, and largely designed for
it.
The early history of the sponsor
program, when Encina Hall was the
freshman men's dorm, illustrates well
its use as an instrument for indoctri
nation of the "hapless Frosh" into pre
vailing upperclassmen's values.
Most sponsors wore a block "S", and
embodied a prevailing ideal of social
and athletic prowess, coupled with a
sense of loyalty to the group, respect
for authority, and an obligation to be
exemplary to their potential succes
sors. As recently as 1955, the effective
ness of a sponsor was measured, among
other things, by the percentage of his
charges attending the pregame rallies
and intercollegiate games.
Most sponsors were also fraternity
men, and another measure of his suc
cess as a sponsor was the number of
his freshmen pledged. For the spon
sors, there was little conflict involved
in serving simultaneously the fresh
men, one's own upperclassman values,
and those of the institution and its
authorities, for all constituents had
pretty much the same understanding
of the system, and of each of their
places within it.
In the intervening years, particularly
those since World War 11, there have
been profound changes in the social
order — a disruption of settled commu
nity, sharpened preoccupations with
material competition, and a culture less
and less sure of where it stood, or what
it believed in. Particularly among those
intelligent enough to attend such col
leges as Stanford, there has been in
creasing criticism of existing institu
tions which seem to them to produce
as leaders men with narrowed vision,
preoccupation with power, and too
little time or love for people. In this
climate of malaise, and in the absence
of once tacitly-held assurances, the
young person's search for personal
identity, relevance, and belief has
emerged as a very important difference
between many students of today and
of the previous generation, and again
underscores the vital importance of the
living group experience.
Despite some expressed dissatisfac
tions with the existing sponsor system,
the sponsors and a few feculty resi
dents at Wilbur were quite probably
the first to sense both this new and
urgent need among the freshmen (and
of course in themselves,) and that the
approach to it had to be met at the
level of day-in, day-out personal inter
action.
The evolution of the present sponsor
system has been a response both to
the growing need for attention to per
sonal education and development, and
to the need to substitute a drive for
continuous search and openness for the
more comfortable, but rather water
tight, social groupings which they saw
taking place.
For the past few years, the sponsors
have been the real pioneers in residen
ital education in the freshman resi
dence program. To condemn them as
"politically motivated" or irresponsible
seems a rather defensive and negative
reaction to the admitted mistakes of
a few members, and more importantly
fails to recognize that, without much
help or understanding, they are on the
track of something very important.
There have, to be sure, been other
efforts in the direction of residential
education for freshmen — relatively
cautious additions which have been in
the general direction of enriching per
sonal experience and contact in the.
residences, and may represent an in
choate recognition of this need.
Such additions have been the Facul
ty Residents, the Faculty Associates,
the Student Associates — at first men,
later women — and later, more free
dom for dining exchanges. More for
mally, in-residence seminars, guests-in
residence, panel discussions, and even
classes have been introduced.
But the former additions (with the
exception of a few Faculty Residents)
have in general provided only super
ficial interactions, while the latter
(again with a few notable exceptions)
have borne little relation to life and
living education other than physical
proximity. There is a heavy implica
tion of the mere introduction of more
academics into residences — while the
.ru#ot iT.nortant questions to students
go, for the most part, unanswered.
Th< present freshmen residence pro
gram, in its segregation by class, by

sex, by its continued reinforcement of
separation of living from learning, is
anachronistic, and reflects values that
have become less relevant and ideas that
are no longer true — such as assump
tions that satisfactory personal devel
opment takes care of itself within an
accepted and orderly framework, (of
which the freshman class is one clear
step, houses and all); that personal
education and development are irrele
vant to, or at least peripheral to the
purposes of "Higher Education"; that
mutually-deaf social groupings are ac
ceptable parts of the social mosaic —
when the fact of the matter is that we
are badly failing to meet these now
paramount questions. Despite our be
ginning attentions to this need, the
main thrust of the freshman resi
dence program and the academic pro
gram, still tends to leave the freshman
alone in his search and to force him
into protective groupings.
FRESHMAN IN3PEORATION INTO
UNIVERSITY IJFE
As discussed above, the Committee
feels strongly that the present segre
gation of freshmen reflects values no
longer taken seriously, reinforces the
separation of learning from living
(with impoverishment of both), height
ens some dysfunctional anxieties, and
tends to force premature and relative
ly narrow security groupings, rein
forces the artificiality of contact be
tween the sexes, and alienates students
from the faculty.
Thus, segregation is in itself a cen
tral problem, and, of course, the alter
natives must be aimed at integration
of the freshman in one or more ways.
A. Coeducational Housing
As noted earlier, a major problem
for freshmen is the difficulty of estab
lishing relationships with members of
the opposite sex on any basis other
than a social or dating level. For fresh
man men, the problem is especially
acute, manifesting itself in a heighten
ing anxiety, increased insecurity, and
frustration. The institution of a sys
tem of coeducational housing would
not only ameliorate the undesirable so
cial position of freshman men but also
provide an atmosphere conducive to
more natural (spontaneous) and per
sonal relationships. Upperclassmen al
so face similar problems as the results
of a segragated housing system, and
they too could gain much from having
the option of a coeducational residence
program.
That such a program is both prac
tical and desirable is supported by the
acknowledged success of the overseas
campus program as a living and learn
ing experience. In addition, the appar
ent success of the Grove Project as a
coeducational residence suggests that
coeducation can be successful on the
home campus.
The committee believes that, in the
long run, coeducational housing should
be the prevailing, although not exclu
sive, pattern for residential education
at Stanford, and that significant steps
can and should be taken toward this
goal during the coming year, 1967-68.
Although some houses segregated by
sex should be retained for these stu
dents who do not wish to live in a co
educational residence, a major effort
should be directed toward providing
coeducational housing in its most sig
nificant sense, men and women living
in the same house. Even these houses
which remain segregated could be
placed in juxtaposition to increase the
interaction among men and women.
The goal of a residence housing both
men and women would be most effect
ively realized if the ratio is approxi
mately 1:1. Although the 1:1 ratio Is
most desirable, a ratio of 2:1 would,
we feel, be successful.
As a long range goal the Committee
recommends changing of th« admis
sions ratio to one that is closer to 1:1
as a step towards this ideal.
B. Integration of classes:
As discussed more fully in Section
111 of this report, the freshman year is
a period of growth in which freshmen
must adjust to what for many of them
is a totally new culture, with new and
demanding standards. This situation re
quires a certain amount of social sup
port to prevent excessive and destruc
tive anxiety.
The committee is convinced that the
freshman residence program too often
promotes a seeurity that reduces expo
sure to challenging and growth-moti
vating aspects of university life, there
by retarding development, rather than

preparing the freshman to meet the
challenges which are in a large mea
sure responsible for his insecurity. In
addition, individual anxieties often re
inforce each other to the detriment of
all concerned.
While it is agreed that there is val
uable support and learning through
contact with others engaged in the
same experience, this by no means re
quires that most of one's contacts be
freshmen, nor does it exclude the pos
sibility or desirability of living in con
tact with others.
In a maximally integrated system in
which freshmen constitute approxi
mately 30 per cent of the population,
reinforcement of pre-college values
would be healthily reduced, while
freshmen, still pursuing similar curri
cula, would not suffer from a dearth of
contact and interaction with other
freshmen. In a fully integrated system,
the freshman could contribute to the
atmosphere of the residence, but could
not dominate it. Social support would
be provided not only by contact with
other freshmen, but also by the pres
ence of upperclassmen who have gone
through similar experiences and who
can contribute to the freshman's sense
of social support both by advice or ex
ample and by providing living evidence
that students actually survive the
freshmen year. This system would, of
course, have the further advantage of
more fully orienting freshmen to the
challenges and opportunities of the
university, a need which can be only
partially fulfilled by the present spon
sor system.
C. Partial Integration
In the preceding discussion the mini
mum ratio of upperclassmen to fresh
men in an integrated residence is as
sumed to be well in excess of 1:1. Any
system of partial integration with ra
tios well below this minimum faces se
vere difficulties:
1. Although the population would be
enriched by the addition of more ex
perienced upperclass models, fresh
men would still dominate the dormi
tory; the balance between security
and growth would not be significant
ly changed.
2. Under one suggestion for partial in
tegration offered by Dean Gordon's
staff, upperclassmen would essential
ly be guests whose rooms happened
to be in a freshman dormitory. It is
difficult to understand what would
motivate 147 upperclassmen to accept
such a position, or why they would
feel any dedication to close personal
interaction with the freshmen in an
educational sense.
3. The sponsor system is successful
largely because a few individuals are
committed to making the best of an
unfortunate living situation for
freshmen. It is not clear that the sub
stitution of five guests for one spon
sor dedicated to working with fresh
men is desirable.
4. Partial integration in itself has never
been suggested as an optimal resi
dence system, and it is not clear that
it is a desirable step toward total
integration. The committee is con
vinced that change for its own sake
is an unsound policy at any stage in
the development of a more viable
residence system.
Freshmen have the most to gain in
a campus-wide residence program
founded on the principles of co-educa
tion and integration. The institution of
this program requires not only the
support of freshmen, but also that of
upperclassmen. It could be argued that
upperclassmen would not want to give
up their present housing system. In
answer to this objection three points
can be made:
1. It is not clear that upperclassmen
are satisfied with the present sys
tem. Every spring quarter freshmen
express dissatisfaction with the hous
ing alternatives open to them: the
success of the overseas program as
a living experience has prompted
many to call for a more desirable
program at Stanford at-Stanford;
there were five applicants for each
place in the Grove Project, and if
the seminar hadn't been required
there would have been more upper
classmen seeking this exciting new
living alternative.
2. Tn our model of a fully integrated,
coeducational house, the percentage
of freshmen living in should be kept
well below 50 per cent. Freshmen
could contribute their real enthusi
asm and the challenge of their ques
tions without dominating the houses,

so that integration would benefit
both freshmen and upperclassmen.
3. In our residence program some inde
pendent npperclass houses would re
main, if there were a demand for
them. We believe that most students
would choose to live in a coed, inte
grated house, however, if some stu
dents wished something akin to the
present system such alternatives
would be open to them. The assump
tion we are making is that the new
residenco opportunities will sell them
selves.
E. Diversity and Self-Selection
Diversity among housing alternatives
is desirable. In addition, diversity with
in each house must be maintained to
avoid provincialism within the various
alternatives. Free choice, particularly
too early in the college career, among
various living styles will eventually
produce self-selective, provincial group
ings which will contradict the ideal
of developing acceptance of individual
differences within the residence. Three
points can be made to this problem:
1. No house needs to represent a cross
section of the student body. When
too great diversity exists in a living
group, cohesiveness is lost and frag
mentation takes the form of break
ing up into small sub-groups between
which little communication exists.
Therefore, some commonality, espe
cially by interests, is desirable.
2. It may not be the case that giving
students free choice among really
worthwhile alternatives will result
in serious problems of self-selection.
At any rate, it will take time for this
to happen and if indeed problems do
arise, we should be able to deal with
them early.
3. Assuming that such problems do
arise and call for some restriction of
free choice, one possible solution
would be to limit the amount of time
that an individual could live in a par
ticular residence. By encouraging
switching and moving among stu
dents, no system would be allowed
to lock itself in and stagnate.
VII. The Tone and Character of the
Living Group: Staff and Program
The residential components of most
universities are now basically eating
and sleeping facilities, structurally like
barracks, motels, or high-rise Hiltons,
surrounded by parking lots. To become
a truly residential university, the resi
dence hall must become a center of
learning and development equal in im
portance to the lecture hall. Ideally
their staffing, planning, and adminis
tration should be the responsibility of
faculty members rather than housing
directors or business offices.
While Stanford now is a far cry from
the suggested ideal of a residence uni
versity, many steps have been pro
posed which work toward the ideal. In
tegration by class and co-education are
two strong recommendations made by
the committee, which as discussed
above have considerable value in them
selves.
However, these steps will not by
themselves result in genuine centers
for learning. The mechanical bod>
shuffling is only one step in preparing
a more conducive atmosphere for total
education; the other is the purposeful
stimulation of intellectual activities
within the residence. The character and
quality of such activities, and their
relevance to students' concerns will be
come a crucial measure and determi
ned of the contribution that residence
is providing for its component mem
bers. The program for each residence
would decide for itself what input to
organize as a stimulus for the desired
enrichment of the quality of living that
contributes to the total education of
the individual and of the group's stu
dents, faculty, ideas, and the unending
list of resources of a university com
munity are all potential and powerful
inputs. The interaction of these compo
nents now creates the particular ex
citement of a university, but these
components are being comparatively
wasted in one of the areas in which
they could be the most effective ... the
living situation. The challenge of a
idential program is to organize and
bring the components together in the
most imaginative ways to utilize the
potential to the lullest.
One of the major areas of waste Is
student-faculty relations. Both the stu
donts and the faculty complain about
the distance and seeming disinterest of
the two groups. The section in the re
port which* deals with the faculty rol£
for the other, and largely designed for
it.
The early history of the sponsor
program, when Encina Hall was the
freshman men's dorm, illustrates well
its use as an instrument for indoctri
nation of the "hapless Frosh" into pre
vailing upperclassmen's values.
Most sponsors wore a block "S", and
embodied a prevailing ideal of social
and athletic prowess, coupled with a
sense of loyalty to the group, respect
for authority, and an obligation to be
exemplary to their potential succes
sors. As recently as 1955, the effective
ness of a sponsor was measured, among
other things, by the percentage of his
charges attending the pregame rallies
and intercollegiate games.
Most sponsors were also fraternity
men, and another measure of his suc
cess as a sponsor was the number of
his freshmen pledged. For the spon
sors, there was little conflict involved
in serving simultaneously the fresh
men, one's own upperclassman values,
and those of the institution and its
authorities, for all constituents had
pretty much the same understanding
of the system, and of each of their
places within it.
In the intervening years, particularly
those since World War 11, there have
been profound changes in the social
order — a disruption of settled commu
nity, sharpened preoccupations with
material competition, and a culture less
and less sure of where it stood, or what
it believed in. Particularly among those
intelligent enough to attend such col
leges as Stanford, there has been in
creasing criticism of existing institu
tions which seem to them to produce
as leaders men with narrowed vision,
preoccupation with power, and too
little time or love for people. In this
climate of malaise, and in the absence
of once tacitly-held assurances, the
young person's search for personal
identity, relevance, and belief has
emerged as a very important difference
between many students of today and
of the previous generation, and again
underscores the vital importance of the
living group experience.
Despite some expressed dissatisfac
tions with the existing sponsor system,
the sponsors and a few feculty resi
dents at Wilbur were quite probably
the first to sense both this new and
urgent need among the freshmen (and
of course in themselves,) and that the
approach to it had to be met at the
level of day-in, day-out personal inter
action.
The evolution of the present sponsor
system has been a response both to
the growing need for attention to per
sonal education and development, and
to the need to substitute a drive for
continuous search and openness for the
more comfortable, but rather water
tight, social groupings which they saw
taking place.
For the past few years, the sponsors
have been the real pioneers in residen
ital education in the freshman resi
dence program. To condemn them as
"politically motivated" or irresponsible
seems a rather defensive and negative
reaction to the admitted mistakes of
a few members, and more importantly
fails to recognize that, without much
help or understanding, they are on the
track of something very important.
There have, to be sure, been other
efforts in the direction of residential
education for freshmen — relatively
cautious additions which have been in
the general direction of enriching per
sonal experience and contact in the.
residences, and may represent an in
choate recognition of this need.
Such additions have been the Facul
ty Residents, the Faculty Associates,
the Student Associates — at first men,
later women — and later, more free
dom for dining exchanges. More for
mally, in-residence seminars, guests-in
residence, panel discussions, and even
classes have been introduced.
But the former additions (with the
exception of a few Faculty Residents)
have in general provided only super
ficial interactions, while the latter
(again with a few notable exceptions)
have borne little relation to life and
living education other than physical
proximity. There is a heavy implica
tion of the mere introduction of more
academics into residences — while the
.ru#ot iT.nortant questions to students
go, for the most part, unanswered.
Th< present freshmen residence pro
gram, in its segregation by class, by

sex, by its continued reinforcement of
separation of living from learning, is
anachronistic, and reflects values that
have become less relevant and ideas that
are no longer true — such as assump
tions that satisfactory personal devel
opment takes care of itself within an
accepted and orderly framework, (of
which the freshman class is one clear
step, houses and all); that personal
education and development are irrele
vant to, or at least peripheral to the
purposes of "Higher Education"; that
mutually-deaf social groupings are ac
ceptable parts of the social mosaic —
when the fact of the matter is that we
are badly failing to meet these now
paramount questions. Despite our be
ginning attentions to this need, the
main thrust of the freshman resi
dence program and the academic pro
gram, still tends to leave the freshman
alone in his search and to force him
into protective groupings.
FRESHMAN IN3PEORATION INTO
UNIVERSITY IJFE
As discussed above, the Committee
feels strongly that the present segre
gation of freshmen reflects values no
longer taken seriously, reinforces the
separation of learning from living
(with impoverishment of both), height
ens some dysfunctional anxieties, and
tends to force premature and relative
ly narrow security groupings, rein
forces the artificiality of contact be
tween the sexes, and alienates students
from the faculty.
Thus, segregation is in itself a cen
tral problem, and, of course, the alter
natives must be aimed at integration
of the freshman in one or more ways.
A. Coeducational Housing
As noted earlier, a major problem
for freshmen is the difficulty of estab
lishing relationships with members of
the opposite sex on any basis other
than a social or dating level. For fresh
man men, the problem is especially
acute, manifesting itself in a heighten
ing anxiety, increased insecurity, and
frustration. The institution of a sys
tem of coeducational housing would
not only ameliorate the undesirable so
cial position of freshman men but also
provide an atmosphere conducive to
more natural (spontaneous) and per
sonal relationships. Upperclassmen al
so face similar problems as the results
of a segragated housing system, and
they too could gain much from having
the option of a coeducational residence
program.
That such a program is both prac
tical and desirable is supported by the
acknowledged success of the overseas
campus program as a living and learn
ing experience. In addition, the appar
ent success of the Grove Project as a
coeducational residence suggests that
coeducation can be successful on the
home campus.
The committee believes that, in the
long run, coeducational housing should
be the prevailing, although not exclu
sive, pattern for residential education
at Stanford, and that significant steps
can and should be taken toward this
goal during the coming year, 1967-68.
Although some houses segregated by
sex should be retained for these stu
dents who do not wish to live in a co
educational residence, a major effort
should be directed toward providing
coeducational housing in its most sig
nificant sense, men and women living
in the same house. Even these houses
which remain segregated could be
placed in juxtaposition to increase the
interaction among men and women.
The goal of a residence housing both
men and women would be most effect
ively realized if the ratio is approxi
mately 1:1. Although the 1:1 ratio Is
most desirable, a ratio of 2:1 would,
we feel, be successful.
As a long range goal the Committee
recommends changing of th« admis
sions ratio to one that is closer to 1:1
as a step towards this ideal.
B. Integration of classes:
As discussed more fully in Section
111 of this report, the freshman year is
a period of growth in which freshmen
must adjust to what for many of them
is a totally new culture, with new and
demanding standards. This situation re
quires a certain amount of social sup
port to prevent excessive and destruc
tive anxiety.
The committee is convinced that the
freshman residence program too often
promotes a seeurity that reduces expo
sure to challenging and growth-moti
vating aspects of university life, there
by retarding development, rather than

preparing the freshman to meet the
challenges which are in a large mea
sure responsible for his insecurity. In
addition, individual anxieties often re
inforce each other to the detriment of
all concerned.
While it is agreed that there is val
uable support and learning through
contact with others engaged in the
same experience, this by no means re
quires that most of one's contacts be
freshmen, nor does it exclude the pos
sibility or desirability of living in con
tact with others.
In a maximally integrated system in
which freshmen constitute approxi
mately 30 per cent of the population,
reinforcement of pre-college values
would be healthily reduced, while
freshmen, still pursuing similar curri
cula, would not suffer from a dearth of
contact and interaction with other
freshmen. In a fully integrated system,
the freshman could contribute to the
atmosphere of the residence, but could
not dominate it. Social support would
be provided not only by contact with
other freshmen, but also by the pres
ence of upperclassmen who have gone
through similar experiences and who
can contribute to the freshman's sense
of social support both by advice or ex
ample and by providing living evidence
that students actually survive the
freshmen year. This system would, of
course, have the further advantage of
more fully orienting freshmen to the
challenges and opportunities of the
university, a need which can be only
partially fulfilled by the present spon
sor system.
C. Partial Integration
In the preceding discussion the mini
mum ratio of upperclassmen to fresh
men in an integrated residence is as
sumed to be well in excess of 1:1. Any
system of partial integration with ra
tios well below this minimum faces se
vere difficulties:
1. Although the population would be
enriched by the addition of more ex
perienced upperclass models, fresh
men would still dominate the dormi
tory; the balance between security
and growth would not be significant
ly changed.
2. Under one suggestion for partial in
tegration offered by Dean Gordon's
staff, upperclassmen would essential
ly be guests whose rooms happened
to be in a freshman dormitory. It is
difficult to understand what would
motivate 147 upperclassmen to accept
such a position, or why they would
feel any dedication to close personal
interaction with the freshmen in an
educational sense.
3. The sponsor system is successful
largely because a few individuals are
committed to making the best of an
unfortunate living situation for
freshmen. It is not clear that the sub
stitution of five guests for one spon
sor dedicated to working with fresh
men is desirable.
4. Partial integration in itself has never
been suggested as an optimal resi
dence system, and it is not clear that
it is a desirable step toward total
integration. The committee is con
vinced that change for its own sake
is an unsound policy at any stage in
the development of a more viable
residence system.
Freshmen have the most to gain in
a campus-wide residence program
founded on the principles of co-educa
tion and integration. The institution of
this program requires not only the
support of freshmen, but also that of
upperclassmen. It could be argued that
upperclassmen would not want to give
up their present housing system. In
answer to this objection three points
can be made:
1. It is not clear that upperclassmen
are satisfied with the present sys
tem. Every spring quarter freshmen
express dissatisfaction with the hous
ing alternatives open to them: the
success of the overseas program as
a living experience has prompted
many to call for a more desirable
program at Stanford at-Stanford;
there were five applicants for each
place in the Grove Project, and if
the seminar hadn't been required
there would have been more upper
classmen seeking this exciting new
living alternative.
2. Tn our model of a fully integrated,
coeducational house, the percentage
of freshmen living in should be kept
well below 50 per cent. Freshmen
could contribute their real enthusi
asm and the challenge of their ques
tions without dominating the houses,

so that integration would benefit
both freshmen and upperclassmen.
3. In our residence program some inde
pendent npperclass houses would re
main, if there were a demand for
them. We believe that most students
would choose to live in a coed, inte
grated house, however, if some stu
dents wished something akin to the
present system such alternatives
would be open to them. The assump
tion we are making is that the new
residenco opportunities will sell them
selves.
E. Diversity and Self-Selection
Diversity among housing alternatives
is desirable. In addition, diversity with
in each house must be maintained to
avoid provincialism within the various
alternatives. Free choice, particularly
too early in the college career, among
various living styles will eventually
produce self-selective, provincial group
ings which will contradict the ideal
of developing acceptance of individual
differences within the residence. Three
points can be made to this problem:
1. No house needs to represent a cross
section of the student body. When
too great diversity exists in a living
group, cohesiveness is lost and frag
mentation takes the form of break
ing up into small sub-groups between
which little communication exists.
Therefore, some commonality, espe
cially by interests, is desirable.
2. It may not be the case that giving
students free choice among really
worthwhile alternatives will result
in serious problems of self-selection.
At any rate, it will take time for this
to happen and if indeed problems do
arise, we should be able to deal with
them early.
3. Assuming that such problems do
arise and call for some restriction of
free choice, one possible solution
would be to limit the amount of time
that an individual could live in a par
ticular residence. By encouraging
switching and moving among stu
dents, no system would be allowed
to lock itself in and stagnate.
VII. The Tone and Character of the
Living Group: Staff and Program
The residential components of most
universities are now basically eating
and sleeping facilities, structurally like
barracks, motels, or high-rise Hiltons,
surrounded by parking lots. To become
a truly residential university, the resi
dence hall must become a center of
learning and development equal in im
portance to the lecture hall. Ideally
their staffing, planning, and adminis
tration should be the responsibility of
faculty members rather than housing
directors or business offices.
While Stanford now is a far cry from
the suggested ideal of a residence uni
versity, many steps have been pro
posed which work toward the ideal. In
tegration by class and co-education are
two strong recommendations made by
the committee, which as discussed
above have considerable value in them
selves.
However, these steps will not by
themselves result in genuine centers
for learning. The mechanical bod>
shuffling is only one step in preparing
a more conducive atmosphere for total
education; the other is the purposeful
stimulation of intellectual activities
within the residence. The character and
quality of such activities, and their
relevance to students' concerns will be
come a crucial measure and determi
ned of the contribution that residence
is providing for its component mem
bers. The program for each residence
would decide for itself what input to
organize as a stimulus for the desired
enrichment of the quality of living that
contributes to the total education of
the individual and of the group's stu
dents, faculty, ideas, and the unending
list of resources of a university com
munity are all potential and powerful
inputs. The interaction of these compo
nents now creates the particular ex
citement of a university, but these
components are being comparatively
wasted in one of the areas in which
they could be the most effective ... the
living situation. The challenge of a
idential program is to organize and
bring the components together in the
most imaginative ways to utilize the
potential to the lullest.
One of the major areas of waste Is
student-faculty relations. Both the stu
donts and the faculty complain about
the distance and seeming disinterest of
the two groups. The section in the re
port which* deals with the faculty rol£
in the residence university is only a
very small start on the road to killing
this unhealthy and unproductive gap.
(See section on faculty residents.)
Too often students miss out on much
of the university experience because of
communication gaps. A face-to-face liv
ing unit is the most obvious place for
communication and contact between
students and faculty. Often the pre
vailing ethos of a dormitory can work
against this ground level communica
tion and antithetically to the explora
tory ventures of the individual. A dorm
which is oriented around a strictly so
cial purpose may even squelch the mo
tivation branding it as "intellectual," a
word that has been mistreated from all
directions in our society. While many
houses do not fall into this trap, there
is another pitfall of ruts and habit that
restricts the growing of experience in
a different way. The entire responsi
bility of taking advantage of the under
graduate experience is on the individ
ual. and some people find themselves
vorking against odds that would dis
courage the most aggressive. Fresh
man in particular belong to this cate
gory. They need to be exposed to the
broad ranges of opportunity but also
need help to make use of them. An
adolescent peer culture reinforcing high
school anti-intellectualism is not one
)f the best possible ways to meet this
need. The outside stimulus and help
will not best be provided by authority
figures who tell people what to do. or
beat off the anti-intellectual bullies. The
best assurance that free exchange and
.sharing of experience will occur will
be found in the atmosphere of the liv
ing group and in the character of its
leadership. A lively house where there
is a constant influx of new and differ
ent stimuli where all things that need
expression can find it, has the best
chance against apathy or unspoken
social taboos. House organized activi
ties such as art exhibits, musical per
formances, seminars, or small scale
lecture series suffer the same fate as
the individual's struggle for expres
sion and exploration. Not everyone
would want to participate and now
many of those who do want to can,
"but to those who find it difficult, en
couragement, not brick walls, should
be present in the tone of the house.
The possibility of organizing houses
around special interests has been sug
gested; experimentation is in order.
Houses with distinctive interests—fine
arts, social issues, foreign policy—may
well bring together students and fac
ulty from various disciplines who
could more meaningfully and readily
develop a learning community than a
house whose residents and loosely
affiliated faculty can only share pleas
antries. There would still be ample
diversity by virtue of differences in
personality, background, majors, ca
reer plans and so on, but there would
also be a major intellectual and social
oncern they all share. More detail
for this kind of program is discussed
in the specific proposal for next year.
The program of input is just the
beginning to what happens to the life
n a particular house. It provides pos
sibly a focus or direction as well as the
important underlying communication
and resource network of faculty, tutor,
and student. It must be emphasized
that what is going to happen in every
house is going to be determined most
by the people who live there. There
is a give-and-take natural exchange
between the program of ideas for the
living group and the group's response.
Reuniting the sphere of living as a
meaningful and integral part of a stu
dent's education in no way signifies
the creation of a twenty-four-hour
classroom. The residential education
urogram is not an extension of the
formal academic structure; it is its
complement. Although the opportun
,fy for experimenting with courses
given for credit should be open, it is
only one of the myriad of possibilities
with residential education. While
proper planning, particularly in the
■'election of good faculty, is necessary
it would be unrealistic to lose sight
of the interaction from the other di
rection. A structure too rigid would
kill the potential of a residential pro
gram just as the naive assumption
that body shuffling is the whole
answer.
Flexibility and spontaneity are key
<*ords in the concept of what a pro
gram should be prepared to provide.
Fvrit the program should be externally

flexible. The development of the house
spirit would depend upon the inter
action between the particular members
and particular faculty and tutors. This
matter of orientation or direction for
the house could bow with the interest
and demand for a particular living sit
uation. Some programs would last
longer than others, some undoubtedly
will be less successful, some would
evolve of themselves into a new area.
There is flexibility to let the good pro
grams grow and let the bad ones kill
themselves without bringing the entire
system to ruin. A diversity of choice
between residences could be main
tained.
There should in addition be an in
ternal flexibility within each group.
There must be room for growth and
change within the group. If topics were
to be the basis for a house, they would
always have to be picked with enough
latitude to allow each member of the
house to approach it in his own way.
This casua', unstructured opportunity
for close faculty contact speaks directly
to the need of students who are con
cerned with relevance as a criterion of
education, relevance to themselves or
to the contemporary world. There is
much opportunity for the student to
become very involved in the formation
and execution of his own education.
People who are involved and interested
in their own work tend to be more in
terested and able to contribute to the
work of others.
Another possibility that should be
included in the program is the oppor
tunity for experimentation with self
government. All sorts of opportunities
exist outside of the adoption of a hier
archy handed from above of president,
social chairman, etc. . .
There is much to be said for the edu
cationally valuable experience of learn
ing to live with ambiguity and without
automatically following tradition or
the dictates of an authority figure to
create the quality of life of a house
out of what is there ... to create an
educationally meaningful experience.
"The ideas sound great on paper!" is
the old comment at the outset of any
innovation with the rejoiner "But how
do you make it work in reality?" usu
ally not far behind. Why doesn't this
all happen now? Wilbur, the recom
mended site for next year's project,
already has many of the features out
lined in this report. "Is there really
going to be any significant difference?"
might be one question. The answer is
twofold. Some of the kinds of things
this report talks about are already
happening. If they weren't then there
would really be no use in trying to
maximize the interaction. But so much
more could be happening, and many of
the detrimental currents that run con
trary to the purpose of attending a
university could be reduced. All sys
tems are implemented by men. There
is not any system of law, morality or
of a residence university which can
overcome the fallibility of man. There
is not a magical formula implied in this
program, it rests very heavily on the
people who participate but so does
every other system. Good systems help
him along and the committee firmly
feels that a true residential university,
is a better system than one which only
claims to be and is somewhere in the
middle.
The people involved therefore are at
the core of the program. But their
effectiveness will depend to a large
degree upon how they see their role.
Their conception of their role in this
new system must undergo as much
fundamental reinterpretation as the
system itself.
How will the inertia of the present
resident conditions be overcome? Who
will set the tone, provide the mo
mentum, and contribute the leader
ship? Our first answer to these ques
tions is the students themselves. In any
residence system students will unde
niably be the major constituency.. But
how the resident staff can contribute
is also an important issue. At the pres
ent time Stanford has faculty residents,
tutors, resident assistants, and spon
sors. The role of each should be re
viewed.
Faculty Resident*
The committee would certainly not
deny the valuable contribution of the
faculty residents toward improving the
living situation at Stanford, but in
general, the faculty resident program
simply is not given the support neces
sary to tree Its members from -other

tasks and to allow them to devote
more time, thought and emphasis to
the residence education program. The
basic change would be that of increased
commitment to the living situation. The
primary responsibility of the faculty
resident should not be to the dorm di
rector or the administration, but to the
student within the living group or com
plex. To be effective, the faculty resi
dent must be willing to accept a de
manding and time consuming involve
ment in the living situation. His pres
ence there will be much more than a
face at meals or even that of a good
friend. Presumably the resident would
be a full time member of the faculty,
for the success of the residence pro
gram would greatly depend upon his
response to the intellectual needs of the
students. Doctoral candidates, coaches,
university officials, and administrators,
however, could still participate if they
would be willing to make the same
kind of commitment to the ideal of a
residence university. The interpersonal
factor is extremely important in this
kind of situation. Most every student
complains about the brilliant man who
can't give a good lecture. The same
argument will have to be taken into
account that not everyone can fulfill
this particular kind of a role. The fac
ulty resident must, above all, be sensi
tive to the interaction among students
in the group.
The things a faculty member could
contribute are bounded only by their
individual creativity but a few sug
gestions are in order.
1. In certain living units, seminars for
academic credit could be offered.
2. Directed reading could be made avail
able to certain students under the
resident.
3. Informal and noncredit seminars
should be encourage by the faculty
resident or when an idea came out
of the group he or some of his col
leagues could serve as resource per
son.
4. A student chairman and the faculty
resident could set up a meaningful
faculty associate program. The resi
dent can draw upon close friends and
colleagues which would supply an
internal identification missing in the
present program.
What would bring the faculty to par
ticipate in this program? Much of the
same dissatisfaction with student-fac
ulty relations that would bring the
students. Where something lively is
going on, something which the faculty
member is part there would not be
the embarassed ordeals that now take
place in dormitories on campus where
everyone involved is on their best and
most strained behavior. The living con
ditions would be similar to that of an
overseas campus though the professor
would not be required to drop his own
work or leave the center of his re
search. Class loads could be lessened
for the faculty participating because
they would be in essence only relocat
ing their teaching commitments, not
dropping them. They would have a
more flexible time schedule that might
be convenient to their purposes. This
position would also be in effect on a
rotating basis.
Resident Assistants and Tutors
The role of resident assistant should
be eliminated. In other words, we
would eliminate the role of the nice
guy disciplinarian, the liaison between
the administration and the students
who has been for too long forced into
an unfortunate position of hypocrisy.
As he is employed by the administra
tion he has an obligation to enforce
University policies, but if he is to be
at all effective with the students his
identification is with them. Too often
he has resolved the conflict by the
statement, "I don't care what you do,
just do it quietly so I don't see it."
Caught in this bind he has been in
effective as a man playing to two mas
ters. It is not enough to react to stu
dent needs and problems, for the role
we see must be one of creative action —
one of initiative and not merely re
sponse. Similarly, the present tutor
system is limited because its goal is
only to answer questions, not raise
them.
The present role of tutor, however,
is closer to our purpose than the RA's.
But this role must be expanded to be
effective. Thus, the idea of tutors
should be maintained, but its purpose
significantly broadened. Like faculty
residents > (and unlike RA's)' tutors

must have autonomy from primarily ad
ministrative policy and must be respon
sible primarily to the students below.
They should be linked to the resident
director, who is then responsible to the
administration. Although academic
assistance is undeniably important, tu
tors must do more than merely toot.
Their role should be to stimulate dis
cussion, to promote all types of inter
change, and to actively work towards
an educational atmosphere. At present
RA's and tutors tend to preserve rather
than promote and to be problem
solvers, rather than catalysts. The
tutor, like the faculty resident, must
approach his job with a new vitality
and commitment.
Sponsors
When the freshman class has been
entirely integrated into the university
community then the sponsor system
will become an anachronism. But until
that point the need remains and the
present system of sponsors and tutors
should be maintained.
There are two more important con
siderations before any system is put
Into operation. How will the faculty
and tutors be selected? And what are
the costs for the program as a whole?
These problems become relevant and
solvable only after the initial commit
ment and go ahead has been made.
Therefore discussion of these aspects
of the program will be included in
the proposal for next year.
VIII. Brief Assessment of Experience
At Other Institutions
While it is not our intention to base
the justification for our proposals on
the successes and failures of other in
stitutions with their necessarily dif
ferent circumstances, it is interesting
to note the results of a study con
ducted by the Faculty Committee on
Student Residences at Stanford in 1959.
Studying twenty-one similar universities
in this country they found that they
were about equally divided between
integrated and segregated freshman
living facilities. In general each school
seem satisfied with the system it then
had. However, while all of these with
the integrated system found it the most
workable, about 25 per cent of those
with segregated freshmen replied that
they were dissatisfied with their situ
ation and it certainly increases the
noisy freshman atmosphere which is
inimical to good study habits and con
ditions." Some schools reported that
the only reason for maintaining fresh
man segregation was pressure from
the fraternities who "objected stren
uously to placing their pledges under
the influence of hard bitten rugged in
dependents."
The many success of coeducational
housing on other campuses are too well
known to require documentation.
The institutions interviewed were
Cal Tech, Reed, Pembroke, Swarth
more, Oberlin, Pomona, Carleton, Rad
clifTe, Occidental, Ohio Wesleyan, Chi
cago, Brown, Dartmouth, Princeton,
Yale, Harvard, Northwestern, Washing
ton State, Oregon, Cornell, and Ohio
State.
IX. A Proposal:
The Wilbur Experiment
The committee has set forth its ar
guments for coeducational and inte
grated residences. It has suggested that
the residence should be a center of
intellectual life, and through residence
education the rigid separation of the
student's social and intellectual lives
could be ended. It remains for the com
mittee to propose how these aims can
be fulfilled at Stanford.
It is the feeling of the committee
that significant experimentation in resi
dence education is altogether feasible
for next year. There is a wide range
of possibilities. The committee initially
considered a massive scrambling of the
university residence pattern, convert
ing most dormitories on campus to
coeducation and integration. This pro
posal was rejected for two reasons:
(1) Full integration, or anything ap
proaching it, would at this time pro
duce an undesirable ratio of freshmen
to upperclass men. (2) It would be im
possible to supply the staff necessary
to introduce residence education in any
meaningful way if the scope of the
housing experiment is so broad.
The committee decided that its aims
could best be fulfilled by an experiment
of more limited scope. Instead of dras
tically overhauling the university resi
dence pattern, one dormitory complex
could be used as a rather large "pilot"
project, in which * Integratiorr and • eo
in the residence university is only a
very small start on the road to killing
this unhealthy and unproductive gap.
(See section on faculty residents.)
Too often students miss out on much
of the university experience because of
communication gaps. A face-to-face liv
ing unit is the most obvious place for
communication and contact between
students and faculty. Often the pre
vailing ethos of a dormitory can work
against this ground level communica
tion and antithetically to the explora
tory ventures of the individual. A dorm
which is oriented around a strictly so
cial purpose may even squelch the mo
tivation branding it as "intellectual," a
word that has been mistreated from all
directions in our society. While many
houses do not fall into this trap, there
is another pitfall of ruts and habit that
restricts the growing of experience in
a different way. The entire responsi
bility of taking advantage of the under
graduate experience is on the individ
ual. and some people find themselves
vorking against odds that would dis
courage the most aggressive. Fresh
man in particular belong to this cate
gory. They need to be exposed to the
broad ranges of opportunity but also
need help to make use of them. An
adolescent peer culture reinforcing high
school anti-intellectualism is not one
)f the best possible ways to meet this
need. The outside stimulus and help
will not best be provided by authority
figures who tell people what to do. or
beat off the anti-intellectual bullies. The
best assurance that free exchange and
.sharing of experience will occur will
be found in the atmosphere of the liv
ing group and in the character of its
leadership. A lively house where there
is a constant influx of new and differ
ent stimuli where all things that need
expression can find it, has the best
chance against apathy or unspoken
social taboos. House organized activi
ties such as art exhibits, musical per
formances, seminars, or small scale
lecture series suffer the same fate as
the individual's struggle for expres
sion and exploration. Not everyone
would want to participate and now
many of those who do want to can,
"but to those who find it difficult, en
couragement, not brick walls, should
be present in the tone of the house.
The possibility of organizing houses
around special interests has been sug
gested; experimentation is in order.
Houses with distinctive interests—fine
arts, social issues, foreign policy—may
well bring together students and fac
ulty from various disciplines who
could more meaningfully and readily
develop a learning community than a
house whose residents and loosely
affiliated faculty can only share pleas
antries. There would still be ample
diversity by virtue of differences in
personality, background, majors, ca
reer plans and so on, but there would
also be a major intellectual and social
oncern they all share. More detail
for this kind of program is discussed
in the specific proposal for next year.
The program of input is just the
beginning to what happens to the life
n a particular house. It provides pos
sibly a focus or direction as well as the
important underlying communication
and resource network of faculty, tutor,
and student. It must be emphasized
that what is going to happen in every
house is going to be determined most
by the people who live there. There
is a give-and-take natural exchange
between the program of ideas for the
living group and the group's response.
Reuniting the sphere of living as a
meaningful and integral part of a stu
dent's education in no way signifies
the creation of a twenty-four-hour
classroom. The residential education
urogram is not an extension of the
formal academic structure; it is its
complement. Although the opportun
,fy for experimenting with courses
given for credit should be open, it is
only one of the myriad of possibilities
with residential education. While
proper planning, particularly in the
■'election of good faculty, is necessary
it would be unrealistic to lose sight
of the interaction from the other di
rection. A structure too rigid would
kill the potential of a residential pro
gram just as the naive assumption
that body shuffling is the whole
answer.
Flexibility and spontaneity are key
<*ords in the concept of what a pro
gram should be prepared to provide.
Fvrit the program should be externally

flexible. The development of the house
spirit would depend upon the inter
action between the particular members
and particular faculty and tutors. This
matter of orientation or direction for
the house could bow with the interest
and demand for a particular living sit
uation. Some programs would last
longer than others, some undoubtedly
will be less successful, some would
evolve of themselves into a new area.
There is flexibility to let the good pro
grams grow and let the bad ones kill
themselves without bringing the entire
system to ruin. A diversity of choice
between residences could be main
tained.
There should in addition be an in
ternal flexibility within each group.
There must be room for growth and
change within the group. If topics were
to be the basis for a house, they would
always have to be picked with enough
latitude to allow each member of the
house to approach it in his own way.
This casua', unstructured opportunity
for close faculty contact speaks directly
to the need of students who are con
cerned with relevance as a criterion of
education, relevance to themselves or
to the contemporary world. There is
much opportunity for the student to
become very involved in the formation
and execution of his own education.
People who are involved and interested
in their own work tend to be more in
terested and able to contribute to the
work of others.
Another possibility that should be
included in the program is the oppor
tunity for experimentation with self
government. All sorts of opportunities
exist outside of the adoption of a hier
archy handed from above of president,
social chairman, etc. . .
There is much to be said for the edu
cationally valuable experience of learn
ing to live with ambiguity and without
automatically following tradition or
the dictates of an authority figure to
create the quality of life of a house
out of what is there ... to create an
educationally meaningful experience.
"The ideas sound great on paper!" is
the old comment at the outset of any
innovation with the rejoiner "But how
do you make it work in reality?" usu
ally not far behind. Why doesn't this
all happen now? Wilbur, the recom
mended site for next year's project,
already has many of the features out
lined in this report. "Is there really
going to be any significant difference?"
might be one question. The answer is
twofold. Some of the kinds of things
this report talks about are already
happening. If they weren't then there
would really be no use in trying to
maximize the interaction. But so much
more could be happening, and many of
the detrimental currents that run con
trary to the purpose of attending a
university could be reduced. All sys
tems are implemented by men. There
is not any system of law, morality or
of a residence university which can
overcome the fallibility of man. There
is not a magical formula implied in this
program, it rests very heavily on the
people who participate but so does
every other system. Good systems help
him along and the committee firmly
feels that a true residential university,
is a better system than one which only
claims to be and is somewhere in the
middle.
The people involved therefore are at
the core of the program. But their
effectiveness will depend to a large
degree upon how they see their role.
Their conception of their role in this
new system must undergo as much
fundamental reinterpretation as the
system itself.
How will the inertia of the present
resident conditions be overcome? Who
will set the tone, provide the mo
mentum, and contribute the leader
ship? Our first answer to these ques
tions is the students themselves. In any
residence system students will unde
niably be the major constituency.. But
how the resident staff can contribute
is also an important issue. At the pres
ent time Stanford has faculty residents,
tutors, resident assistants, and spon
sors. The role of each should be re
viewed.
Faculty Resident*
The committee would certainly not
deny the valuable contribution of the
faculty residents toward improving the
living situation at Stanford, but in
general, the faculty resident program
simply is not given the support neces
sary to tree Its members from -other

tasks and to allow them to devote
more time, thought and emphasis to
the residence education program. The
basic change would be that of increased
commitment to the living situation. The
primary responsibility of the faculty
resident should not be to the dorm di
rector or the administration, but to the
student within the living group or com
plex. To be effective, the faculty resi
dent must be willing to accept a de
manding and time consuming involve
ment in the living situation. His pres
ence there will be much more than a
face at meals or even that of a good
friend. Presumably the resident would
be a full time member of the faculty,
for the success of the residence pro
gram would greatly depend upon his
response to the intellectual needs of the
students. Doctoral candidates, coaches,
university officials, and administrators,
however, could still participate if they
would be willing to make the same
kind of commitment to the ideal of a
residence university. The interpersonal
factor is extremely important in this
kind of situation. Most every student
complains about the brilliant man who
can't give a good lecture. The same
argument will have to be taken into
account that not everyone can fulfill
this particular kind of a role. The fac
ulty resident must, above all, be sensi
tive to the interaction among students
in the group.
The things a faculty member could
contribute are bounded only by their
individual creativity but a few sug
gestions are in order.
1. In certain living units, seminars for
academic credit could be offered.
2. Directed reading could be made avail
able to certain students under the
resident.
3. Informal and noncredit seminars
should be encourage by the faculty
resident or when an idea came out
of the group he or some of his col
leagues could serve as resource per
son.
4. A student chairman and the faculty
resident could set up a meaningful
faculty associate program. The resi
dent can draw upon close friends and
colleagues which would supply an
internal identification missing in the
present program.
What would bring the faculty to par
ticipate in this program? Much of the
same dissatisfaction with student-fac
ulty relations that would bring the
students. Where something lively is
going on, something which the faculty
member is part there would not be
the embarassed ordeals that now take
place in dormitories on campus where
everyone involved is on their best and
most strained behavior. The living con
ditions would be similar to that of an
overseas campus though the professor
would not be required to drop his own
work or leave the center of his re
search. Class loads could be lessened
for the faculty participating because
they would be in essence only relocat
ing their teaching commitments, not
dropping them. They would have a
more flexible time schedule that might
be convenient to their purposes. This
position would also be in effect on a
rotating basis.
Resident Assistants and Tutors
The role of resident assistant should
be eliminated. In other words, we
would eliminate the role of the nice
guy disciplinarian, the liaison between
the administration and the students
who has been for too long forced into
an unfortunate position of hypocrisy.
As he is employed by the administra
tion he has an obligation to enforce
University policies, but if he is to be
at all effective with the students his
identification is with them. Too often
he has resolved the conflict by the
statement, "I don't care what you do,
just do it quietly so I don't see it."
Caught in this bind he has been in
effective as a man playing to two mas
ters. It is not enough to react to stu
dent needs and problems, for the role
we see must be one of creative action —
one of initiative and not merely re
sponse. Similarly, the present tutor
system is limited because its goal is
only to answer questions, not raise
them.
The present role of tutor, however,
is closer to our purpose than the RA's.
But this role must be expanded to be
effective. Thus, the idea of tutors
should be maintained, but its purpose
significantly broadened. Like faculty
residents > (and unlike RA's)' tutors

must have autonomy from primarily ad
ministrative policy and must be respon
sible primarily to the students below.
They should be linked to the resident
director, who is then responsible to the
administration. Although academic
assistance is undeniably important, tu
tors must do more than merely toot.
Their role should be to stimulate dis
cussion, to promote all types of inter
change, and to actively work towards
an educational atmosphere. At present
RA's and tutors tend to preserve rather
than promote and to be problem
solvers, rather than catalysts. The
tutor, like the faculty resident, must
approach his job with a new vitality
and commitment.
Sponsors
When the freshman class has been
entirely integrated into the university
community then the sponsor system
will become an anachronism. But until
that point the need remains and the
present system of sponsors and tutors
should be maintained.
There are two more important con
siderations before any system is put
Into operation. How will the faculty
and tutors be selected? And what are
the costs for the program as a whole?
These problems become relevant and
solvable only after the initial commit
ment and go ahead has been made.
Therefore discussion of these aspects
of the program will be included in
the proposal for next year.
VIII. Brief Assessment of Experience
At Other Institutions
While it is not our intention to base
the justification for our proposals on
the successes and failures of other in
stitutions with their necessarily dif
ferent circumstances, it is interesting
to note the results of a study con
ducted by the Faculty Committee on
Student Residences at Stanford in 1959.
Studying twenty-one similar universities
in this country they found that they
were about equally divided between
integrated and segregated freshman
living facilities. In general each school
seem satisfied with the system it then
had. However, while all of these with
the integrated system found it the most
workable, about 25 per cent of those
with segregated freshmen replied that
they were dissatisfied with their situ
ation and it certainly increases the
noisy freshman atmosphere which is
inimical to good study habits and con
ditions." Some schools reported that
the only reason for maintaining fresh
man segregation was pressure from
the fraternities who "objected stren
uously to placing their pledges under
the influence of hard bitten rugged in
dependents."
The many success of coeducational
housing on other campuses are too well
known to require documentation.
The institutions interviewed were
Cal Tech, Reed, Pembroke, Swarth
more, Oberlin, Pomona, Carleton, Rad
clifTe, Occidental, Ohio Wesleyan, Chi
cago, Brown, Dartmouth, Princeton,
Yale, Harvard, Northwestern, Washing
ton State, Oregon, Cornell, and Ohio
State.
IX. A Proposal:
The Wilbur Experiment
The committee has set forth its ar
guments for coeducational and inte
grated residences. It has suggested that
the residence should be a center of
intellectual life, and through residence
education the rigid separation of the
student's social and intellectual lives
could be ended. It remains for the com
mittee to propose how these aims can
be fulfilled at Stanford.
It is the feeling of the committee
that significant experimentation in resi
dence education is altogether feasible
for next year. There is a wide range
of possibilities. The committee initially
considered a massive scrambling of the
university residence pattern, convert
ing most dormitories on campus to
coeducation and integration. This pro
posal was rejected for two reasons:
(1) Full integration, or anything ap
proaching it, would at this time pro
duce an undesirable ratio of freshmen
to upperclass men. (2) It would be im
possible to supply the staff necessary
to introduce residence education in any
meaningful way if the scope of the
housing experiment is so broad.
The committee decided that its aims
could best be fulfilled by an experiment
of more limited scope. Instead of dras
tically overhauling the university resi
dence pattern, one dormitory complex
could be used as a rather large "pilot"
project, in which * Integratiorr and • eo
education could be complete and intel
lectual life could be given the proper
attention. Wilbur Hall is ideal for this
purpose. It is the largest complex on
campus, with space for approximately
720 people. It is divided into eight
houses, each of which constitutes a
separate identity unit. Each house has
an adjacent cottage for a faculty resi
dent and a tutorial room where semin
ars can be held.
The committee recommends that
next fall each Wilbur house be occu
pied by two floors of men and one
floor of women, and that each house
be integrated by class at a rate of one
freshman to three upperclassmen. Con
stituted as such, Wilbur Hall would be
the site of meaningful experimentation
in residential education.
The Wilbur experiment will of neces
sity affect some of the other university
residences. Freshman men will move to
Stern and Branner, retaining the spon
sor system in its present form. Fresh
man women will remain in Roble, with
sponsors, and those living in neither
Roble or Wilbur will be integrated with
upperclass women in Florence Moore.
Lagunita, Hoskins, and Toyon will be
unaffected. The remaining upperclass
men will live in three of the row
houses. The statistical breakdown is
as follows.
Total Frosh Upcl. Total Frosh Upcl.
Men Men Men W'ran W'mn Wmn
Wilbur 480 120 360 240 60 180
Stem 590 570 20
Branner 170 160 10
Roble 260 250 10
Florence
Moore 350 90 260
Lagunita 290 0 290
Hoskins 120 0 120
Toyon 200 0 200
Row
Houses (3)100 0 100
(5) 180 0 180
Totals 1540 850 690 1440 400 1040
(Note: If women are allowed to move
off campus, adjustments can be made
easily. If the number of women moving
off is under 180, an appropriate num
ber of row houses can be converted
from women to men. Compensation
can also be made by admitting more
freshman and transfer women. If

necessary the measures can be com
bined. )
Students will be chosen for the Wil
bur experiment on a draw basis. It is
reasonable to expect an excess demand
for on-campus housing by upperclass
men, since a new option is being of
fered that will presumably attract men
who presently or would otherwise live
off campus, or in fraternities. The com
ration of the upperclassmen's popu
lation in Wilbur would thus differ
from the present composition of Stem.
If women are allowed off campus, there
would be a greater possibility of satis
fying the demand for men's housing.
The likelihood of vacant dormitory
space, with the introduction of the
Wilbur option, is highly improbable.
The logistics of putting the bodies
into Wilbur for the pilot project is
only half of our task in our proposal.
The problems of staffing the complex
and from there working out feasible
programs is the next step. Hopefully
to make this pilot project a real step
toward achieving the residential uni
versity, as much of the general report
as possible will be included, only the
scope has changed not the purpose of
the program.
Selection for next year's faculty resi
dents could be turned over to a com
mittee composed of one faculty and
one student member of the ASSU
Housing Commission and two members
from the Dean of Students Office, with
the advice of the present Committee.
Once this task has been completed, the
faculty can participate in choosing the
tutors and drawing up more detailed
plans for the program.
The committee realizes that a com
mitment to this kind of residential
education will require an overt shift
in educational effort from the class
room and lab to the residence, with
both compensation for it and relief
from other teaching duties—and quite
probably the replacement of their
other more formal academic functions
by other personnel. We also realize
that there will be a budget problem,
but emphatically deny that worthwhile
educational goals should not be pro
posed and slated because of current
pragmatic limitations.
The committee hopes that, through

further study—best done in conjunc
tion with the study of education at
Stanford—that it will be possible to
rearrange and reemphasize the com
ponents of freshman education in such
a way that existing resources would
permit a serious upgrading of resi
dence education, and the possibility
that such education could replace some
aspects of the present program. This
might well allow the same total re
sources of money and people to meet
the desired objectives by shifting the
locale and method of teaching, rather
than just adding to the staff and pro
gram.
Presently in Wilbur there are three
sponsor rooms and one tutor room
which can accommodate the new tutors.
Hopefully as many of these rooms will
be used for that purpose, but if for
any reason four tutors per house is im
possible, then the rooms could be used
for offices which would at least bring
more graduate level contact into the
residence.
One possible suggestion for Wilbur's
eight houses next year would be to
have five of them centered around a
general theme, one international house,
and two left unstructured. There has
been much agitation for an interna
tional house on campus and many pro
posals have been drawn up. Five sug
gested topics for the theme houses are
"Religion and Society," "Literature and
Fine Arts," "Science and Human Prob
lems," "The Urban Threat," and "So
cial Change."
To take only one of these themes and
speculate what the given house of
faculty, tutors and students will make
of it is another of those endless first
steps in imagination potential. The
house that was using the topic "Science
and Human Problems," for example,
would bring in a diversity of fields
from the natural sciences to the hu
manities. Many of the poignant prob
lems facing students and faculty are
centered in this topic but the same
could probably be said in a different
context for each of the five topics. The
impact of technology on our economic
and social system, the moral contro
versy over the newest discoveries in
genetics, the myth of the scientific
method are all themes to be explored.

What happens to a world view when
scientific discoveries puncture com
fortable philosophies? What is time
and how does man control it and how
docs it control man? These are ques
tions to be asked. Above all, it is im
portant to remember that the direc
tion of intellectual thrust must not be
too well defined in advance. One of
the most valuable experiences for the
living group will be coming to grips
with the topic, deciding for themselves
how the general area should be ap
proached, and then proceeding to de
velop programs and structures on their
own.
The committee is highly enthusiastic
about the creative possibilities pre
sented by the Wilbur experiment—the
first step in the direction of a fully
integrated and coeducational residence.
If the experiment even approaches the
measure of success the committee en
visions, it could prove a major innova
tion in the history of American higher
education. A well developed program
of residential education offers a poten
tial of immeasurable dimension.
X. Correlation of this report with the
overall review of education at Stanford
The key problems of residence edu
cational stimulus and the kind of staff
and budget commitments necessary
need further specific elucidations which
the committee hopes can be under
taken by the Executive Committee for
the study of education at the earliest
opportunity, in order to agree on ob
jectives and make necessary staff and
financial plans for the Wilbur Project
to be able to start in the Fall of 1967.
The committee takes this oppor
tunity to thank the following people
for individual contributions to our
meetings: Dwight Clark, Dr. Lawrence
Thomas, Miss Sally Mahoney, Dr. Mar
tin Evans, Dick Williams, Mike Roster,
Howie Holmes, Doug Davis, Bob Gor
don, Dean Hind, and Dean Novak.
February 6, 1967
Subcommittee on the Freshmen Resi
dence Program ASSU Housing Com
mission. Barbara Levin, Judy Bader.
Barbara Warren, David Koval, Chris
topher Harte, Douglas Sorenson, Scott
Soames (Co-Chairman) Elizabeth
Cohen, B. Davie Napier, Max
Maurice M. Osborne Jr. (Co-Chairman).
education could be complete and intel
lectual life could be given the proper
attention. Wilbur Hall is ideal for this
purpose. It is the largest complex on
campus, with space for approximately
720 people. It is divided into eight
houses, each of which constitutes a
separate identity unit. Each house has
an adjacent cottage for a faculty resi
dent and a tutorial room where semin
ars can be held.
The committee recommends that
next fall each Wilbur house be occu
pied by two floors of men and one
floor of women, and that each house
be integrated by class at a rate of one
freshman to three upperclassmen. Con
stituted as such, Wilbur Hall would be
the site of meaningful experimentation
in residential education.
The Wilbur experiment will of neces
sity affect some of the other university
residences. Freshman men will move to
Stern and Branner, retaining the spon
sor system in its present form. Fresh
man women will remain in Roble, with
sponsors, and those living in neither
Roble or Wilbur will be integrated with
upperclass women in Florence Moore.
Lagunita, Hoskins, and Toyon will be
unaffected. The remaining upperclass
men will live in three of the row
houses. The statistical breakdown is
as follows.
Total Frosh Upcl. Total Frosh Upcl.
Men Men Men W'ran W'mn Wmn
Wilbur 480 120 360 240 60 180
Stem 590 570 20
Branner 170 160 10
Roble 260 250 10
Florence
Moore 350 90 260
Lagunita 290 0 290
Hoskins 120 0 120
Toyon 200 0 200
Row
Houses (3)100 0 100
(5) 180 0 180
Totals 1540 850 690 1440 400 1040
(Note: If women are allowed to move
off campus, adjustments can be made
easily. If the number of women moving
off is under 180, an appropriate num
ber of row houses can be converted
from women to men. Compensation
can also be made by admitting more
freshman and transfer women. If

necessary the measures can be com
bined. )
Students will be chosen for the Wil
bur experiment on a draw basis. It is
reasonable to expect an excess demand
for on-campus housing by upperclass
men, since a new option is being of
fered that will presumably attract men
who presently or would otherwise live
off campus, or in fraternities. The com
ration of the upperclassmen's popu
lation in Wilbur would thus differ
from the present composition of Stem.
If women are allowed off campus, there
would be a greater possibility of satis
fying the demand for men's housing.
The likelihood of vacant dormitory
space, with the introduction of the
Wilbur option, is highly improbable.
The logistics of putting the bodies
into Wilbur for the pilot project is
only half of our task in our proposal.
The problems of staffing the complex
and from there working out feasible
programs is the next step. Hopefully
to make this pilot project a real step
toward achieving the residential uni
versity, as much of the general report
as possible will be included, only the
scope has changed not the purpose of
the program.
Selection for next year's faculty resi
dents could be turned over to a com
mittee composed of one faculty and
one student member of the ASSU
Housing Commission and two members
from the Dean of Students Office, with
the advice of the present Committee.
Once this task has been completed, the
faculty can participate in choosing the
tutors and drawing up more detailed
plans for the program.
The committee realizes that a com
mitment to this kind of residential
education will require an overt shift
in educational effort from the class
room and lab to the residence, with
both compensation for it and relief
from other teaching duties—and quite
probably the replacement of their
other more formal academic functions
by other personnel. We also realize
that there will be a budget problem,
but emphatically deny that worthwhile
educational goals should not be pro
posed and slated because of current
pragmatic limitations.
The committee hopes that, through

further study—best done in conjunc
tion with the study of education at
Stanford—that it will be possible to
rearrange and reemphasize the com
ponents of freshman education in such
a way that existing resources would
permit a serious upgrading of resi
dence education, and the possibility
that such education could replace some
aspects of the present program. This
might well allow the same total re
sources of money and people to meet
the desired objectives by shifting the
locale and method of teaching, rather
than just adding to the staff and pro
gram.
Presently in Wilbur there are three
sponsor rooms and one tutor room
which can accommodate the new tutors.
Hopefully as many of these rooms will
be used for that purpose, but if for
any reason four tutors per house is im
possible, then the rooms could be used
for offices which would at least bring
more graduate level contact into the
residence.
One possible suggestion for Wilbur's
eight houses next year would be to
have five of them centered around a
general theme, one international house,
and two left unstructured. There has
been much agitation for an interna
tional house on campus and many pro
posals have been drawn up. Five sug
gested topics for the theme houses are
"Religion and Society," "Literature and
Fine Arts," "Science and Human Prob
lems," "The Urban Threat," and "So
cial Change."
To take only one of these themes and
speculate what the given house of
faculty, tutors and students will make
of it is another of those endless first
steps in imagination potential. The
house that was using the topic "Science
and Human Problems," for example,
would bring in a diversity of fields
from the natural sciences to the hu
manities. Many of the poignant prob
lems facing students and faculty are
centered in this topic but the same
could probably be said in a different
context for each of the five topics. The
impact of technology on our economic
and social system, the moral contro
versy over the newest discoveries in
genetics, the myth of the scientific
method are all themes to be explored.

What happens to a world view when
scientific discoveries puncture com
fortable philosophies? What is time
and how does man control it and how
docs it control man? These are ques
tions to be asked. Above all, it is im
portant to remember that the direc
tion of intellectual thrust must not be
too well defined in advance. One of
the most valuable experiences for the
living group will be coming to grips
with the topic, deciding for themselves
how the general area should be ap
proached, and then proceeding to de
velop programs and structures on their
own.
The committee is highly enthusiastic
about the creative possibilities pre
sented by the Wilbur experiment—the
first step in the direction of a fully
integrated and coeducational residence.
If the experiment even approaches the
measure of success the committee en
visions, it could prove a major innova
tion in the history of American higher
education. A well developed program
of residential education offers a poten
tial of immeasurable dimension.
X. Correlation of this report with the
overall review of education at Stanford
The key problems of residence edu
cational stimulus and the kind of staff
and budget commitments necessary
need further specific elucidations which
the committee hopes can be under
taken by the Executive Committee for
the study of education at the earliest
opportunity, in order to agree on ob
jectives and make necessary staff and
financial plans for the Wilbur Project
to be able to start in the Fall of 1967.
The committee takes this oppor
tunity to thank the following people
for individual contributions to our
meetings: Dwight Clark, Dr. Lawrence
Thomas, Miss Sally Mahoney, Dr. Mar
tin Evans, Dick Williams, Mike Roster,
Howie Holmes, Doug Davis, Bob Gor
don, Dean Hind, and Dean Novak.
February 6, 1967
Subcommittee on the Freshmen Resi
dence Program ASSU Housing Com
mission. Barbara Levin, Judy Bader.
Barbara Warren, David Koval, Chris
topher Harte, Douglas Sorenson, Scott
Soames (Co-Chairman) Elizabeth
Cohen, B. Davie Napier, Max
Maurice M. Osborne Jr. (Co-Chairman).
Doubts of the ability of Stanford's
present educational system to provide
for the needs of its students, and speci
fic questions about the relevance of
the residence program in its present
form, have stimulated students, faculty,
and staff to seek more appropriate
solutions.
The A.S.S.U., concerned about the
quality of residential experience at
Stanford — particularly in contrast to
that at the Overseas Campuses —
created through its Legislature a Hous
ing Commission, one task of which was
to review and make recommendations
concerning the freshman residence
program in its relation to education.
At about the same time, Associate
Dean of Students Robert Gordon was
asked to present proposals for a new
model of freshman residential educa
tion.
Both A.S.S.U. and Dean Gordon al
most simultaneously appointed com
mittees in the early Fall of 1966 to ad
vise them in the making of recommen
dations in this important area, and
rather than continue a too-familiar pat
tern of separate committees working
independently (and often divergently)
it was decided to merge the two.
In the merger, the Dean's Advisory
Committee agreed to accept the A.S.S.U.
invitation to become an integral part,
of its group. Dean Gordon agreed to
accept the report of the entire group
in the same light as he would have the
recommendations of his originally ap
pointed committee, and the merged
group in turn agreed to attempt in
good faith to assist him in meeting his
deadlines and obligations as best it
could.
Despite particular questions existing
about the Sponsor system, the Commit
tee felt from the outset that to limit
its discussions and report to such par
ticulars, or to start out with them,
would be to avoid the main Issues sur
rounding ,the quality and meaning of

residential education at Stanford, par
ticularly the freshman program.
The Committee thus firmly decided
that it would start from a fresh con
sideration of the issues and principles
involved, relating its recommendations
to them. It was recognized that such
an approach would be time consuming,
that it might seem Utopian to some;
yet a critque and basic statement about
the ideas of a residence university
seemed vital for future planning and
growth.
At the same time, the practical ne
cessity for more immediate recommen
dations and action was realized. The
present report is in this sense a pre
liminary, or interim report, which at
tempts to set forth and justify some
practical recommendations for residence
programs that could be adopted in
1967-68 — steps within the framework
of progression towards a more ideal
situation.
The Case for the Residential Commu
nity — The Personal Committment to
Learning
The impossibility of considering the
freshman experience in isolation from
the life and purposes of the entire un
dergraduate program has been a ma
jor premise in the subcommittee's
study of the Freshman Residence Pro
gram. Two main assumptions underlie
this approach.
One is that the university experience,
as a whole, is only one part of the con
tinuum of the educational process, a
process which neither begins nor ends
at the university gates. The educational
ideals should be the same for all four
undergraduate years in terms of what
they declare for the growth of persons.
The freshman year is only a step in
a span of development, having a spe
cial function as the first step but not
a separate one.
The second is a new conception which
views the university as a community
for learning through personal, interac
,tjon, find development,. .nsp, of

all its facilities for education. This view
emphasizes that the classroom, library
or laboratory cannot — indeed does not
even now — have a monopoly on pro
viding for the education and develop
ment of students. Else, why a residen
tial university? Why not subcontract
all residential arrangements and avoid
hotel problems?
The Committee felt strongly that
there was urgent need for institutional
endorsement of the fact that without
growth and development in personal,
social, and emotional dimensions, the
achievements of intellect are shallow
and stand in isolation from the indivi
dual and his world. The conviction that
gives personal meaning to knowledge
is a product of direct human relation
ship, and we make far too little use
of its potential.
In a more settled and comfortable
past, with much greater mutuality of
expectations and values both between
peers and between generations, the ur
gency of such questions was less, the
scope more limited and the answers
more predictable. The bull-session quite
effectively handled many aspects of
this personal-social side of development.
For this, and other reasons, relatively
little formal attention to it was felt
to be necessary, aside from some for
mal lectures on hygiene, the evils of
sex and booze, and the Fundamental
Standard. After all, boys were (and
would be) boys, and pretty soon they'd
grow up into men, producers and fa
thers. Home and society would take
care somehow that they grew up right,
and the college would provide an ac
cepted transition station on the way,
some academic input, and try to keep
the lid on boyish spirit getting out of
hand.
By contrast today, for many students
questions about one's nature, and about
one's relationship to an uncertain
world, and about this world itself are
more insistent, and more pre-occupying
.before The V&iefttipns a#?, -real,

and require believable answers from
within the individual. And, until he can
find them, this quest, this preoccupa
tion has top priority, while academics
suffer through seeming less relevant.
And though there are many students
who are relatively unconcerned about
such questions, we feel their total edu
cation would be enriched if they could
be purposefully involved.
The history of formal didactic at
tempts to speak to these burning ques
tions is rather dismal, and all over the
country, there has been a steady atro
phy of required, and even of voluntary
courses relative to personal hygiene,
sex, morals, and behavior. Both stu
dents and educators sense that because
a viable set of personal ethics and
values just grow within the individual,
attempts simply to impose them from
without are relatively futile.
Not only have curricular approaches
to such questions atrophied (happi
ly!), but American education is nearing
the end of a decade in which the entire
necessity of addressing itself to the
problem of personal growth has been
quite deliberately rejected. Sputnik was
the symbol, and such spokesmen as
Hyman Rickover took up the cudgels,
with articulate and seathing denuncia
tions of "Education for Living" — of
concepts of "adjustment," and insisted,
along with many others, on intellectual
excellence (for "excellence" read "a
chievement") as the right, and only
purpose of education.
Growth of population; of national
wealth with its stimulus to upward so
cial mobility; increasing complexity
and diversity of knowledge with its
concommitant of faculty pre-occupa
tion and relatively-narrower fields; and
increased competition have sharpened
the pressures for achievement, leaving
even loss time, thought, or energy for
development as a person.
The need to pay most serious atten
tion to this is most keenly felt by many
studetitfi hy their eldprs.
There has been some re-emergence of
an expressed need for leadership and
cooperation in working out better ways
to assist and support the individual in
his personal education and develop
ment, and when students do not raise
these questions, their education should
raise them, and speak to them.
Unstructured and spontaneous stu
dent discussion, particularly at the
freshman level, is heavily-flavored with
the need to sort oneself out, but as it
now operates, it tends less to growth
than to its more traditional social func
tion of settling into "bird-of-a-feather"
groupings in which the individual
can find comfort and support for his
own sets of values and seekings. With
in this spontaneously-forming group
ings, the dialogue tends to become in
creasingly circular, the values increas
ingly exclusive, and there is decreased
permeability to fresh ideas and ex
perience.
In an educational situation where
concentration is placed on the formal
aspects of education there is an imbal
ance which produces distortion, which
too often takes the form of rejection
of the academic sphere as "irrelevant."
Another consequence is the dangerous
polarization of university life into two
worlds; that of the classroom, and that
of social life, setting them to work
against each other instead of with each
other toward the individual's goals. The
acceptance of the residence university
ideal as being vital to education can
be one important factor in keeping
the two worlds together and moving in
the same direction, whereas the pres
ent residence program presents too
many forces that divide living from
learning.
The Committee takes as self-evident
that a truly liberal education is in fact
liberating — in making both wider and
deeper the individual's ability to per
ceive, absorb, analyze, and choose in a
vastly-increasing array of people,
events, and issues, and not in forcing
the premature adoption of limited, and
constricting attitudes. In effect this
seems the necessity of the student's
continuous and repeated exposure to
and challenge by diversity of ideas, of
values, styles, and of course people.
It is here that the meaning of residen
tial education springs to life, for it of
fers potentially the best milieu for
daily face-to-face interaction with peers,
with older students, and faculty mem
bers of both sexes — offering diversity
of age, sex, discipline and values in
the highly personal way so necessary
for exposure to lead to involvement,
and knowledge to become commitment.
The necessity of direct personal in
teraction is most strongly endorsed by
the Committee, for it is the set of
values and mental attitudes formed in
such day-in, day-out exchange that set
tle most deeply into one's fiber. Thus
to narrow the range, or dilute the qual
ity of this exchange seems antiethical
to education. Kenneth Benne, in his
article "The Uses of Fraternity" states
in this regard, "People learn value sys
tems in the first instance as they form
relations with others. These relations
in turn develop norms with corres
ponding rationales which the individual
then internalizes. If people, young or
old, can build groups with standards
that reward and strengthen honest
self - expression and self - acceptance,
creativity, mutual helpfulness and the
capacity to cope with conflict, then the
members of such groups will assimilate
these values as conditions of member
ship."
Choice, and learning to choose ra
tionally, are important educational
tasks, but should not be forced on the
individual too hurriedly, without
enough exposure to a wide range of
choices, nor without some room for
trial and error.
In summary then, the Committee
firmly believes that:
1. As education is, or should be, a con
tinuum, the freshman year cannot
be considered in isolation from the
entire undergraduate program, and al
though it has a special function as
the first step, it is an integral part
of the whole.
2. There is a grave imbalance in the
university's educational emphasis,
which tends to widen the needless,
and in our view harmful, gap be
tween the getting of knowledge and
the important business of living.
3. The deepest personal and intellectual
cpncems of students — their rela
tionships to themselves, and to an

uncertain world, — are not receiving
the institutional recognition and ef
fort they deserve.
4. That people learn most deeply by
living, and by forming personal re
lationships, and that when the resi
dence program, as at present, is
oriented to bed, board, and social
needs, the opportunities for inter
nalizing intellectual knowledge and
values are meager, and the tenden
cies to reject academic values as per
sonally-irrelevant are reinforced.
5. That choice, and learning to choose
critically are central educational
goals, but that it must depend on
close and repeated exposure to a
wide range of ideas, values, styles,
and people — people of different
ages, disciplines, sexes, and back
grounds, — and not be prematurely
forced into constricting channels
based primarily on social and not in
tellectual values.
6. Such close exposure to diversity, over
sufficient time, and if taken as the
norm, would go far in preventing
the formation of narrowed and
sterotypic attitudes and thought —
the surest signs of the ill-educated
man.
7. The way in which students live very
directly affects the whole quality of
their education: this single principle
underpins the whole concept of the
residential university.
"THE FRESHMAN CONDITION"
The paraphrase above in intentional,
— and designed to point out that being
a freshman at Stanford, or anywhere,
is an intensely personal experience of
transition. Although the general ideals
of education apply equally, — and es
pecially, — to him, the freshman also
has attributes which make him special,
but not separate.
It is the feeling of this committee
that freshmen can and should receive
the benefit of special experiences de
signed for their particular problems.
The assumption that we would like to
question is whether this need for some
special orientation experiences necessi
tates their living in a segragated fash
ion. Although it is expedient from an
"efficiency" point of view, it may gen
erate excessive anxiety over perfor
mance in freshman courses and a rein
forcement for essentially juvenile
modes of facing college stresses. His
special attributes can be summed up as
follows:
A. He obviously needs early and reli
able information about his new com
munity — where things are, what he
is to do, and so forth.
B. He is making the transition most
traditionally accepted in America as
the line between family dependency
and personal autonomy.
In actuality, the line, if there is one,
is blurred, and varies greatly from one
freshman to another. In general, the
freshman comes equipped with the cre
dentials of previous achievement and
approval — hoping he will be accepted
in his new college world, and fearing
that he may not. At the same time he
hopes that his performance and life
will be freer and larger than before.
The freshman, more poignantly than
any other undergraduate, in his transi
tion from a narrower to a hopefully
wider identity, wants the understand
ing of his old world, personal accep
tance by the new — and fears he may
have neither.
He is thus enormously vulnerable,
and as Steve Hurlbut has written in
his excellent paper, is characterized by
a "pervasive anxiety." Until he has as
similated workable norms, he feels he's
got to satisfy some kind of external
standard, and is anxious until he does.
Some more specific stresses that tend
to promote anxiety are:
I.The sudden change of status that
comes from being taken out of a
high school situation where one is
enormously successful and being put
in a class of similar big frogs from
small ponds, and feeling that they
are tougher frogs than he is:
2. The doubt about being able to live up
to tough academic demands:
3. Doubts about his being accepted by
his peers — of both sexes;
4. Being away from home;
5. Confrontation with different reli
gious and social values than those
the student has learned in his family
and home community;
6. Ambivalence about authority, and
older peopje in general.
This araciety and vulnerability are by

no means bad in themselves — and in
deed offer the most fertile soil for cul
tivation of the seeking young mind.
But the thrust of this searching anxiety
is in essence social, and approval-seek
ing — and therefore related to persons
and social groups, or the winning of ac
ceptable symbols of achievement.
The Committee feels that the perva
sive, and expectable freshman anxiety
and search for some group identity is
a double-edged sword, with potential
for both regression and for growth.
On one side, if there is failure of
approval from home, or personal ac
ceptance at college, or fewer grade
points "in the bank" than expected,
anxiety may well become dysfunction
al, with consequences such as neurotic
disturbance, refusal to compete aca
demically, and even regressive and
anti-social group-adolescent behavior,
and the reinforcement of pre-college
values.
CRITIQUE OF THE PRESENT
FRESHMAN RESIDENCE PROGRAM
The Committee feels that too many
features of the present freshman resi
dence program serve:
1. To reinforce natural anxieties among
the newest members of the Univer
sity, and
2. To promote the seeking of solutions
to this anxiety that have little if any
thing to do with educational pur
poses, but tend to promote prema
ture and mutually exclusive social
groupings.
As he moves into a freshman resi
dence, he is thrown into close contact
with a large peer-group of greater
diversity in background, attitudes, and
talent than he is likely to have known.
And, because competition and fears of
failure are keenest among peers (par
ticularly of neophytes performing simi
lar tasks,) these differences within the
larger peer-group tend to move the stu
dent into protective subgroups of
peers with attitudes and pre-college
backgrounds similar to his own, within
which he finds support. In such mutual
ly-supportive social groups, the student
can arm himself and defend himself
psychologically against any new ideas
to which he is being exposed, from fel
low students, members of the opposite
sex, and his professors. Studies will
never be taken at all seriously but will
be dealt with in a purely cognitive
fashion, ingested for the purpose of
passing exams and discarded soon af
terwards. Under these conditions, we
may have done away with the prob
lems of anxiety, but are faced with the
possibility of at least two other un
desirable consequences, 1) His atti
tudes and values may remain totally
unquestioned throughout his college
career; and 2) a group devoted to de
fending itself against the climate of an
institution may exhibit anti-social char
acteristics of alienated people every
where.
That present groups formed for mu
tual support emerge after a limited
exposure to new, and possible better
models, is certainly true, and groupings
tend to occur along pre-college lines
and values, or in rebellion against
them.
The present segregated freshman
residence situation also tends:
3. To promote the seeking of achieve
ment symbols (i.e. grades) rather
than knowledge of self or substance;
4. By a residence administration seen
as primarily regulatory and manger
ial, to aggravate the natural ambi
valence of freshmen towards author
ity with results ranging from thought
less docility to destructive rebellion;
or apathetic alienation;
5. To provide too much pressure for
distortion and ritualization of rela
tionships between the sexes — the
"dating syndrome" — and a poverty
of opportunities for simple, friendly
interaction of people, a lack fre
quently deplored by both freshmen
and upperclassmen.
Both architecture and group pres
sures, as well as well-institutionalized
pressures for achieving good grades
in a heavy curriculum conspire to rob
the freshman of privacy — both physi
cal privacy, and temporal privacy; i.e.
some time simply to be himself, to spin
his wheels, and to think, with room for
trial and error.
There is, at least in Wilbur, no at
mosphere in the dining halls in the
least conducive to conversation — and
for some reason, plastic and formica
encourage one to get In and out fast,

with emphasis on feeding the face, but
none on nourishing friendship.
All of these (observable) results are
Inimical to the purposes of stimulating
interest in new subjects, of promoting
constructive reaction to diversity, of
the discouragement of stereotypic
thinking and behavior, and of trust in
older people as human beings.
More importantly, the positive po
tentials of freshman vulnerability go
relatively untapped — or are being tap
ped for outworn purposes. For this
vulnerability is personal, and if pro
vided with daily personal interaction
with a wide range of interesting
people of different ages and different
disciplines, there is more than a good
chance that Stanford freshmen would
attach their enthusiasms and their
hearts to the new models they need
and seek — models of greater depth
and diversity, but providing the identi
ty and security they need.
The interaction between freshman
men in Wilbur and the Faculty Resi
dents has varied greatly in its intensity
and impact — with instances of great
fruitfulness, or relative neutrality and
harmony, and a very few of a truly
negative quality.
Faculty Associates to freshman resi
dences have often provided important
personal interactions between fresh
men and the faculty — but just as
often these contacts have been super
ficial and ritualized.
Sponsors, while providing the great
est impact in personal exchange, pre
sent, because of their small number,
relatively limited contact with upper
classmen's values and experiences.
While all these personal contacts in
the freshman residences do in fact en
rich the education of many freshmen,
the other fact remains that there are
simply not enough such contacts, nor
sufficient support and time for these
few people to give residential educa
tion the emphasis it deserves.
EVOLUTION OF THE PRESENT
FRESHMAN RESIDENCE PROGRAM
Whatever rationalizations may be
adduced in support of the present
freshman residence program, it ap
pears to the Committee that it is in
large measure a holdover from an
earlier set of norms — norms that re
ceived wide acceptance and support in
those times, but that are under serious
question *oday.
In the Teens, the Twenties, and even
well into the Thirties, there was more
general acceptance (in society at large
as well as in the university commu
nity) of a particular hierarchical order,
and the particular authority structure
such an order implies. One tended to
know where one stood in relation to
the order at any given period, and to
be confident that one would ascend the
ladder by predictable steps.
Perhaps because of the relative sta
bility of the social order, personal de
velopment was thought of more along
the lines of advancement within that
order — with of course the acquisition
of enough "knowledge" and academic
polish to secure preference in vocations
and the status of a college-educated
man. It was important in itself to be
a senior, or for that matter an upper
classman, and the class structure had
in itself real meaning to the student.
Hence, the development of class spirit
and cohesiveness was valued, encour
aged, and ritualized. Even the major
steps in progression along the well
worn rungs were ritualized in such
rites of passage as the annual "Frosh-
Soph War," a ritual which would have
been impossible had there been no such
open class distinction.
The residence arrangements prob
ably reflected an accept? e of this
order according to social and culture
values of the day, and were aimed at
initiating the freshman into them. A
deliberate segration of the neophyte —
either by residence, by distinguishing
badges (viz. the "Beanie"), by restric
tion of privilege, or by combinations
of these has in many human organiza
tions, served to reinforce acculturation
to desired social and behavioral norms,
and whether anyone was purposefully
aware of this or not, such considera
tions surely operated in freshman resi
dential segragation. Aside from "home
work" performed in a dorm, there was
a rather strict geographic separation
of intellectual-academic concerns and
the personal-social sphere. The class
room and laboratory (and one's closed
~oom or the stacks) were meant for
the'one — while the dorm was really
for the other, and largely designed for
it.
The early history of the sponsor
program, when Encina Hall was the
freshman men's dorm, illustrates well
its use as an instrument for indoctri
nation of the "hapless Frosh" into pre
vailing upperclassmen's values.
Most sponsors wore a block "S", and
embodied a prevailing ideal of social
and athletic prowess, coupled with a
sense of loyalty to the group, respect
for authority, and an obligation to be
exemplary to their potential succes
sors. As recently as 1955, the effective
ness of a sponsor was measured, among
other things, by the percentage of his
charges attending the pregame rallies
and intercollegiate games.
Most sponsors were also fraternity
men, and another measure of his suc
cess as a sponsor was the number of
his freshmen pledged. For the spon
sors, there was little conflict involved
in serving simultaneously the fresh
men, one's own upperclassman values,
and those of the institution and its
authorities, for all constituents had
pretty much the same understanding
of the system, and of each of their
places within it.
In the intervening years, particularly
those since World War 11, there have
been profound changes in the social
order — a disruption of settled commu
nity, sharpened preoccupations with
material competition, and a culture less
and less sure of where it stood, or what
it believed in. Particularly among those
intelligent enough to attend such col
leges as Stanford, there has been in
creasing criticism of existing institu
tions which seem to them to produce
as leaders men with narrowed vision,
preoccupation with power, and too
little time or love for people. In this
climate of malaise, and in the absence
of once tacitly-held assurances, the
young person's search for personal
identity, relevance, and belief has
emerged as a very important difference
between many students of today and
of the previous generation, and again
underscores the vital importance of the
living group experience.
Despite some expressed dissatisfac
tions with the existing sponsor system,
the sponsors and a few feculty resi
dents at Wilbur were quite probably
the first to sense both this new and
urgent need among the freshmen (and
of course in themselves,) and that the
approach to it had to be met at the
level of day-in, day-out personal inter
action.
The evolution of the present sponsor
system has been a response both to
the growing need for attention to per
sonal education and development, and
to the need to substitute a drive for
continuous search and openness for the
more comfortable, but rather water
tight, social groupings which they saw
taking place.
For the past few years, the sponsors
have been the real pioneers in residen
ital education in the freshman resi
dence program. To condemn them as
"politically motivated" or irresponsible
seems a rather defensive and negative
reaction to the admitted mistakes of
a few members, and more importantly
fails to recognize that, without much
help or understanding, they are on the
track of something very important.
There have, to be sure, been other
efforts in the direction of residential
education for freshmen — relatively
cautious additions which have been in
the general direction of enriching per
sonal experience and contact in the.
residences, and may represent an in
choate recognition of this need.
Such additions have been the Facul
ty Residents, the Faculty Associates,
the Student Associates — at first men,
later women — and later, more free
dom for dining exchanges. More for
mally, in-residence seminars, guests-in
residence, panel discussions, and even
classes have been introduced.
But the former additions (with the
exception of a few Faculty Residents)
have in general provided only super
ficial interactions, while the latter
(again with a few notable exceptions)
have borne little relation to life and
living education other than physical
proximity. There is a heavy implica
tion of the mere introduction of more
academics into residences — while the
.ru#ot iT.nortant questions to students
go, for the most part, unanswered.
Th< present freshmen residence pro
gram, in its segregation by class, by

sex, by its continued reinforcement of
separation of living from learning, is
anachronistic, and reflects values that
have become less relevant and ideas that
are no longer true — such as assump
tions that satisfactory personal devel
opment takes care of itself within an
accepted and orderly framework, (of
which the freshman class is one clear
step, houses and all); that personal
education and development are irrele
vant to, or at least peripheral to the
purposes of "Higher Education"; that
mutually-deaf social groupings are ac
ceptable parts of the social mosaic —
when the fact of the matter is that we
are badly failing to meet these now
paramount questions. Despite our be
ginning attentions to this need, the
main thrust of the freshman resi
dence program and the academic pro
gram, still tends to leave the freshman
alone in his search and to force him
into protective groupings.
FRESHMAN IN3PEORATION INTO
UNIVERSITY IJFE
As discussed above, the Committee
feels strongly that the present segre
gation of freshmen reflects values no
longer taken seriously, reinforces the
separation of learning from living
(with impoverishment of both), height
ens some dysfunctional anxieties, and
tends to force premature and relative
ly narrow security groupings, rein
forces the artificiality of contact be
tween the sexes, and alienates students
from the faculty.
Thus, segregation is in itself a cen
tral problem, and, of course, the alter
natives must be aimed at integration
of the freshman in one or more ways.
A. Coeducational Housing
As noted earlier, a major problem
for freshmen is the difficulty of estab
lishing relationships with members of
the opposite sex on any basis other
than a social or dating level. For fresh
man men, the problem is especially
acute, manifesting itself in a heighten
ing anxiety, increased insecurity, and
frustration. The institution of a sys
tem of coeducational housing would
not only ameliorate the undesirable so
cial position of freshman men but also
provide an atmosphere conducive to
more natural (spontaneous) and per
sonal relationships. Upperclassmen al
so face similar problems as the results
of a segragated housing system, and
they too could gain much from having
the option of a coeducational residence
program.
That such a program is both prac
tical and desirable is supported by the
acknowledged success of the overseas
campus program as a living and learn
ing experience. In addition, the appar
ent success of the Grove Project as a
coeducational residence suggests that
coeducation can be successful on the
home campus.
The committee believes that, in the
long run, coeducational housing should
be the prevailing, although not exclu
sive, pattern for residential education
at Stanford, and that significant steps
can and should be taken toward this
goal during the coming year, 1967-68.
Although some houses segregated by
sex should be retained for these stu
dents who do not wish to live in a co
educational residence, a major effort
should be directed toward providing
coeducational housing in its most sig
nificant sense, men and women living
in the same house. Even these houses
which remain segregated could be
placed in juxtaposition to increase the
interaction among men and women.
The goal of a residence housing both
men and women would be most effect
ively realized if the ratio is approxi
mately 1:1. Although the 1:1 ratio Is
most desirable, a ratio of 2:1 would,
we feel, be successful.
As a long range goal the Committee
recommends changing of th« admis
sions ratio to one that is closer to 1:1
as a step towards this ideal.
B. Integration of classes:
As discussed more fully in Section
111 of this report, the freshman year is
a period of growth in which freshmen
must adjust to what for many of them
is a totally new culture, with new and
demanding standards. This situation re
quires a certain amount of social sup
port to prevent excessive and destruc
tive anxiety.
The committee is convinced that the
freshman residence program too often
promotes a seeurity that reduces expo
sure to challenging and growth-moti
vating aspects of university life, there
by retarding development, rather than

preparing the freshman to meet the
challenges which are in a large mea
sure responsible for his insecurity. In
addition, individual anxieties often re
inforce each other to the detriment of
all concerned.
While it is agreed that there is val
uable support and learning through
contact with others engaged in the
same experience, this by no means re
quires that most of one's contacts be
freshmen, nor does it exclude the pos
sibility or desirability of living in con
tact with others.
In a maximally integrated system in
which freshmen constitute approxi
mately 30 per cent of the population,
reinforcement of pre-college values
would be healthily reduced, while
freshmen, still pursuing similar curri
cula, would not suffer from a dearth of
contact and interaction with other
freshmen. In a fully integrated system,
the freshman could contribute to the
atmosphere of the residence, but could
not dominate it. Social support would
be provided not only by contact with
other freshmen, but also by the pres
ence of upperclassmen who have gone
through similar experiences and who
can contribute to the freshman's sense
of social support both by advice or ex
ample and by providing living evidence
that students actually survive the
freshmen year. This system would, of
course, have the further advantage of
more fully orienting freshmen to the
challenges and opportunities of the
university, a need which can be only
partially fulfilled by the present spon
sor system.
C. Partial Integration
In the preceding discussion the mini
mum ratio of upperclassmen to fresh
men in an integrated residence is as
sumed to be well in excess of 1:1. Any
system of partial integration with ra
tios well below this minimum faces se
vere difficulties:
1. Although the population would be
enriched by the addition of more ex
perienced upperclass models, fresh
men would still dominate the dormi
tory; the balance between security
and growth would not be significant
ly changed.
2. Under one suggestion for partial in
tegration offered by Dean Gordon's
staff, upperclassmen would essential
ly be guests whose rooms happened
to be in a freshman dormitory. It is
difficult to understand what would
motivate 147 upperclassmen to accept
such a position, or why they would
feel any dedication to close personal
interaction with the freshmen in an
educational sense.
3. The sponsor system is successful
largely because a few individuals are
committed to making the best of an
unfortunate living situation for
freshmen. It is not clear that the sub
stitution of five guests for one spon
sor dedicated to working with fresh
men is desirable.
4. Partial integration in itself has never
been suggested as an optimal resi
dence system, and it is not clear that
it is a desirable step toward total
integration. The committee is con
vinced that change for its own sake
is an unsound policy at any stage in
the development of a more viable
residence system.
Freshmen have the most to gain in
a campus-wide residence program
founded on the principles of co-educa
tion and integration. The institution of
this program requires not only the
support of freshmen, but also that of
upperclassmen. It could be argued that
upperclassmen would not want to give
up their present housing system. In
answer to this objection three points
can be made:
1. It is not clear that upperclassmen
are satisfied with the present sys
tem. Every spring quarter freshmen
express dissatisfaction with the hous
ing alternatives open to them: the
success of the overseas program as
a living experience has prompted
many to call for a more desirable
program at Stanford at-Stanford;
there were five applicants for each
place in the Grove Project, and if
the seminar hadn't been required
there would have been more upper
classmen seeking this exciting new
living alternative.
2. Tn our model of a fully integrated,
coeducational house, the percentage
of freshmen living in should be kept
well below 50 per cent. Freshmen
could contribute their real enthusi
asm and the challenge of their ques
tions without dominating the houses,

so that integration would benefit
both freshmen and upperclassmen.
3. In our residence program some inde
pendent npperclass houses would re
main, if there were a demand for
them. We believe that most students
would choose to live in a coed, inte
grated house, however, if some stu
dents wished something akin to the
present system such alternatives
would be open to them. The assump
tion we are making is that the new
residenco opportunities will sell them
selves.
E. Diversity and Self-Selection
Diversity among housing alternatives
is desirable. In addition, diversity with
in each house must be maintained to
avoid provincialism within the various
alternatives. Free choice, particularly
too early in the college career, among
various living styles will eventually
produce self-selective, provincial group
ings which will contradict the ideal
of developing acceptance of individual
differences within the residence. Three
points can be made to this problem:
1. No house needs to represent a cross
section of the student body. When
too great diversity exists in a living
group, cohesiveness is lost and frag
mentation takes the form of break
ing up into small sub-groups between
which little communication exists.
Therefore, some commonality, espe
cially by interests, is desirable.
2. It may not be the case that giving
students free choice among really
worthwhile alternatives will result
in serious problems of self-selection.
At any rate, it will take time for this
to happen and if indeed problems do
arise, we should be able to deal with
them early.
3. Assuming that such problems do
arise and call for some restriction of
free choice, one possible solution
would be to limit the amount of time
that an individual could live in a par
ticular residence. By encouraging
switching and moving among stu
dents, no system would be allowed
to lock itself in and stagnate.
VII. The Tone and Character of the
Living Group: Staff and Program
The residential components of most
universities are now basically eating
and sleeping facilities, structurally like
barracks, motels, or high-rise Hiltons,
surrounded by parking lots. To become
a truly residential university, the resi
dence hall must become a center of
learning and development equal in im
portance to the lecture hall. Ideally
their staffing, planning, and adminis
tration should be the responsibility of
faculty members rather than housing
directors or business offices.
While Stanford now is a far cry from
the suggested ideal of a residence uni
versity, many steps have been pro
posed which work toward the ideal. In
tegration by class and co-education are
two strong recommendations made by
the committee, which as discussed
above have considerable value in them
selves.
However, these steps will not by
themselves result in genuine centers
for learning. The mechanical bod>
shuffling is only one step in preparing
a more conducive atmosphere for total
education; the other is the purposeful
stimulation of intellectual activities
within the residence. The character and
quality of such activities, and their
relevance to students' concerns will be
come a crucial measure and determi
ned of the contribution that residence
is providing for its component mem
bers. The program for each residence
would decide for itself what input to
organize as a stimulus for the desired
enrichment of the quality of living that
contributes to the total education of
the individual and of the group's stu
dents, faculty, ideas, and the unending
list of resources of a university com
munity are all potential and powerful
inputs. The interaction of these compo
nents now creates the particular ex
citement of a university, but these
components are being comparatively
wasted in one of the areas in which
they could be the most effective ... the
living situation. The challenge of a
idential program is to organize and
bring the components together in the
most imaginative ways to utilize the
potential to the lullest.
One of the major areas of waste Is
student-faculty relations. Both the stu
donts and the faculty complain about
the distance and seeming disinterest of
the two groups. The section in the re
port which* deals with the faculty rol£
in the residence university is only a
very small start on the road to killing
this unhealthy and unproductive gap.
(See section on faculty residents.)
Too often students miss out on much
of the university experience because of
communication gaps. A face-to-face liv
ing unit is the most obvious place for
communication and contact between
students and faculty. Often the pre
vailing ethos of a dormitory can work
against this ground level communica
tion and antithetically to the explora
tory ventures of the individual. A dorm
which is oriented around a strictly so
cial purpose may even squelch the mo
tivation branding it as "intellectual," a
word that has been mistreated from all
directions in our society. While many
houses do not fall into this trap, there
is another pitfall of ruts and habit that
restricts the growing of experience in
a different way. The entire responsi
bility of taking advantage of the under
graduate experience is on the individ
ual. and some people find themselves
vorking against odds that would dis
courage the most aggressive. Fresh
man in particular belong to this cate
gory. They need to be exposed to the
broad ranges of opportunity but also
need help to make use of them. An
adolescent peer culture reinforcing high
school anti-intellectualism is not one
)f the best possible ways to meet this
need. The outside stimulus and help
will not best be provided by authority
figures who tell people what to do. or
beat off the anti-intellectual bullies. The
best assurance that free exchange and
.sharing of experience will occur will
be found in the atmosphere of the liv
ing group and in the character of its
leadership. A lively house where there
is a constant influx of new and differ
ent stimuli where all things that need
expression can find it, has the best
chance against apathy or unspoken
social taboos. House organized activi
ties such as art exhibits, musical per
formances, seminars, or small scale
lecture series suffer the same fate as
the individual's struggle for expres
sion and exploration. Not everyone
would want to participate and now
many of those who do want to can,
"but to those who find it difficult, en
couragement, not brick walls, should
be present in the tone of the house.
The possibility of organizing houses
around special interests has been sug
gested; experimentation is in order.
Houses with distinctive interests—fine
arts, social issues, foreign policy—may
well bring together students and fac
ulty from various disciplines who
could more meaningfully and readily
develop a learning community than a
house whose residents and loosely
affiliated faculty can only share pleas
antries. There would still be ample
diversity by virtue of differences in
personality, background, majors, ca
reer plans and so on, but there would
also be a major intellectual and social
oncern they all share. More detail
for this kind of program is discussed
in the specific proposal for next year.
The program of input is just the
beginning to what happens to the life
n a particular house. It provides pos
sibly a focus or direction as well as the
important underlying communication
and resource network of faculty, tutor,
and student. It must be emphasized
that what is going to happen in every
house is going to be determined most
by the people who live there. There
is a give-and-take natural exchange
between the program of ideas for the
living group and the group's response.
Reuniting the sphere of living as a
meaningful and integral part of a stu
dent's education in no way signifies
the creation of a twenty-four-hour
classroom. The residential education
urogram is not an extension of the
formal academic structure; it is its
complement. Although the opportun
,fy for experimenting with courses
given for credit should be open, it is
only one of the myriad of possibilities
with residential education. While
proper planning, particularly in the
■'election of good faculty, is necessary
it would be unrealistic to lose sight
of the interaction from the other di
rection. A structure too rigid would
kill the potential of a residential pro
gram just as the naive assumption
that body shuffling is the whole
answer.
Flexibility and spontaneity are key
<*ords in the concept of what a pro
gram should be prepared to provide.
Fvrit the program should be externally

flexible. The development of the house
spirit would depend upon the inter
action between the particular members
and particular faculty and tutors. This
matter of orientation or direction for
the house could bow with the interest
and demand for a particular living sit
uation. Some programs would last
longer than others, some undoubtedly
will be less successful, some would
evolve of themselves into a new area.
There is flexibility to let the good pro
grams grow and let the bad ones kill
themselves without bringing the entire
system to ruin. A diversity of choice
between residences could be main
tained.
There should in addition be an in
ternal flexibility within each group.
There must be room for growth and
change within the group. If topics were
to be the basis for a house, they would
always have to be picked with enough
latitude to allow each member of the
house to approach it in his own way.
This casua', unstructured opportunity
for close faculty contact speaks directly
to the need of students who are con
cerned with relevance as a criterion of
education, relevance to themselves or
to the contemporary world. There is
much opportunity for the student to
become very involved in the formation
and execution of his own education.
People who are involved and interested
in their own work tend to be more in
terested and able to contribute to the
work of others.
Another possibility that should be
included in the program is the oppor
tunity for experimentation with self
government. All sorts of opportunities
exist outside of the adoption of a hier
archy handed from above of president,
social chairman, etc. . .
There is much to be said for the edu
cationally valuable experience of learn
ing to live with ambiguity and without
automatically following tradition or
the dictates of an authority figure to
create the quality of life of a house
out of what is there ... to create an
educationally meaningful experience.
"The ideas sound great on paper!" is
the old comment at the outset of any
innovation with the rejoiner "But how
do you make it work in reality?" usu
ally not far behind. Why doesn't this
all happen now? Wilbur, the recom
mended site for next year's project,
already has many of the features out
lined in this report. "Is there really
going to be any significant difference?"
might be one question. The answer is
twofold. Some of the kinds of things
this report talks about are already
happening. If they weren't then there
would really be no use in trying to
maximize the interaction. But so much
more could be happening, and many of
the detrimental currents that run con
trary to the purpose of attending a
university could be reduced. All sys
tems are implemented by men. There
is not any system of law, morality or
of a residence university which can
overcome the fallibility of man. There
is not a magical formula implied in this
program, it rests very heavily on the
people who participate but so does
every other system. Good systems help
him along and the committee firmly
feels that a true residential university,
is a better system than one which only
claims to be and is somewhere in the
middle.
The people involved therefore are at
the core of the program. But their
effectiveness will depend to a large
degree upon how they see their role.
Their conception of their role in this
new system must undergo as much
fundamental reinterpretation as the
system itself.
How will the inertia of the present
resident conditions be overcome? Who
will set the tone, provide the mo
mentum, and contribute the leader
ship? Our first answer to these ques
tions is the students themselves. In any
residence system students will unde
niably be the major constituency.. But
how the resident staff can contribute
is also an important issue. At the pres
ent time Stanford has faculty residents,
tutors, resident assistants, and spon
sors. The role of each should be re
viewed.
Faculty Resident*
The committee would certainly not
deny the valuable contribution of the
faculty residents toward improving the
living situation at Stanford, but in
general, the faculty resident program
simply is not given the support neces
sary to tree Its members from -other

tasks and to allow them to devote
more time, thought and emphasis to
the residence education program. The
basic change would be that of increased
commitment to the living situation. The
primary responsibility of the faculty
resident should not be to the dorm di
rector or the administration, but to the
student within the living group or com
plex. To be effective, the faculty resi
dent must be willing to accept a de
manding and time consuming involve
ment in the living situation. His pres
ence there will be much more than a
face at meals or even that of a good
friend. Presumably the resident would
be a full time member of the faculty,
for the success of the residence pro
gram would greatly depend upon his
response to the intellectual needs of the
students. Doctoral candidates, coaches,
university officials, and administrators,
however, could still participate if they
would be willing to make the same
kind of commitment to the ideal of a
residence university. The interpersonal
factor is extremely important in this
kind of situation. Most every student
complains about the brilliant man who
can't give a good lecture. The same
argument will have to be taken into
account that not everyone can fulfill
this particular kind of a role. The fac
ulty resident must, above all, be sensi
tive to the interaction among students
in the group.
The things a faculty member could
contribute are bounded only by their
individual creativity but a few sug
gestions are in order.
1. In certain living units, seminars for
academic credit could be offered.
2. Directed reading could be made avail
able to certain students under the
resident.
3. Informal and noncredit seminars
should be encourage by the faculty
resident or when an idea came out
of the group he or some of his col
leagues could serve as resource per
son.
4. A student chairman and the faculty
resident could set up a meaningful
faculty associate program. The resi
dent can draw upon close friends and
colleagues which would supply an
internal identification missing in the
present program.
What would bring the faculty to par
ticipate in this program? Much of the
same dissatisfaction with student-fac
ulty relations that would bring the
students. Where something lively is
going on, something which the faculty
member is part there would not be
the embarassed ordeals that now take
place in dormitories on campus where
everyone involved is on their best and
most strained behavior. The living con
ditions would be similar to that of an
overseas campus though the professor
would not be required to drop his own
work or leave the center of his re
search. Class loads could be lessened
for the faculty participating because
they would be in essence only relocat
ing their teaching commitments, not
dropping them. They would have a
more flexible time schedule that might
be convenient to their purposes. This
position would also be in effect on a
rotating basis.
Resident Assistants and Tutors
The role of resident assistant should
be eliminated. In other words, we
would eliminate the role of the nice
guy disciplinarian, the liaison between
the administration and the students
who has been for too long forced into
an unfortunate position of hypocrisy.
As he is employed by the administra
tion he has an obligation to enforce
University policies, but if he is to be
at all effective with the students his
identification is with them. Too often
he has resolved the conflict by the
statement, "I don't care what you do,
just do it quietly so I don't see it."
Caught in this bind he has been in
effective as a man playing to two mas
ters. It is not enough to react to stu
dent needs and problems, for the role
we see must be one of creative action —
one of initiative and not merely re
sponse. Similarly, the present tutor
system is limited because its goal is
only to answer questions, not raise
them.
The present role of tutor, however,
is closer to our purpose than the RA's.
But this role must be expanded to be
effective. Thus, the idea of tutors
should be maintained, but its purpose
significantly broadened. Like faculty
residents > (and unlike RA's)' tutors

must have autonomy from primarily ad
ministrative policy and must be respon
sible primarily to the students below.
They should be linked to the resident
director, who is then responsible to the
administration. Although academic
assistance is undeniably important, tu
tors must do more than merely toot.
Their role should be to stimulate dis
cussion, to promote all types of inter
change, and to actively work towards
an educational atmosphere. At present
RA's and tutors tend to preserve rather
than promote and to be problem
solvers, rather than catalysts. The
tutor, like the faculty resident, must
approach his job with a new vitality
and commitment.
Sponsors
When the freshman class has been
entirely integrated into the university
community then the sponsor system
will become an anachronism. But until
that point the need remains and the
present system of sponsors and tutors
should be maintained.
There are two more important con
siderations before any system is put
Into operation. How will the faculty
and tutors be selected? And what are
the costs for the program as a whole?
These problems become relevant and
solvable only after the initial commit
ment and go ahead has been made.
Therefore discussion of these aspects
of the program will be included in
the proposal for next year.
VIII. Brief Assessment of Experience
At Other Institutions
While it is not our intention to base
the justification for our proposals on
the successes and failures of other in
stitutions with their necessarily dif
ferent circumstances, it is interesting
to note the results of a study con
ducted by the Faculty Committee on
Student Residences at Stanford in 1959.
Studying twenty-one similar universities
in this country they found that they
were about equally divided between
integrated and segregated freshman
living facilities. In general each school
seem satisfied with the system it then
had. However, while all of these with
the integrated system found it the most
workable, about 25 per cent of those
with segregated freshmen replied that
they were dissatisfied with their situ
ation and it certainly increases the
noisy freshman atmosphere which is
inimical to good study habits and con
ditions." Some schools reported that
the only reason for maintaining fresh
man segregation was pressure from
the fraternities who "objected stren
uously to placing their pledges under
the influence of hard bitten rugged in
dependents."
The many success of coeducational
housing on other campuses are too well
known to require documentation.
The institutions interviewed were
Cal Tech, Reed, Pembroke, Swarth
more, Oberlin, Pomona, Carleton, Rad
clifTe, Occidental, Ohio Wesleyan, Chi
cago, Brown, Dartmouth, Princeton,
Yale, Harvard, Northwestern, Washing
ton State, Oregon, Cornell, and Ohio
State.
IX. A Proposal:
The Wilbur Experiment
The committee has set forth its ar
guments for coeducational and inte
grated residences. It has suggested that
the residence should be a center of
intellectual life, and through residence
education the rigid separation of the
student's social and intellectual lives
could be ended. It remains for the com
mittee to propose how these aims can
be fulfilled at Stanford.
It is the feeling of the committee
that significant experimentation in resi
dence education is altogether feasible
for next year. There is a wide range
of possibilities. The committee initially
considered a massive scrambling of the
university residence pattern, convert
ing most dormitories on campus to
coeducation and integration. This pro
posal was rejected for two reasons:
(1) Full integration, or anything ap
proaching it, would at this time pro
duce an undesirable ratio of freshmen
to upperclass men. (2) It would be im
possible to supply the staff necessary
to introduce residence education in any
meaningful way if the scope of the
housing experiment is so broad.
The committee decided that its aims
could best be fulfilled by an experiment
of more limited scope. Instead of dras
tically overhauling the university resi
dence pattern, one dormitory complex
could be used as a rather large "pilot"
project, in which * Integratiorr and • eo
education could be complete and intel
lectual life could be given the proper
attention. Wilbur Hall is ideal for this
purpose. It is the largest complex on
campus, with space for approximately
720 people. It is divided into eight
houses, each of which constitutes a
separate identity unit. Each house has
an adjacent cottage for a faculty resi
dent and a tutorial room where semin
ars can be held.
The committee recommends that
next fall each Wilbur house be occu
pied by two floors of men and one
floor of women, and that each house
be integrated by class at a rate of one
freshman to three upperclassmen. Con
stituted as such, Wilbur Hall would be
the site of meaningful experimentation
in residential education.
The Wilbur experiment will of neces
sity affect some of the other university
residences. Freshman men will move to
Stern and Branner, retaining the spon
sor system in its present form. Fresh
man women will remain in Roble, with
sponsors, and those living in neither
Roble or Wilbur will be integrated with
upperclass women in Florence Moore.
Lagunita, Hoskins, and Toyon will be
unaffected. The remaining upperclass
men will live in three of the row
houses. The statistical breakdown is
as follows.
Total Frosh Upcl. Total Frosh Upcl.
Men Men Men W'ran W'mn Wmn
Wilbur 480 120 360 240 60 180
Stem 590 570 20
Branner 170 160 10
Roble 260 250 10
Florence
Moore 350 90 260
Lagunita 290 0 290
Hoskins 120 0 120
Toyon 200 0 200
Row
Houses (3)100 0 100
(5) 180 0 180
Totals 1540 850 690 1440 400 1040
(Note: If women are allowed to move
off campus, adjustments can be made
easily. If the number of women moving
off is under 180, an appropriate num
ber of row houses can be converted
from women to men. Compensation
can also be made by admitting more
freshman and transfer women. If

necessary the measures can be com
bined. )
Students will be chosen for the Wil
bur experiment on a draw basis. It is
reasonable to expect an excess demand
for on-campus housing by upperclass
men, since a new option is being of
fered that will presumably attract men
who presently or would otherwise live
off campus, or in fraternities. The com
ration of the upperclassmen's popu
lation in Wilbur would thus differ
from the present composition of Stem.
If women are allowed off campus, there
would be a greater possibility of satis
fying the demand for men's housing.
The likelihood of vacant dormitory
space, with the introduction of the
Wilbur option, is highly improbable.
The logistics of putting the bodies
into Wilbur for the pilot project is
only half of our task in our proposal.
The problems of staffing the complex
and from there working out feasible
programs is the next step. Hopefully
to make this pilot project a real step
toward achieving the residential uni
versity, as much of the general report
as possible will be included, only the
scope has changed not the purpose of
the program.
Selection for next year's faculty resi
dents could be turned over to a com
mittee composed of one faculty and
one student member of the ASSU
Housing Commission and two members
from the Dean of Students Office, with
the advice of the present Committee.
Once this task has been completed, the
faculty can participate in choosing the
tutors and drawing up more detailed
plans for the program.
The committee realizes that a com
mitment to this kind of residential
education will require an overt shift
in educational effort from the class
room and lab to the residence, with
both compensation for it and relief
from other teaching duties—and quite
probably the replacement of their
other more formal academic functions
by other personnel. We also realize
that there will be a budget problem,
but emphatically deny that worthwhile
educational goals should not be pro
posed and slated because of current
pragmatic limitations.
The committee hopes that, through

further study—best done in conjunc
tion with the study of education at
Stanford—that it will be possible to
rearrange and reemphasize the com
ponents of freshman education in such
a way that existing resources would
permit a serious upgrading of resi
dence education, and the possibility
that such education could replace some
aspects of the present program. This
might well allow the same total re
sources of money and people to meet
the desired objectives by shifting the
locale and method of teaching, rather
than just adding to the staff and pro
gram.
Presently in Wilbur there are three
sponsor rooms and one tutor room
which can accommodate the new tutors.
Hopefully as many of these rooms will
be used for that purpose, but if for
any reason four tutors per house is im
possible, then the rooms could be used
for offices which would at least bring
more graduate level contact into the
residence.
One possible suggestion for Wilbur's
eight houses next year would be to
have five of them centered around a
general theme, one international house,
and two left unstructured. There has
been much agitation for an interna
tional house on campus and many pro
posals have been drawn up. Five sug
gested topics for the theme houses are
"Religion and Society," "Literature and
Fine Arts," "Science and Human Prob
lems," "The Urban Threat," and "So
cial Change."
To take only one of these themes and
speculate what the given house of
faculty, tutors and students will make
of it is another of those endless first
steps in imagination potential. The
house that was using the topic "Science
and Human Problems," for example,
would bring in a diversity of fields
from the natural sciences to the hu
manities. Many of the poignant prob
lems facing students and faculty are
centered in this topic but the same
could probably be said in a different
context for each of the five topics. The
impact of technology on our economic
and social system, the moral contro
versy over the newest discoveries in
genetics, the myth of the scientific
method are all themes to be explored.

What happens to a world view when
scientific discoveries puncture com
fortable philosophies? What is time
and how does man control it and how
docs it control man? These are ques
tions to be asked. Above all, it is im
portant to remember that the direc
tion of intellectual thrust must not be
too well defined in advance. One of
the most valuable experiences for the
living group will be coming to grips
with the topic, deciding for themselves
how the general area should be ap
proached, and then proceeding to de
velop programs and structures on their
own.
The committee is highly enthusiastic
about the creative possibilities pre
sented by the Wilbur experiment—the
first step in the direction of a fully
integrated and coeducational residence.
If the experiment even approaches the
measure of success the committee en
visions, it could prove a major innova
tion in the history of American higher
education. A well developed program
of residential education offers a poten
tial of immeasurable dimension.
X. Correlation of this report with the
overall review of education at Stanford
The key problems of residence edu
cational stimulus and the kind of staff
and budget commitments necessary
need further specific elucidations which
the committee hopes can be under
taken by the Executive Committee for
the study of education at the earliest
opportunity, in order to agree on ob
jectives and make necessary staff and
financial plans for the Wilbur Project
to be able to start in the Fall of 1967.
The committee takes this oppor
tunity to thank the following people
for individual contributions to our
meetings: Dwight Clark, Dr. Lawrence
Thomas, Miss Sally Mahoney, Dr. Mar
tin Evans, Dick Williams, Mike Roster,
Howie Holmes, Doug Davis, Bob Gor
don, Dean Hind, and Dean Novak.
February 6, 1967
Subcommittee on the Freshmen Resi
dence Program ASSU Housing Com
mission. Barbara Levin, Judy Bader.
Barbara Warren, David Koval, Chris
topher Harte, Douglas Sorenson, Scott
Soames (Co-Chairman) Elizabeth
Cohen, B. Davie Napier, Max
Maurice M. Osborne Jr. (Co-Chairman).
Doubts of the ability of Stanford's
present educational system to provide
for the needs of its students, and speci
fic questions about the relevance of
the residence program in its present
form, have stimulated students, faculty,
and staff to seek more appropriate
solutions.
The A.S.S.U., concerned about the
quality of residential experience at
Stanford — particularly in contrast to
that at the Overseas Campuses —
created through its Legislature a Hous
ing Commission, one task of which was
to review and make recommendations
concerning the freshman residence
program in its relation to education.
At about the same time, Associate
Dean of Students Robert Gordon was
asked to present proposals for a new
model of freshman residential educa
tion.
Both A.S.S.U. and Dean Gordon al
most simultaneously appointed com
mittees in the early Fall of 1966 to ad
vise them in the making of recommen
dations in this important area, and
rather than continue a too-familiar pat
tern of separate committees working
independently (and often divergently)
it was decided to merge the two.
In the merger, the Dean's Advisory
Committee agreed to accept the A.S.S.U.
invitation to become an integral part,
of its group. Dean Gordon agreed to
accept the report of the entire group
in the same light as he would have the
recommendations of his originally ap
pointed committee, and the merged
group in turn agreed to attempt in
good faith to assist him in meeting his
deadlines and obligations as best it
could.
Despite particular questions existing
about the Sponsor system, the Commit
tee felt from the outset that to limit
its discussions and report to such par
ticulars, or to start out with them,
would be to avoid the main Issues sur
rounding ,the quality and meaning of

residential education at Stanford, par
ticularly the freshman program.
The Committee thus firmly decided
that it would start from a fresh con
sideration of the issues and principles
involved, relating its recommendations
to them. It was recognized that such
an approach would be time consuming,
that it might seem Utopian to some;
yet a critque and basic statement about
the ideas of a residence university
seemed vital for future planning and
growth.
At the same time, the practical ne
cessity for more immediate recommen
dations and action was realized. The
present report is in this sense a pre
liminary, or interim report, which at
tempts to set forth and justify some
practical recommendations for residence
programs that could be adopted in
1967-68 — steps within the framework
of progression towards a more ideal
situation.
The Case for the Residential Commu
nity — The Personal Committment to
Learning
The impossibility of considering the
freshman experience in isolation from
the life and purposes of the entire un
dergraduate program has been a ma
jor premise in the subcommittee's
study of the Freshman Residence Pro
gram. Two main assumptions underlie
this approach.
One is that the university experience,
as a whole, is only one part of the con
tinuum of the educational process, a
process which neither begins nor ends
at the university gates. The educational
ideals should be the same for all four
undergraduate years in terms of what
they declare for the growth of persons.
The freshman year is only a step in
a span of development, having a spe
cial function as the first step but not
a separate one.
The second is a new conception which
views the university as a community
for learning through personal, interac
,tjon, find development,. .nsp, of

all its facilities for education. This view
emphasizes that the classroom, library
or laboratory cannot — indeed does not
even now — have a monopoly on pro
viding for the education and develop
ment of students. Else, why a residen
tial university? Why not subcontract
all residential arrangements and avoid
hotel problems?
The Committee felt strongly that
there was urgent need for institutional
endorsement of the fact that without
growth and development in personal,
social, and emotional dimensions, the
achievements of intellect are shallow
and stand in isolation from the indivi
dual and his world. The conviction that
gives personal meaning to knowledge
is a product of direct human relation
ship, and we make far too little use
of its potential.
In a more settled and comfortable
past, with much greater mutuality of
expectations and values both between
peers and between generations, the ur
gency of such questions was less, the
scope more limited and the answers
more predictable. The bull-session quite
effectively handled many aspects of
this personal-social side of development.
For this, and other reasons, relatively
little formal attention to it was felt
to be necessary, aside from some for
mal lectures on hygiene, the evils of
sex and booze, and the Fundamental
Standard. After all, boys were (and
would be) boys, and pretty soon they'd
grow up into men, producers and fa
thers. Home and society would take
care somehow that they grew up right,
and the college would provide an ac
cepted transition station on the way,
some academic input, and try to keep
the lid on boyish spirit getting out of
hand.
By contrast today, for many students
questions about one's nature, and about
one's relationship to an uncertain
world, and about this world itself are
more insistent, and more pre-occupying
.before The V&iefttipns a#?, -real,

and require believable answers from
within the individual. And, until he can
find them, this quest, this preoccupa
tion has top priority, while academics
suffer through seeming less relevant.
And though there are many students
who are relatively unconcerned about
such questions, we feel their total edu
cation would be enriched if they could
be purposefully involved.
The history of formal didactic at
tempts to speak to these burning ques
tions is rather dismal, and all over the
country, there has been a steady atro
phy of required, and even of voluntary
courses relative to personal hygiene,
sex, morals, and behavior. Both stu
dents and educators sense that because
a viable set of personal ethics and
values just grow within the individual,
attempts simply to impose them from
without are relatively futile.
Not only have curricular approaches
to such questions atrophied (happi
ly!), but American education is nearing
the end of a decade in which the entire
necessity of addressing itself to the
problem of personal growth has been
quite deliberately rejected. Sputnik was
the symbol, and such spokesmen as
Hyman Rickover took up the cudgels,
with articulate and seathing denuncia
tions of "Education for Living" — of
concepts of "adjustment," and insisted,
along with many others, on intellectual
excellence (for "excellence" read "a
chievement") as the right, and only
purpose of education.
Growth of population; of national
wealth with its stimulus to upward so
cial mobility; increasing complexity
and diversity of knowledge with its
concommitant of faculty pre-occupa
tion and relatively-narrower fields; and
increased competition have sharpened
the pressures for achievement, leaving
even loss time, thought, or energy for
development as a person.
The need to pay most serious atten
tion to this is most keenly felt by many
studetitfi hy their eldprs.
There has been some re-emergence of
an expressed need for leadership and
cooperation in working out better ways
to assist and support the individual in
his personal education and develop
ment, and when students do not raise
these questions, their education should
raise them, and speak to them.
Unstructured and spontaneous stu
dent discussion, particularly at the
freshman level, is heavily-flavored with
the need to sort oneself out, but as it
now operates, it tends less to growth
than to its more traditional social func
tion of settling into "bird-of-a-feather"
groupings in which the individual
can find comfort and support for his
own sets of values and seekings. With
in this spontaneously-forming group
ings, the dialogue tends to become in
creasingly circular, the values increas
ingly exclusive, and there is decreased
permeability to fresh ideas and ex
perience.
In an educational situation where
concentration is placed on the formal
aspects of education there is an imbal
ance which produces distortion, which
too often takes the form of rejection
of the academic sphere as "irrelevant."
Another consequence is the dangerous
polarization of university life into two
worlds; that of the classroom, and that
of social life, setting them to work
against each other instead of with each
other toward the individual's goals. The
acceptance of the residence university
ideal as being vital to education can
be one important factor in keeping
the two worlds together and moving in
the same direction, whereas the pres
ent residence program presents too
many forces that divide living from
learning.
The Committee takes as self-evident
that a truly liberal education is in fact
liberating — in making both wider and
deeper the individual's ability to per
ceive, absorb, analyze, and choose in a
vastly-increasing array of people,
events, and issues, and not in forcing
the premature adoption of limited, and
constricting attitudes. In effect this
seems the necessity of the student's
continuous and repeated exposure to
and challenge by diversity of ideas, of
values, styles, and of course people.
It is here that the meaning of residen
tial education springs to life, for it of
fers potentially the best milieu for
daily face-to-face interaction with peers,
with older students, and faculty mem
bers of both sexes — offering diversity
of age, sex, discipline and values in
the highly personal way so necessary
for exposure to lead to involvement,
and knowledge to become commitment.
The necessity of direct personal in
teraction is most strongly endorsed by
the Committee, for it is the set of
values and mental attitudes formed in
such day-in, day-out exchange that set
tle most deeply into one's fiber. Thus
to narrow the range, or dilute the qual
ity of this exchange seems antiethical
to education. Kenneth Benne, in his
article "The Uses of Fraternity" states
in this regard, "People learn value sys
tems in the first instance as they form
relations with others. These relations
in turn develop norms with corres
ponding rationales which the individual
then internalizes. If people, young or
old, can build groups with standards
that reward and strengthen honest
self - expression and self - acceptance,
creativity, mutual helpfulness and the
capacity to cope with conflict, then the
members of such groups will assimilate
these values as conditions of member
ship."
Choice, and learning to choose ra
tionally, are important educational
tasks, but should not be forced on the
individual too hurriedly, without
enough exposure to a wide range of
choices, nor without some room for
trial and error.
In summary then, the Committee
firmly believes that:
1. As education is, or should be, a con
tinuum, the freshman year cannot
be considered in isolation from the
entire undergraduate program, and al
though it has a special function as
the first step, it is an integral part
of the whole.
2. There is a grave imbalance in the
university's educational emphasis,
which tends to widen the needless,
and in our view harmful, gap be
tween the getting of knowledge and
the important business of living.
3. The deepest personal and intellectual
cpncems of students — their rela
tionships to themselves, and to an

uncertain world, — are not receiving
the institutional recognition and ef
fort they deserve.
4. That people learn most deeply by
living, and by forming personal re
lationships, and that when the resi
dence program, as at present, is
oriented to bed, board, and social
needs, the opportunities for inter
nalizing intellectual knowledge and
values are meager, and the tenden
cies to reject academic values as per
sonally-irrelevant are reinforced.
5. That choice, and learning to choose
critically are central educational
goals, but that it must depend on
close and repeated exposure to a
wide range of ideas, values, styles,
and people — people of different
ages, disciplines, sexes, and back
grounds, — and not be prematurely
forced into constricting channels
based primarily on social and not in
tellectual values.
6. Such close exposure to diversity, over
sufficient time, and if taken as the
norm, would go far in preventing
the formation of narrowed and
sterotypic attitudes and thought —
the surest signs of the ill-educated
man.
7. The way in which students live very
directly affects the whole quality of
their education: this single principle
underpins the whole concept of the
residential university.
"THE FRESHMAN CONDITION"
The paraphrase above in intentional,
— and designed to point out that being
a freshman at Stanford, or anywhere,
is an intensely personal experience of
transition. Although the general ideals
of education apply equally, — and es
pecially, — to him, the freshman also
has attributes which make him special,
but not separate.
It is the feeling of this committee
that freshmen can and should receive
the benefit of special experiences de
signed for their particular problems.
The assumption that we would like to
question is whether this need for some
special orientation experiences necessi
tates their living in a segragated fash
ion. Although it is expedient from an
"efficiency" point of view, it may gen
erate excessive anxiety over perfor
mance in freshman courses and a rein
forcement for essentially juvenile
modes of facing college stresses. His
special attributes can be summed up as
follows:
A. He obviously needs early and reli
able information about his new com
munity — where things are, what he
is to do, and so forth.
B. He is making the transition most
traditionally accepted in America as
the line between family dependency
and personal autonomy.
In actuality, the line, if there is one,
is blurred, and varies greatly from one
freshman to another. In general, the
freshman comes equipped with the cre
dentials of previous achievement and
approval — hoping he will be accepted
in his new college world, and fearing
that he may not. At the same time he
hopes that his performance and life
will be freer and larger than before.
The freshman, more poignantly than
any other undergraduate, in his transi
tion from a narrower to a hopefully
wider identity, wants the understand
ing of his old world, personal accep
tance by the new — and fears he may
have neither.
He is thus enormously vulnerable,
and as Steve Hurlbut has written in
his excellent paper, is characterized by
a "pervasive anxiety." Until he has as
similated workable norms, he feels he's
got to satisfy some kind of external
standard, and is anxious until he does.
Some more specific stresses that tend
to promote anxiety are:
I.The sudden change of status that
comes from being taken out of a
high school situation where one is
enormously successful and being put
in a class of similar big frogs from
small ponds, and feeling that they
are tougher frogs than he is:
2. The doubt about being able to live up
to tough academic demands:
3. Doubts about his being accepted by
his peers — of both sexes;
4. Being away from home;
5. Confrontation with different reli
gious and social values than those
the student has learned in his family
and home community;
6. Ambivalence about authority, and
older peopje in general.
This araciety and vulnerability are by

no means bad in themselves — and in
deed offer the most fertile soil for cul
tivation of the seeking young mind.
But the thrust of this searching anxiety
is in essence social, and approval-seek
ing — and therefore related to persons
and social groups, or the winning of ac
ceptable symbols of achievement.
The Committee feels that the perva
sive, and expectable freshman anxiety
and search for some group identity is
a double-edged sword, with potential
for both regression and for growth.
On one side, if there is failure of
approval from home, or personal ac
ceptance at college, or fewer grade
points "in the bank" than expected,
anxiety may well become dysfunction
al, with consequences such as neurotic
disturbance, refusal to compete aca
demically, and even regressive and
anti-social group-adolescent behavior,
and the reinforcement of pre-college
values.
CRITIQUE OF THE PRESENT
FRESHMAN RESIDENCE PROGRAM
The Committee feels that too many
features of the present freshman resi
dence program serve:
1. To reinforce natural anxieties among
the newest members of the Univer
sity, and
2. To promote the seeking of solutions
to this anxiety that have little if any
thing to do with educational pur
poses, but tend to promote prema
ture and mutually exclusive social
groupings.
As he moves into a freshman resi
dence, he is thrown into close contact
with a large peer-group of greater
diversity in background, attitudes, and
talent than he is likely to have known.
And, because competition and fears of
failure are keenest among peers (par
ticularly of neophytes performing simi
lar tasks,) these differences within the
larger peer-group tend to move the stu
dent into protective subgroups of
peers with attitudes and pre-college
backgrounds similar to his own, within
which he finds support. In such mutual
ly-supportive social groups, the student
can arm himself and defend himself
psychologically against any new ideas
to which he is being exposed, from fel
low students, members of the opposite
sex, and his professors. Studies will
never be taken at all seriously but will
be dealt with in a purely cognitive
fashion, ingested for the purpose of
passing exams and discarded soon af
terwards. Under these conditions, we
may have done away with the prob
lems of anxiety, but are faced with the
possibility of at least two other un
desirable consequences, 1) His atti
tudes and values may remain totally
unquestioned throughout his college
career; and 2) a group devoted to de
fending itself against the climate of an
institution may exhibit anti-social char
acteristics of alienated people every
where.
That present groups formed for mu
tual support emerge after a limited
exposure to new, and possible better
models, is certainly true, and groupings
tend to occur along pre-college lines
and values, or in rebellion against
them.
The present segregated freshman
residence situation also tends:
3. To promote the seeking of achieve
ment symbols (i.e. grades) rather
than knowledge of self or substance;
4. By a residence administration seen
as primarily regulatory and manger
ial, to aggravate the natural ambi
valence of freshmen towards author
ity with results ranging from thought
less docility to destructive rebellion;
or apathetic alienation;
5. To provide too much pressure for
distortion and ritualization of rela
tionships between the sexes — the
"dating syndrome" — and a poverty
of opportunities for simple, friendly
interaction of people, a lack fre
quently deplored by both freshmen
and upperclassmen.
Both architecture and group pres
sures, as well as well-institutionalized
pressures for achieving good grades
in a heavy curriculum conspire to rob
the freshman of privacy — both physi
cal privacy, and temporal privacy; i.e.
some time simply to be himself, to spin
his wheels, and to think, with room for
trial and error.
There is, at least in Wilbur, no at
mosphere in the dining halls in the
least conducive to conversation — and
for some reason, plastic and formica
encourage one to get In and out fast,

with emphasis on feeding the face, but
none on nourishing friendship.
All of these (observable) results are
Inimical to the purposes of stimulating
interest in new subjects, of promoting
constructive reaction to diversity, of
the discouragement of stereotypic
thinking and behavior, and of trust in
older people as human beings.
More importantly, the positive po
tentials of freshman vulnerability go
relatively untapped — or are being tap
ped for outworn purposes. For this
vulnerability is personal, and if pro
vided with daily personal interaction
with a wide range of interesting
people of different ages and different
disciplines, there is more than a good
chance that Stanford freshmen would
attach their enthusiasms and their
hearts to the new models they need
and seek — models of greater depth
and diversity, but providing the identi
ty and security they need.
The interaction between freshman
men in Wilbur and the Faculty Resi
dents has varied greatly in its intensity
and impact — with instances of great
fruitfulness, or relative neutrality and
harmony, and a very few of a truly
negative quality.
Faculty Associates to freshman resi
dences have often provided important
personal interactions between fresh
men and the faculty — but just as
often these contacts have been super
ficial and ritualized.
Sponsors, while providing the great
est impact in personal exchange, pre
sent, because of their small number,
relatively limited contact with upper
classmen's values and experiences.
While all these personal contacts in
the freshman residences do in fact en
rich the education of many freshmen,
the other fact remains that there are
simply not enough such contacts, nor
sufficient support and time for these
few people to give residential educa
tion the emphasis it deserves.
EVOLUTION OF THE PRESENT
FRESHMAN RESIDENCE PROGRAM
Whatever rationalizations may be
adduced in support of the present
freshman residence program, it ap
pears to the Committee that it is in
large measure a holdover from an
earlier set of norms — norms that re
ceived wide acceptance and support in
those times, but that are under serious
question *oday.
In the Teens, the Twenties, and even
well into the Thirties, there was more
general acceptance (in society at large
as well as in the university commu
nity) of a particular hierarchical order,
and the particular authority structure
such an order implies. One tended to
know where one stood in relation to
the order at any given period, and to
be confident that one would ascend the
ladder by predictable steps.
Perhaps because of the relative sta
bility of the social order, personal de
velopment was thought of more along
the lines of advancement within that
order — with of course the acquisition
of enough "knowledge" and academic
polish to secure preference in vocations
and the status of a college-educated
man. It was important in itself to be
a senior, or for that matter an upper
classman, and the class structure had
in itself real meaning to the student.
Hence, the development of class spirit
and cohesiveness was valued, encour
aged, and ritualized. Even the major
steps in progression along the well
worn rungs were ritualized in such
rites of passage as the annual "Frosh-
Soph War," a ritual which would have
been impossible had there been no such
open class distinction.
The residence arrangements prob
ably reflected an accept? e of this
order according to social and culture
values of the day, and were aimed at
initiating the freshman into them. A
deliberate segration of the neophyte —
either by residence, by distinguishing
badges (viz. the "Beanie"), by restric
tion of privilege, or by combinations
of these has in many human organiza
tions, served to reinforce acculturation
to desired social and behavioral norms,
and whether anyone was purposefully
aware of this or not, such considera
tions surely operated in freshman resi
dential segragation. Aside from "home
work" performed in a dorm, there was
a rather strict geographic separation
of intellectual-academic concerns and
the personal-social sphere. The class
room and laboratory (and one's closed
~oom or the stacks) were meant for
the'one — while the dorm was really
for the other, and largely designed for
it.
The early history of the sponsor
program, when Encina Hall was the
freshman men's dorm, illustrates well
its use as an instrument for indoctri
nation of the "hapless Frosh" into pre
vailing upperclassmen's values.
Most sponsors wore a block "S", and
embodied a prevailing ideal of social
and athletic prowess, coupled with a
sense of loyalty to the group, respect
for authority, and an obligation to be
exemplary to their potential succes
sors. As recently as 1955, the effective
ness of a sponsor was measured, among
other things, by the percentage of his
charges attending the pregame rallies
and intercollegiate games.
Most sponsors were also fraternity
men, and another measure of his suc
cess as a sponsor was the number of
his freshmen pledged. For the spon
sors, there was little conflict involved
in serving simultaneously the fresh
men, one's own upperclassman values,
and those of the institution and its
authorities, for all constituents had
pretty much the same understanding
of the system, and of each of their
places within it.
In the intervening years, particularly
those since World War 11, there have
been profound changes in the social
order — a disruption of settled commu
nity, sharpened preoccupations with
material competition, and a culture less
and less sure of where it stood, or what
it believed in. Particularly among those
intelligent enough to attend such col
leges as Stanford, there has been in
creasing criticism of existing institu
tions which seem to them to produce
as leaders men with narrowed vision,
preoccupation with power, and too
little time or love for people. In this
climate of malaise, and in the absence
of once tacitly-held assurances, the
young person's search for personal
identity, relevance, and belief has
emerged as a very important difference
between many students of today and
of the previous generation, and again
underscores the vital importance of the
living group experience.
Despite some expressed dissatisfac
tions with the existing sponsor system,
the sponsors and a few feculty resi
dents at Wilbur were quite probably
the first to sense both this new and
urgent need among the freshmen (and
of course in themselves,) and that the
approach to it had to be met at the
level of day-in, day-out personal inter
action.
The evolution of the present sponsor
system has been a response both to
the growing need for attention to per
sonal education and development, and
to the need to substitute a drive for
continuous search and openness for the
more comfortable, but rather water
tight, social groupings which they saw
taking place.
For the past few years, the sponsors
have been the real pioneers in residen
ital education in the freshman resi
dence program. To condemn them as
"politically motivated" or irresponsible
seems a rather defensive and negative
reaction to the admitted mistakes of
a few members, and more importantly
fails to recognize that, without much
help or understanding, they are on the
track of something very important.
There have, to be sure, been other
efforts in the direction of residential
education for freshmen — relatively
cautious additions which have been in
the general direction of enriching per
sonal experience and contact in the.
residences, and may represent an in
choate recognition of this need.
Such additions have been the Facul
ty Residents, the Faculty Associates,
the Student Associates — at first men,
later women — and later, more free
dom for dining exchanges. More for
mally, in-residence seminars, guests-in
residence, panel discussions, and even
classes have been introduced.
But the former additions (with the
exception of a few Faculty Residents)
have in general provided only super
ficial interactions, while the latter
(again with a few notable exceptions)
have borne little relation to life and
living education other than physical
proximity. There is a heavy implica
tion of the mere introduction of more
academics into residences — while the
.ru#ot iT.nortant questions to students
go, for the most part, unanswered.
Th< present freshmen residence pro
gram, in its segregation by class, by

sex, by its continued reinforcement of
separation of living from learning, is
anachronistic, and reflects values that
have become less relevant and ideas that
are no longer true — such as assump
tions that satisfactory personal devel
opment takes care of itself within an
accepted and orderly framework, (of
which the freshman class is one clear
step, houses and all); that personal
education and development are irrele
vant to, or at least peripheral to the
purposes of "Higher Education"; that
mutually-deaf social groupings are ac
ceptable parts of the social mosaic —
when the fact of the matter is that we
are badly failing to meet these now
paramount questions. Despite our be
ginning attentions to this need, the
main thrust of the freshman resi
dence program and the academic pro
gram, still tends to leave the freshman
alone in his search and to force him
into protective groupings.
FRESHMAN IN3PEORATION INTO
UNIVERSITY IJFE
As discussed above, the Committee
feels strongly that the present segre
gation of freshmen reflects values no
longer taken seriously, reinforces the
separation of learning from living
(with impoverishment of both), height
ens some dysfunctional anxieties, and
tends to force premature and relative
ly narrow security groupings, rein
forces the artificiality of contact be
tween the sexes, and alienates students
from the faculty.
Thus, segregation is in itself a cen
tral problem, and, of course, the alter
natives must be aimed at integration
of the freshman in one or more ways.
A. Coeducational Housing
As noted earlier, a major problem
for freshmen is the difficulty of estab
lishing relationships with members of
the opposite sex on any basis other
than a social or dating level. For fresh
man men, the problem is especially
acute, manifesting itself in a heighten
ing anxiety, increased insecurity, and
frustration. The institution of a sys
tem of coeducational housing would
not only ameliorate the undesirable so
cial position of freshman men but also
provide an atmosphere conducive to
more natural (spontaneous) and per
sonal relationships. Upperclassmen al
so face similar problems as the results
of a segragated housing system, and
they too could gain much from having
the option of a coeducational residence
program.
That such a program is both prac
tical and desirable is supported by the
acknowledged success of the overseas
campus program as a living and learn
ing experience. In addition, the appar
ent success of the Grove Project as a
coeducational residence suggests that
coeducation can be successful on the
home campus.
The committee believes that, in the
long run, coeducational housing should
be the prevailing, although not exclu
sive, pattern for residential education
at Stanford, and that significant steps
can and should be taken toward this
goal during the coming year, 1967-68.
Although some houses segregated by
sex should be retained for these stu
dents who do not wish to live in a co
educational residence, a major effort
should be directed toward providing
coeducational housing in its most sig
nificant sense, men and women living
in the same house. Even these houses
which remain segregated could be
placed in juxtaposition to increase the
interaction among men and women.
The goal of a residence housing both
men and women would be most effect
ively realized if the ratio is approxi
mately 1:1. Although the 1:1 ratio Is
most desirable, a ratio of 2:1 would,
we feel, be successful.
As a long range goal the Committee
recommends changing of th« admis
sions ratio to one that is closer to 1:1
as a step towards this ideal.
B. Integration of classes:
As discussed more fully in Section
111 of this report, the freshman year is
a period of growth in which freshmen
must adjust to what for many of them
is a totally new culture, with new and
demanding standards. This situation re
quires a certain amount of social sup
port to prevent excessive and destruc
tive anxiety.
The committee is convinced that the
freshman residence program too often
promotes a seeurity that reduces expo
sure to challenging and growth-moti
vating aspects of university life, there
by retarding development, rather than

preparing the freshman to meet the
challenges which are in a large mea
sure responsible for his insecurity. In
addition, individual anxieties often re
inforce each other to the detriment of
all concerned.
While it is agreed that there is val
uable support and learning through
contact with others engaged in the
same experience, this by no means re
quires that most of one's contacts be
freshmen, nor does it exclude the pos
sibility or desirability of living in con
tact with others.
In a maximally integrated system in
which freshmen constitute approxi
mately 30 per cent of the population,
reinforcement of pre-college values
would be healthily reduced, while
freshmen, still pursuing similar curri
cula, would not suffer from a dearth of
contact and interaction with other
freshmen. In a fully integrated system,
the freshman could contribute to the
atmosphere of the residence, but could
not dominate it. Social support would
be provided not only by contact with
other freshmen, but also by the pres
ence of upperclassmen who have gone
through similar experiences and who
can contribute to the freshman's sense
of social support both by advice or ex
ample and by providing living evidence
that students actually survive the
freshmen year. This system would, of
course, have the further advantage of
more fully orienting freshmen to the
challenges and opportunities of the
university, a need which can be only
partially fulfilled by the present spon
sor system.
C. Partial Integration
In the preceding discussion the mini
mum ratio of upperclassmen to fresh
men in an integrated residence is as
sumed to be well in excess of 1:1. Any
system of partial integration with ra
tios well below this minimum faces se
vere difficulties:
1. Although the population would be
enriched by the addition of more ex
perienced upperclass models, fresh
men would still dominate the dormi
tory; the balance between security
and growth would not be significant
ly changed.
2. Under one suggestion for partial in
tegration offered by Dean Gordon's
staff, upperclassmen would essential
ly be guests whose rooms happened
to be in a freshman dormitory. It is
difficult to understand what would
motivate 147 upperclassmen to accept
such a position, or why they would
feel any dedication to close personal
interaction with the freshmen in an
educational sense.
3. The sponsor system is successful
largely because a few individuals are
committed to making the best of an
unfortunate living situation for
freshmen. It is not clear that the sub
stitution of five guests for one spon
sor dedicated to working with fresh
men is desirable.
4. Partial integration in itself has never
been suggested as an optimal resi
dence system, and it is not clear that
it is a desirable step toward total
integration. The committee is con
vinced that change for its own sake
is an unsound policy at any stage in
the development of a more viable
residence system.
Freshmen have the most to gain in
a campus-wide residence program
founded on the principles of co-educa
tion and integration. The institution of
this program requires not only the
support of freshmen, but also that of
upperclassmen. It could be argued that
upperclassmen would not want to give
up their present housing system. In
answer to this objection three points
can be made:
1. It is not clear that upperclassmen
are satisfied with the present sys
tem. Every spring quarter freshmen
express dissatisfaction with the hous
ing alternatives open to them: the
success of the overseas program as
a living experience has prompted
many to call for a more desirable
program at Stanford at-Stanford;
there were five applicants for each
place in the Grove Project, and if
the seminar hadn't been required
there would have been more upper
classmen seeking this exciting new
living alternative.
2. Tn our model of a fully integrated,
coeducational house, the percentage
of freshmen living in should be kept
well below 50 per cent. Freshmen
could contribute their real enthusi
asm and the challenge of their ques
tions without dominating the houses,

so that integration would benefit
both freshmen and upperclassmen.
3. In our residence program some inde
pendent npperclass houses would re
main, if there were a demand for
them. We believe that most students
would choose to live in a coed, inte
grated house, however, if some stu
dents wished something akin to the
present system such alternatives
would be open to them. The assump
tion we are making is that the new
residenco opportunities will sell them
selves.
E. Diversity and Self-Selection
Diversity among housing alternatives
is desirable. In addition, diversity with
in each house must be maintained to
avoid provincialism within the various
alternatives. Free choice, particularly
too early in the college career, among
various living styles will eventually
produce self-selective, provincial group
ings which will contradict the ideal
of developing acceptance of individual
differences within the residence. Three
points can be made to this problem:
1. No house needs to represent a cross
section of the student body. When
too great diversity exists in a living
group, cohesiveness is lost and frag
mentation takes the form of break
ing up into small sub-groups between
which little communication exists.
Therefore, some commonality, espe
cially by interests, is desirable.
2. It may not be the case that giving
students free choice among really
worthwhile alternatives will result
in serious problems of self-selection.
At any rate, it will take time for this
to happen and if indeed problems do
arise, we should be able to deal with
them early.
3. Assuming that such problems do
arise and call for some restriction of
free choice, one possible solution
would be to limit the amount of time
that an individual could live in a par
ticular residence. By encouraging
switching and moving among stu
dents, no system would be allowed
to lock itself in and stagnate.
VII. The Tone and Character of the
Living Group: Staff and Program
The residential components of most
universities are now basically eating
and sleeping facilities, structurally like
barracks, motels, or high-rise Hiltons,
surrounded by parking lots. To become
a truly residential university, the resi
dence hall must become a center of
learning and development equal in im
portance to the lecture hall. Ideally
their staffing, planning, and adminis
tration should be the responsibility of
faculty members rather than housing
directors or business offices.
While Stanford now is a far cry from
the suggested ideal of a residence uni
versity, many steps have been pro
posed which work toward the ideal. In
tegration by class and co-education are
two strong recommendations made by
the committee, which as discussed
above have considerable value in them
selves.
However, these steps will not by
themselves result in genuine centers
for learning. The mechanical bod>
shuffling is only one step in preparing
a more conducive atmosphere for total
education; the other is the purposeful
stimulation of intellectual activities
within the residence. The character and
quality of such activities, and their
relevance to students' concerns will be
come a crucial measure and determi
ned of the contribution that residence
is providing for its component mem
bers. The program for each residence
would decide for itself what input to
organize as a stimulus for the desired
enrichment of the quality of living that
contributes to the total education of
the individual and of the group's stu
dents, faculty, ideas, and the unending
list of resources of a university com
munity are all potential and powerful
inputs. The interaction of these compo
nents now creates the particular ex
citement of a university, but these
components are being comparatively
wasted in one of the areas in which
they could be the most effective ... the
living situation. The challenge of a
idential program is to organize and
bring the components together in the
most imaginative ways to utilize the
potential to the lullest.
One of the major areas of waste Is
student-faculty relations. Both the stu
donts and the faculty complain about
the distance and seeming disinterest of
the two groups. The section in the re
port which* deals with the faculty rol£
in the residence university is only a
very small start on the road to killing
this unhealthy and unproductive gap.
(See section on faculty residents.)
Too often students miss out on much
of the university experience because of
communication gaps. A face-to-face liv
ing unit is the most obvious place for
communication and contact between
students and faculty. Often the pre
vailing ethos of a dormitory can work
against this ground level communica
tion and antithetically to the explora
tory ventures of the individual. A dorm
which is oriented around a strictly so
cial purpose may even squelch the mo
tivation branding it as "intellectual," a
word that has been mistreated from all
directions in our society. While many
houses do not fall into this trap, there
is another pitfall of ruts and habit that
restricts the growing of experience in
a different way. The entire responsi
bility of taking advantage of the under
graduate experience is on the individ
ual. and some people find themselves
vorking against odds that would dis
courage the most aggressive. Fresh
man in particular belong to this cate
gory. They need to be exposed to the
broad ranges of opportunity but also
need help to make use of them. An
adolescent peer culture reinforcing high
school anti-intellectualism is not one
)f the best possible ways to meet this
need. The outside stimulus and help
will not best be provided by authority
figures who tell people what to do. or
beat off the anti-intellectual bullies. The
best assurance that free exchange and
.sharing of experience will occur will
be found in the atmosphere of the liv
ing group and in the character of its
leadership. A lively house where there
is a constant influx of new and differ
ent stimuli where all things that need
expression can find it, has the best
chance against apathy or unspoken
social taboos. House organized activi
ties such as art exhibits, musical per
formances, seminars, or small scale
lecture series suffer the same fate as
the individual's struggle for expres
sion and exploration. Not everyone
would want to participate and now
many of those who do want to can,
"but to those who find it difficult, en
couragement, not brick walls, should
be present in the tone of the house.
The possibility of organizing houses
around special interests has been sug
gested; experimentation is in order.
Houses with distinctive interests—fine
arts, social issues, foreign policy—may
well bring together students and fac
ulty from various disciplines who
could more meaningfully and readily
develop a learning community than a
house whose residents and loosely
affiliated faculty can only share pleas
antries. There would still be ample
diversity by virtue of differences in
personality, background, majors, ca
reer plans and so on, but there would
also be a major intellectual and social
oncern they all share. More detail
for this kind of program is discussed
in the specific proposal for next year.
The program of input is just the
beginning to what happens to the life
n a particular house. It provides pos
sibly a focus or direction as well as the
important underlying communication
and resource network of faculty, tutor,
and student. It must be emphasized
that what is going to happen in every
house is going to be determined most
by the people who live there. There
is a give-and-take natural exchange
between the program of ideas for the
living group and the group's response.
Reuniting the sphere of living as a
meaningful and integral part of a stu
dent's education in no way signifies
the creation of a twenty-four-hour
classroom. The residential education
urogram is not an extension of the
formal academic structure; it is its
complement. Although the opportun
,fy for experimenting with courses
given for credit should be open, it is
only one of the myriad of possibilities
with residential education. While
proper planning, particularly in the
■'election of good faculty, is necessary
it would be unrealistic to lose sight
of the interaction from the other di
rection. A structure too rigid would
kill the potential of a residential pro
gram just as the naive assumption
that body shuffling is the whole
answer.
Flexibility and spontaneity are key
<*ords in the concept of what a pro
gram should be prepared to provide.
Fvrit the program should be externally

flexible. The development of the house
spirit would depend upon the inter
action between the particular members
and particular faculty and tutors. This
matter of orientation or direction for
the house could bow with the interest
and demand for a particular living sit
uation. Some programs would last
longer than others, some undoubtedly
will be less successful, some would
evolve of themselves into a new area.
There is flexibility to let the good pro
grams grow and let the bad ones kill
themselves without bringing the entire
system to ruin. A diversity of choice
between residences could be main
tained.
There should in addition be an in
ternal flexibility within each group.
There must be room for growth and
change within the group. If topics were
to be the basis for a house, they would
always have to be picked with enough
latitude to allow each member of the
house to approach it in his own way.
This casua', unstructured opportunity
for close faculty contact speaks directly
to the need of students who are con
cerned with relevance as a criterion of
education, relevance to themselves or
to the contemporary world. There is
much opportunity for the student to
become very involved in the formation
and execution of his own education.
People who are involved and interested
in their own work tend to be more in
terested and able to contribute to the
work of others.
Another possibility that should be
included in the program is the oppor
tunity for experimentation with self
government. All sorts of opportunities
exist outside of the adoption of a hier
archy handed from above of president,
social chairman, etc. . .
There is much to be said for the edu
cationally valuable experience of learn
ing to live with ambiguity and without
automatically following tradition or
the dictates of an authority figure to
create the quality of life of a house
out of what is there ... to create an
educationally meaningful experience.
"The ideas sound great on paper!" is
the old comment at the outset of any
innovation with the rejoiner "But how
do you make it work in reality?" usu
ally not far behind. Why doesn't this
all happen now? Wilbur, the recom
mended site for next year's project,
already has many of the features out
lined in this report. "Is there really
going to be any significant difference?"
might be one question. The answer is
twofold. Some of the kinds of things
this report talks about are already
happening. If they weren't then there
would really be no use in trying to
maximize the interaction. But so much
more could be happening, and many of
the detrimental currents that run con
trary to the purpose of attending a
university could be reduced. All sys
tems are implemented by men. There
is not any system of law, morality or
of a residence university which can
overcome the fallibility of man. There
is not a magical formula implied in this
program, it rests very heavily on the
people who participate but so does
every other system. Good systems help
him along and the committee firmly
feels that a true residential university,
is a better system than one which only
claims to be and is somewhere in the
middle.
The people involved therefore are at
the core of the program. But their
effectiveness will depend to a large
degree upon how they see their role.
Their conception of their role in this
new system must undergo as much
fundamental reinterpretation as the
system itself.
How will the inertia of the present
resident conditions be overcome? Who
will set the tone, provide the mo
mentum, and contribute the leader
ship? Our first answer to these ques
tions is the students themselves. In any
residence system students will unde
niably be the major constituency.. But
how the resident staff can contribute
is also an important issue. At the pres
ent time Stanford has faculty residents,
tutors, resident assistants, and spon
sors. The role of each should be re
viewed.
Faculty Resident*
The committee would certainly not
deny the valuable contribution of the
faculty residents toward improving the
living situation at Stanford, but in
general, the faculty resident program
simply is not given the support neces
sary to tree Its members from -other

tasks and to allow them to devote
more time, thought and emphasis to
the residence education program. The
basic change would be that of increased
commitment to the living situation. The
primary responsibility of the faculty
resident should not be to the dorm di
rector or the administration, but to the
student within the living group or com
plex. To be effective, the faculty resi
dent must be willing to accept a de
manding and time consuming involve
ment in the living situation. His pres
ence there will be much more than a
face at meals or even that of a good
friend. Presumably the resident would
be a full time member of the faculty,
for the success of the residence pro
gram would greatly depend upon his
response to the intellectual needs of the
students. Doctoral candidates, coaches,
university officials, and administrators,
however, could still participate if they
would be willing to make the same
kind of commitment to the ideal of a
residence university. The interpersonal
factor is extremely important in this
kind of situation. Most every student
complains about the brilliant man who
can't give a good lecture. The same
argument will have to be taken into
account that not everyone can fulfill
this particular kind of a role. The fac
ulty resident must, above all, be sensi
tive to the interaction among students
in the group.
The things a faculty member could
contribute are bounded only by their
individual creativity but a few sug
gestions are in order.
1. In certain living units, seminars for
academic credit could be offered.
2. Directed reading could be made avail
able to certain students under the
resident.
3. Informal and noncredit seminars
should be encourage by the faculty
resident or when an idea came out
of the group he or some of his col
leagues could serve as resource per
son.
4. A student chairman and the faculty
resident could set up a meaningful
faculty associate program. The resi
dent can draw upon close friends and
colleagues which would supply an
internal identification missing in the
present program.
What would bring the faculty to par
ticipate in this program? Much of the
same dissatisfaction with student-fac
ulty relations that would bring the
students. Where something lively is
going on, something which the faculty
member is part there would not be
the embarassed ordeals that now take
place in dormitories on campus where
everyone involved is on their best and
most strained behavior. The living con
ditions would be similar to that of an
overseas campus though the professor
would not be required to drop his own
work or leave the center of his re
search. Class loads could be lessened
for the faculty participating because
they would be in essence only relocat
ing their teaching commitments, not
dropping them. They would have a
more flexible time schedule that might
be convenient to their purposes. This
position would also be in effect on a
rotating basis.
Resident Assistants and Tutors
The role of resident assistant should
be eliminated. In other words, we
would eliminate the role of the nice
guy disciplinarian, the liaison between
the administration and the students
who has been for too long forced into
an unfortunate position of hypocrisy.
As he is employed by the administra
tion he has an obligation to enforce
University policies, but if he is to be
at all effective with the students his
identification is with them. Too often
he has resolved the conflict by the
statement, "I don't care what you do,
just do it quietly so I don't see it."
Caught in this bind he has been in
effective as a man playing to two mas
ters. It is not enough to react to stu
dent needs and problems, for the role
we see must be one of creative action —
one of initiative and not merely re
sponse. Similarly, the present tutor
system is limited because its goal is
only to answer questions, not raise
them.
The present role of tutor, however,
is closer to our purpose than the RA's.
But this role must be expanded to be
effective. Thus, the idea of tutors
should be maintained, but its purpose
significantly broadened. Like faculty
residents > (and unlike RA's)' tutors

must have autonomy from primarily ad
ministrative policy and must be respon
sible primarily to the students below.
They should be linked to the resident
director, who is then responsible to the
administration. Although academic
assistance is undeniably important, tu
tors must do more than merely toot.
Their role should be to stimulate dis
cussion, to promote all types of inter
change, and to actively work towards
an educational atmosphere. At present
RA's and tutors tend to preserve rather
than promote and to be problem
solvers, rather than catalysts. The
tutor, like the faculty resident, must
approach his job with a new vitality
and commitment.
Sponsors
When the freshman class has been
entirely integrated into the university
community then the sponsor system
will become an anachronism. But until
that point the need remains and the
present system of sponsors and tutors
should be maintained.
There are two more important con
siderations before any system is put
Into operation. How will the faculty
and tutors be selected? And what are
the costs for the program as a whole?
These problems become relevant and
solvable only after the initial commit
ment and go ahead has been made.
Therefore discussion of these aspects
of the program will be included in
the proposal for next year.
VIII. Brief Assessment of Experience
At Other Institutions
While it is not our intention to base
the justification for our proposals on
the successes and failures of other in
stitutions with their necessarily dif
ferent circumstances, it is interesting
to note the results of a study con
ducted by the Faculty Committee on
Student Residences at Stanford in 1959.
Studying twenty-one similar universities
in this country they found that they
were about equally divided between
integrated and segregated freshman
living facilities. In general each school
seem satisfied with the system it then
had. However, while all of these with
the integrated system found it the most
workable, about 25 per cent of those
with segregated freshmen replied that
they were dissatisfied with their situ
ation and it certainly increases the
noisy freshman atmosphere which is
inimical to good study habits and con
ditions." Some schools reported that
the only reason for maintaining fresh
man segregation was pressure from
the fraternities who "objected stren
uously to placing their pledges under
the influence of hard bitten rugged in
dependents."
The many success of coeducational
housing on other campuses are too well
known to require documentation.
The institutions interviewed were
Cal Tech, Reed, Pembroke, Swarth
more, Oberlin, Pomona, Carleton, Rad
clifTe, Occidental, Ohio Wesleyan, Chi
cago, Brown, Dartmouth, Princeton,
Yale, Harvard, Northwestern, Washing
ton State, Oregon, Cornell, and Ohio
State.
IX. A Proposal:
The Wilbur Experiment
The committee has set forth its ar
guments for coeducational and inte
grated residences. It has suggested that
the residence should be a center of
intellectual life, and through residence
education the rigid separation of the
student's social and intellectual lives
could be ended. It remains for the com
mittee to propose how these aims can
be fulfilled at Stanford.
It is the feeling of the committee
that significant experimentation in resi
dence education is altogether feasible
for next year. There is a wide range
of possibilities. The committee initially
considered a massive scrambling of the
university residence pattern, convert
ing most dormitories on campus to
coeducation and integration. This pro
posal was rejected for two reasons:
(1) Full integration, or anything ap
proaching it, would at this time pro
duce an undesirable ratio of freshmen
to upperclass men. (2) It would be im
possible to supply the staff necessary
to introduce residence education in any
meaningful way if the scope of the
housing experiment is so broad.
The committee decided that its aims
could best be fulfilled by an experiment
of more limited scope. Instead of dras
tically overhauling the university resi
dence pattern, one dormitory complex
could be used as a rather large "pilot"
project, in which * Integratiorr and • eo
education could be complete and intel
lectual life could be given the proper
attention. Wilbur Hall is ideal for this
purpose. It is the largest complex on
campus, with space for approximately
720 people. It is divided into eight
houses, each of which constitutes a
separate identity unit. Each house has
an adjacent cottage for a faculty resi
dent and a tutorial room where semin
ars can be held.
The committee recommends that
next fall each Wilbur house be occu
pied by two floors of men and one
floor of women, and that each house
be integrated by class at a rate of one
freshman to three upperclassmen. Con
stituted as such, Wilbur Hall would be
the site of meaningful experimentation
in residential education.
The Wilbur experiment will of neces
sity affect some of the other university
residences. Freshman men will move to
Stern and Branner, retaining the spon
sor system in its present form. Fresh
man women will remain in Roble, with
sponsors, and those living in neither
Roble or Wilbur will be integrated with
upperclass women in Florence Moore.
Lagunita, Hoskins, and Toyon will be
unaffected. The remaining upperclass
men will live in three of the row
houses. The statistical breakdown is
as follows.
Total Frosh Upcl. Total Frosh Upcl.
Men Men Men W'ran W'mn Wmn
Wilbur 480 120 360 240 60 180
Stem 590 570 20
Branner 170 160 10
Roble 260 250 10
Florence
Moore 350 90 260
Lagunita 290 0 290
Hoskins 120 0 120
Toyon 200 0 200
Row
Houses (3)100 0 100
(5) 180 0 180
Totals 1540 850 690 1440 400 1040
(Note: If women are allowed to move
off campus, adjustments can be made
easily. If the number of women moving
off is under 180, an appropriate num
ber of row houses can be converted
from women to men. Compensation
can also be made by admitting more
freshman and transfer women. If

necessary the measures can be com
bined. )
Students will be chosen for the Wil
bur experiment on a draw basis. It is
reasonable to expect an excess demand
for on-campus housing by upperclass
men, since a new option is being of
fered that will presumably attract men
who presently or would otherwise live
off campus, or in fraternities. The com
ration of the upperclassmen's popu
lation in Wilbur would thus differ
from the present composition of Stem.
If women are allowed off campus, there
would be a greater possibility of satis
fying the demand for men's housing.
The likelihood of vacant dormitory
space, with the introduction of the
Wilbur option, is highly improbable.
The logistics of putting the bodies
into Wilbur for the pilot project is
only half of our task in our proposal.
The problems of staffing the complex
and from there working out feasible
programs is the next step. Hopefully
to make this pilot project a real step
toward achieving the residential uni
versity, as much of the general report
as possible will be included, only the
scope has changed not the purpose of
the program.
Selection for next year's faculty resi
dents could be turned over to a com
mittee composed of one faculty and
one student member of the ASSU
Housing Commission and two members
from the Dean of Students Office, with
the advice of the present Committee.
Once this task has been completed, the
faculty can participate in choosing the
tutors and drawing up more detailed
plans for the program.
The committee realizes that a com
mitment to this kind of residential
education will require an overt shift
in educational effort from the class
room and lab to the residence, with
both compensation for it and relief
from other teaching duties—and quite
probably the replacement of their
other more formal academic functions
by other personnel. We also realize
that there will be a budget problem,
but emphatically deny that worthwhile
educational goals should not be pro
posed and slated because of current
pragmatic limitations.
The committee hopes that, through

further study—best done in conjunc
tion with the study of education at
Stanford—that it will be possible to
rearrange and reemphasize the com
ponents of freshman education in such
a way that existing resources would
permit a serious upgrading of resi
dence education, and the possibility
that such education could replace some
aspects of the present program. This
might well allow the same total re
sources of money and people to meet
the desired objectives by shifting the
locale and method of teaching, rather
than just adding to the staff and pro
gram.
Presently in Wilbur there are three
sponsor rooms and one tutor room
which can accommodate the new tutors.
Hopefully as many of these rooms will
be used for that purpose, but if for
any reason four tutors per house is im
possible, then the rooms could be used
for offices which would at least bring
more graduate level contact into the
residence.
One possible suggestion for Wilbur's
eight houses next year would be to
have five of them centered around a
general theme, one international house,
and two left unstructured. There has
been much agitation for an interna
tional house on campus and many pro
posals have been drawn up. Five sug
gested topics for the theme houses are
"Religion and Society," "Literature and
Fine Arts," "Science and Human Prob
lems," "The Urban Threat," and "So
cial Change."
To take only one of these themes and
speculate what the given house of
faculty, tutors and students will make
of it is another of those endless first
steps in imagination potential. The
house that was using the topic "Science
and Human Problems," for example,
would bring in a diversity of fields
from the natural sciences to the hu
manities. Many of the poignant prob
lems facing students and faculty are
centered in this topic but the same
could probably be said in a different
context for each of the five topics. The
impact of technology on our economic
and social system, the moral contro
versy over the newest discoveries in
genetics, the myth of the scientific
method are all themes to be explored.

What happens to a world view when
scientific discoveries puncture com
fortable philosophies? What is time
and how does man control it and how
docs it control man? These are ques
tions to be asked. Above all, it is im
portant to remember that the direc
tion of intellectual thrust must not be
too well defined in advance. One of
the most valuable experiences for the
living group will be coming to grips
with the topic, deciding for themselves
how the general area should be ap
proached, and then proceeding to de
velop programs and structures on their
own.
The committee is highly enthusiastic
about the creative possibilities pre
sented by the Wilbur experiment—the
first step in the direction of a fully
integrated and coeducational residence.
If the experiment even approaches the
measure of success the committee en
visions, it could prove a major innova
tion in the history of American higher
education. A well developed program
of residential education offers a poten
tial of immeasurable dimension.
X. Correlation of this report with the
overall review of education at Stanford
The key problems of residence edu
cational stimulus and the kind of staff
and budget commitments necessary
need further specific elucidations which
the committee hopes can be under
taken by the Executive Committee for
the study of education at the earliest
opportunity, in order to agree on ob
jectives and make necessary staff and
financial plans for the Wilbur Project
to be able to start in the Fall of 1967.
The committee takes this oppor
tunity to thank the following people
for individual contributions to our
meetings: Dwight Clark, Dr. Lawrence
Thomas, Miss Sally Mahoney, Dr. Mar
tin Evans, Dick Williams, Mike Roster,
Howie Holmes, Doug Davis, Bob Gor
don, Dean Hind, and Dean Novak.
February 6, 1967
Subcommittee on the Freshmen Resi
dence Program ASSU Housing Com
mission. Barbara Levin, Judy Bader.
Barbara Warren, David Koval, Chris
topher Harte, Douglas Sorenson, Scott
Soames (Co-Chairman) Elizabeth
Cohen, B. Davie Napier, Max
Maurice M. Osborne Jr. (Co-Chairman).
Doubts of the ability of Stanford's
present educational system to provide
for the needs of its students, and speci
fic questions about the relevance of
the residence program in its present
form, have stimulated students, faculty,
and staff to seek more appropriate
solutions.
The A.S.S.U., concerned about the
quality of residential experience at
Stanford — particularly in contrast to
that at the Overseas Campuses —
created through its Legislature a Hous
ing Commission, one task of which was
to review and make recommendations
concerning the freshman residence
program in its relation to education.
At about the same time, Associate
Dean of Students Robert Gordon was
asked to present proposals for a new
model of freshman residential educa
tion.
Both A.S.S.U. and Dean Gordon al
most simultaneously appointed com
mittees in the early Fall of 1966 to ad
vise them in the making of recommen
dations in this important area, and
rather than continue a too-familiar pat
tern of separate committees working
independently (and often divergently)
it was decided to merge the two.
In the merger, the Dean's Advisory
Committee agreed to accept the A.S.S.U.
invitation to become an integral part,
of its group. Dean Gordon agreed to
accept the report of the entire group
in the same light as he would have the
recommendations of his originally ap
pointed committee, and the merged
group in turn agreed to attempt in
good faith to assist him in meeting his
deadlines and obligations as best it
could.
Despite particular questions existing
about the Sponsor system, the Commit
tee felt from the outset that to limit
its discussions and report to such par
ticulars, or to start out with them,
would be to avoid the main Issues sur
rounding ,the quality and meaning of

residential education at Stanford, par
ticularly the freshman program.
The Committee thus firmly decided
that it would start from a fresh con
sideration of the issues and principles
involved, relating its recommendations
to them. It was recognized that such
an approach would be time consuming,
that it might seem Utopian to some;
yet a critque and basic statement about
the ideas of a residence university
seemed vital for future planning and
growth.
At the same time, the practical ne
cessity for more immediate recommen
dations and action was realized. The
present report is in this sense a pre
liminary, or interim report, which at
tempts to set forth and justify some
practical recommendations for residence
programs that could be adopted in
1967-68 — steps within the framework
of progression towards a more ideal
situation.
The Case for the Residential Commu
nity — The Personal Committment to
Learning
The impossibility of considering the
freshman experience in isolation from
the life and purposes of the entire un
dergraduate program has been a ma
jor premise in the subcommittee's
study of the Freshman Residence Pro
gram. Two main assumptions underlie
this approach.
One is that the university experience,
as a whole, is only one part of the con
tinuum of the educational process, a
process which neither begins nor ends
at the university gates. The educational
ideals should be the same for all four
undergraduate years in terms of what
they declare for the growth of persons.
The freshman year is only a step in
a span of development, having a spe
cial function as the first step but not
a separate one.
The second is a new conception which
views the university as a community
for learning through personal, interac
,tjon, find development,. .nsp, of

all its facilities for education. This view
emphasizes that the classroom, library
or laboratory cannot — indeed does not
even now — have a monopoly on pro
viding for the education and develop
ment of students. Else, why a residen
tial university? Why not subcontract
all residential arrangements and avoid
hotel problems?
The Committee felt strongly that
there was urgent need for institutional
endorsement of the fact that without
growth and development in personal,
social, and emotional dimensions, the
achievements of intellect are shallow
and stand in isolation from the indivi
dual and his world. The conviction that
gives personal meaning to knowledge
is a product of direct human relation
ship, and we make far too little use
of its potential.
In a more settled and comfortable
past, with much greater mutuality of
expectations and values both between
peers and between generations, the ur
gency of such questions was less, the
scope more limited and the answers
more predictable. The bull-session quite
effectively handled many aspects of
this personal-social side of development.
For this, and other reasons, relatively
little formal attention to it was felt
to be necessary, aside from some for
mal lectures on hygiene, the evils of
sex and booze, and the Fundamental
Standard. After all, boys were (and
would be) boys, and pretty soon they'd
grow up into men, producers and fa
thers. Home and society would take
care somehow that they grew up right,
and the college would provide an ac
cepted transition station on the way,
some academic input, and try to keep
the lid on boyish spirit getting out of
hand.
By contrast today, for many students
questions about one's nature, and about
one's relationship to an uncertain
world, and about this world itself are
more insistent, and more pre-occupying
.before The V&iefttipns a#?, -real,

and require believable answers from
within the individual. And, until he can
find them, this quest, this preoccupa
tion has top priority, while academics
suffer through seeming less relevant.
And though there are many students
who are relatively unconcerned about
such questions, we feel their total edu
cation would be enriched if they could
be purposefully involved.
The history of formal didactic at
tempts to speak to these burning ques
tions is rather dismal, and all over the
country, there has been a steady atro
phy of required, and even of voluntary
courses relative to personal hygiene,
sex, morals, and behavior. Both stu
dents and educators sense that because
a viable set of personal ethics and
values just grow within the individual,
attempts simply to impose them from
without are relatively futile.
Not only have curricular approaches
to such questions atrophied (happi
ly!), but American education is nearing
the end of a decade in which the entire
necessity of addressing itself to the
problem of personal growth has been
quite deliberately rejected. Sputnik was
the symbol, and such spokesmen as
Hyman Rickover took up the cudgels,
with articulate and seathing denuncia
tions of "Education for Living" — of
concepts of "adjustment," and insisted,
along with many others, on intellectual
excellence (for "excellence" read "a
chievement") as the right, and only
purpose of education.
Growth of population; of national
wealth with its stimulus to upward so
cial mobility; increasing complexity
and diversity of knowledge with its
concommitant of faculty pre-occupa
tion and relatively-narrower fields; and
increased competition have sharpened
the pressures for achievement, leaving
even loss time, thought, or energy for
development as a person.
The need to pay most serious atten
tion to this is most keenly felt by many
studetitfi hy their eldprs.
There has been some re-emergence of
an expressed need for leadership and
cooperation in working out better ways
to assist and support the individual in
his personal education and develop
ment, and when students do not raise
these questions, their education should
raise them, and speak to them.
Unstructured and spontaneous stu
dent discussion, particularly at the
freshman level, is heavily-flavored with
the need to sort oneself out, but as it
now operates, it tends less to growth
than to its more traditional social func
tion of settling into "bird-of-a-feather"
groupings in which the individual
can find comfort and support for his
own sets of values and seekings. With
in this spontaneously-forming group
ings, the dialogue tends to become in
creasingly circular, the values increas
ingly exclusive, and there is decreased
permeability to fresh ideas and ex
perience.
In an educational situation where
concentration is placed on the formal
aspects of education there is an imbal
ance which produces distortion, which
too often takes the form of rejection
of the academic sphere as "irrelevant."
Another consequence is the dangerous
polarization of university life into two
worlds; that of the classroom, and that
of social life, setting them to work
against each other instead of with each
other toward the individual's goals. The
acceptance of the residence university
ideal as being vital to education can
be one important factor in keeping
the two worlds together and moving in
the same direction, whereas the pres
ent residence program presents too
many forces that divide living from
learning.
The Committee takes as self-evident
that a truly liberal education is in fact
liberating — in making both wider and
deeper the individual's ability to per
ceive, absorb, analyze, and choose in a
vastly-increasing array of people,
events, and issues, and not in forcing
the premature adoption of limited, and
constricting attitudes. In effect this
seems the necessity of the student's
continuous and repeated exposure to
and challenge by diversity of ideas, of
values, styles, and of course people.
It is here that the meaning of residen
tial education springs to life, for it of
fers potentially the best milieu for
daily face-to-face interaction with peers,
with older students, and faculty mem
bers of both sexes — offering diversity
of age, sex, discipline and values in
the highly personal way so necessary
for exposure to lead to involvement,
and knowledge to become commitment.
The necessity of direct personal in
teraction is most strongly endorsed by
the Committee, for it is the set of
values and mental attitudes formed in
such day-in, day-out exchange that set
tle most deeply into one's fiber. Thus
to narrow the range, or dilute the qual
ity of this exchange seems antiethical
to education. Kenneth Benne, in his
article "The Uses of Fraternity" states
in this regard, "People learn value sys
tems in the first instance as they form
relations with others. These relations
in turn develop norms with corres
ponding rationales which the individual
then internalizes. If people, young or
old, can build groups with standards
that reward and strengthen honest
self - expression and self - acceptance,
creativity, mutual helpfulness and the
capacity to cope with conflict, then the
members of such groups will assimilate
these values as conditions of member
ship."
Choice, and learning to choose ra
tionally, are important educational
tasks, but should not be forced on the
individual too hurriedly, without
enough exposure to a wide range of
choices, nor without some room for
trial and error.
In summary then, the Committee
firmly believes that:
1. As education is, or should be, a con
tinuum, the freshman year cannot
be considered in isolation from the
entire undergraduate program, and al
though it has a special function as
the first step, it is an integral part
of the whole.
2. There is a grave imbalance in the
university's educational emphasis,
which tends to widen the needless,
and in our view harmful, gap be
tween the getting of knowledge and
the important business of living.
3. The deepest personal and intellectual
cpncems of students — their rela
tionships to themselves, and to an

uncertain world, — are not receiving
the institutional recognition and ef
fort they deserve.
4. That people learn most deeply by
living, and by forming personal re
lationships, and that when the resi
dence program, as at present, is
oriented to bed, board, and social
needs, the opportunities for inter
nalizing intellectual knowledge and
values are meager, and the tenden
cies to reject academic values as per
sonally-irrelevant are reinforced.
5. That choice, and learning to choose
critically are central educational
goals, but that it must depend on
close and repeated exposure to a
wide range of ideas, values, styles,
and people — people of different
ages, disciplines, sexes, and back
grounds, — and not be prematurely
forced into constricting channels
based primarily on social and not in
tellectual values.
6. Such close exposure to diversity, over
sufficient time, and if taken as the
norm, would go far in preventing
the formation of narrowed and
sterotypic attitudes and thought —
the surest signs of the ill-educated
man.
7. The way in which students live very
directly affects the whole quality of
their education: this single principle
underpins the whole concept of the
residential university.
"THE FRESHMAN CONDITION"
The paraphrase above in intentional,
— and designed to point out that being
a freshman at Stanford, or anywhere,
is an intensely personal experience of
transition. Although the general ideals
of education apply equally, — and es
pecially, — to him, the freshman also
has attributes which make him special,
but not separate.
It is the feeling of this committee
that freshmen can and should receive
the benefit of special experiences de
signed for their particular problems.
The assumption that we would like to
question is whether this need for some
special orientation experiences necessi
tates their living in a segragated fash
ion. Although it is expedient from an
"efficiency" point of view, it may gen
erate excessive anxiety over perfor
mance in freshman courses and a rein
forcement for essentially juvenile
modes of facing college stresses. His
special attributes can be summed up as
follows:
A. He obviously needs early and reli
able information about his new com
munity — where things are, what he
is to do, and so forth.
B. He is making the transition most
traditionally accepted in America as
the line between family dependency
and personal autonomy.
In actuality, the line, if there is one,
is blurred, and varies greatly from one
freshman to another. In general, the
freshman comes equipped with the cre
dentials of previous achievement and
approval — hoping he will be accepted
in his new college world, and fearing
that he may not. At the same time he
hopes that his performance and life
will be freer and larger than before.
The freshman, more poignantly than
any other undergraduate, in his transi
tion from a narrower to a hopefully
wider identity, wants the understand
ing of his old world, personal accep
tance by the new — and fears he may
have neither.
He is thus enormously vulnerable,
and as Steve Hurlbut has written in
his excellent paper, is characterized by
a "pervasive anxiety." Until he has as
similated workable norms, he feels he's
got to satisfy some kind of external
standard, and is anxious until he does.
Some more specific stresses that tend
to promote anxiety are:
I.The sudden change of status that
comes from being taken out of a
high school situation where one is
enormously successful and being put
in a class of similar big frogs from
small ponds, and feeling that they
are tougher frogs than he is:
2. The doubt about being able to live up
to tough academic demands:
3. Doubts about his being accepted by
his peers — of both sexes;
4. Being away from home;
5. Confrontation with different reli
gious and social values than those
the student has learned in his family
and home community;
6. Ambivalence about authority, and
older peopje in general.
This araciety and vulnerability are by

no means bad in themselves — and in
deed offer the most fertile soil for cul
tivation of the seeking young mind.
But the thrust of this searching anxiety
is in essence social, and approval-seek
ing — and therefore related to persons
and social groups, or the winning of ac
ceptable symbols of achievement.
The Committee feels that the perva
sive, and expectable freshman anxiety
and search for some group identity is
a double-edged sword, with potential
for both regression and for growth.
On one side, if there is failure of
approval from home, or personal ac
ceptance at college, or fewer grade
points "in the bank" than expected,
anxiety may well become dysfunction
al, with consequences such as neurotic
disturbance, refusal to compete aca
demically, and even regressive and
anti-social group-adolescent behavior,
and the reinforcement of pre-college
values.
CRITIQUE OF THE PRESENT
FRESHMAN RESIDENCE PROGRAM
The Committee feels that too many
features of the present freshman resi
dence program serve:
1. To reinforce natural anxieties among
the newest members of the Univer
sity, and
2. To promote the seeking of solutions
to this anxiety that have little if any
thing to do with educational pur
poses, but tend to promote prema
ture and mutually exclusive social
groupings.
As he moves into a freshman resi
dence, he is thrown into close contact
with a large peer-group of greater
diversity in background, attitudes, and
talent than he is likely to have known.
And, because competition and fears of
failure are keenest among peers (par
ticularly of neophytes performing simi
lar tasks,) these differences within the
larger peer-group tend to move the stu
dent into protective subgroups of
peers with attitudes and pre-college
backgrounds similar to his own, within
which he finds support. In such mutual
ly-supportive social groups, the student
can arm himself and defend himself
psychologically against any new ideas
to which he is being exposed, from fel
low students, members of the opposite
sex, and his professors. Studies will
never be taken at all seriously but will
be dealt with in a purely cognitive
fashion, ingested for the purpose of
passing exams and discarded soon af
terwards. Under these conditions, we
may have done away with the prob
lems of anxiety, but are faced with the
possibility of at least two other un
desirable consequences, 1) His atti
tudes and values may remain totally
unquestioned throughout his college
career; and 2) a group devoted to de
fending itself against the climate of an
institution may exhibit anti-social char
acteristics of alienated people every
where.
That present groups formed for mu
tual support emerge after a limited
exposure to new, and possible better
models, is certainly true, and groupings
tend to occur along pre-college lines
and values, or in rebellion against
them.
The present segregated freshman
residence situation also tends:
3. To promote the seeking of achieve
ment symbols (i.e. grades) rather
than knowledge of self or substance;
4. By a residence administration seen
as primarily regulatory and manger
ial, to aggravate the natural ambi
valence of freshmen towards author
ity with results ranging from thought
less docility to destructive rebellion;
or apathetic alienation;
5. To provide too much pressure for
distortion and ritualization of rela
tionships between the sexes — the
"dating syndrome" — and a poverty
of opportunities for simple, friendly
interaction of people, a lack fre
quently deplored by both freshmen
and upperclassmen.
Both architecture and group pres
sures, as well as well-institutionalized
pressures for achieving good grades
in a heavy curriculum conspire to rob
the freshman of privacy — both physi
cal privacy, and temporal privacy; i.e.
some time simply to be himself, to spin
his wheels, and to think, with room for
trial and error.
There is, at least in Wilbur, no at
mosphere in the dining halls in the
least conducive to conversation — and
for some reason, plastic and formica
encourage one to get In and out fast,

with emphasis on feeding the face, but
none on nourishing friendship.
All of these (observable) results are
Inimical to the purposes of stimulating
interest in new subjects, of promoting
constructive reaction to diversity, of
the discouragement of stereotypic
thinking and behavior, and of trust in
older people as human beings.
More importantly, the positive po
tentials of freshman vulnerability go
relatively untapped — or are being tap
ped for outworn purposes. For this
vulnerability is personal, and if pro
vided with daily personal interaction
with a wide range of interesting
people of different ages and different
disciplines, there is more than a good
chance that Stanford freshmen would
attach their enthusiasms and their
hearts to the new models they need
and seek — models of greater depth
and diversity, but providing the identi
ty and security they need.
The interaction between freshman
men in Wilbur and the Faculty Resi
dents has varied greatly in its intensity
and impact — with instances of great
fruitfulness, or relative neutrality and
harmony, and a very few of a truly
negative quality.
Faculty Associates to freshman resi
dences have often provided important
personal interactions between fresh
men and the faculty — but just as
often these contacts have been super
ficial and ritualized.
Sponsors, while providing the great
est impact in personal exchange, pre
sent, because of their small number,
relatively limited contact with upper
classmen's values and experiences.
While all these personal contacts in
the freshman residences do in fact en
rich the education of many freshmen,
the other fact remains that there are
simply not enough such contacts, nor
sufficient support and time for these
few people to give residential educa
tion the emphasis it deserves.
EVOLUTION OF THE PRESENT
FRESHMAN RESIDENCE PROGRAM
Whatever rationalizations may be
adduced in support of the present
freshman residence program, it ap
pears to the Committee that it is in
large measure a holdover from an
earlier set of norms — norms that re
ceived wide acceptance and support in
those times, but that are under serious
question *oday.
In the Teens, the Twenties, and even
well into the Thirties, there was more
general acceptance (in society at large
as well as in the university commu
nity) of a particular hierarchical order,
and the particular authority structure
such an order implies. One tended to
know where one stood in relation to
the order at any given period, and to
be confident that one would ascend the
ladder by predictable steps.
Perhaps because of the relative sta
bility of the social order, personal de
velopment was thought of more along
the lines of advancement within that
order — with of course the acquisition
of enough "knowledge" and academic
polish to secure preference in vocations
and the status of a college-educated
man. It was important in itself to be
a senior, or for that matter an upper
classman, and the class structure had
in itself real meaning to the student.
Hence, the development of class spirit
and cohesiveness was valued, encour
aged, and ritualized. Even the major
steps in progression along the well
worn rungs were ritualized in such
rites of passage as the annual "Frosh-
Soph War," a ritual which would have
been impossible had there been no such
open class distinction.
The residence arrangements prob
ably reflected an accept? e of this
order according to social and culture
values of the day, and were aimed at
initiating the freshman into them. A
deliberate segration of the neophyte —
either by residence, by distinguishing
badges (viz. the "Beanie"), by restric
tion of privilege, or by combinations
of these has in many human organiza
tions, served to reinforce acculturation
to desired social and behavioral norms,
and whether anyone was purposefully
aware of this or not, such considera
tions surely operated in freshman resi
dential segragation. Aside from "home
work" performed in a dorm, there was
a rather strict geographic separation
of intellectual-academic concerns and
the personal-social sphere. The class
room and laboratory (and one's closed
~oom or the stacks) were meant for
the'one — while the dorm was really
for the other, and largely designed for
it.
The early history of the sponsor
program, when Encina Hall was the
freshman men's dorm, illustrates well
its use as an instrument for indoctri
nation of the "hapless Frosh" into pre
vailing upperclassmen's values.
Most sponsors wore a block "S", and
embodied a prevailing ideal of social
and athletic prowess, coupled with a
sense of loyalty to the group, respect
for authority, and an obligation to be
exemplary to their potential succes
sors. As recently as 1955, the effective
ness of a sponsor was measured, among
other things, by the percentage of his
charges attending the pregame rallies
and intercollegiate games.
Most sponsors were also fraternity
men, and another measure of his suc
cess as a sponsor was the number of
his freshmen pledged. For the spon
sors, there was little conflict involved
in serving simultaneously the fresh
men, one's own upperclassman values,
and those of the institution and its
authorities, for all constituents had
pretty much the same understanding
of the system, and of each of their
places within it.
In the intervening years, particularly
those since World War 11, there have
been profound changes in the social
order — a disruption of settled commu
nity, sharpened preoccupations with
material competition, and a culture less
and less sure of where it stood, or what
it believed in. Particularly among those
intelligent enough to attend such col
leges as Stanford, there has been in
creasing criticism of existing institu
tions which seem to them to produce
as leaders men with narrowed vision,
preoccupation with power, and too
little time or love for people. In this
climate of malaise, and in the absence
of once tacitly-held assurances, the
young person's search for personal
identity, relevance, and belief has
emerged as a very important difference
between many students of today and
of the previous generation, and again
underscores the vital importance of the
living group experience.
Despite some expressed dissatisfac
tions with the existing sponsor system,
the sponsors and a few feculty resi
dents at Wilbur were quite probably
the first to sense both this new and
urgent need among the freshmen (and
of course in themselves,) and that the
approach to it had to be met at the
level of day-in, day-out personal inter
action.
The evolution of the present sponsor
system has been a response both to
the growing need for attention to per
sonal education and development, and
to the need to substitute a drive for
continuous search and openness for the
more comfortable, but rather water
tight, social groupings which they saw
taking place.
For the past few years, the sponsors
have been the real pioneers in residen
ital education in the freshman resi
dence program. To condemn them as
"politically motivated" or irresponsible
seems a rather defensive and negative
reaction to the admitted mistakes of
a few members, and more importantly
fails to recognize that, without much
help or understanding, they are on the
track of something very important.
There have, to be sure, been other
efforts in the direction of residential
education for freshmen — relatively
cautious additions which have been in
the general direction of enriching per
sonal experience and contact in the.
residences, and may represent an in
choate recognition of this need.
Such additions have been the Facul
ty Residents, the Faculty Associates,
the Student Associates — at first men,
later women — and later, more free
dom for dining exchanges. More for
mally, in-residence seminars, guests-in
residence, panel discussions, and even
classes have been introduced.
But the former additions (with the
exception of a few Faculty Residents)
have in general provided only super
ficial interactions, while the latter
(again with a few notable exceptions)
have borne little relation to life and
living education other than physical
proximity. There is a heavy implica
tion of the mere introduction of more
academics into residences — while the
.ru#ot iT.nortant questions to students
go, for the most part, unanswered.
Th< present freshmen residence pro
gram, in its segregation by class, by

sex, by its continued reinforcement of
separation of living from learning, is
anachronistic, and reflects values that
have become less relevant and ideas that
are no longer true — such as assump
tions that satisfactory personal devel
opment takes care of itself within an
accepted and orderly framework, (of
which the freshman class is one clear
step, houses and all); that personal
education and development are irrele
vant to, or at least peripheral to the
purposes of "Higher Education"; that
mutually-deaf social groupings are ac
ceptable parts of the social mosaic —
when the fact of the matter is that we
are badly failing to meet these now
paramount questions. Despite our be
ginning attentions to this need, the
main thrust of the freshman resi
dence program and the academic pro
gram, still tends to leave the freshman
alone in his search and to force him
into protective groupings.
FRESHMAN IN3PEORATION INTO
UNIVERSITY IJFE
As discussed above, the Committee
feels strongly that the present segre
gation of freshmen reflects values no
longer taken seriously, reinforces the
separation of learning from living
(with impoverishment of both), height
ens some dysfunctional anxieties, and
tends to force premature and relative
ly narrow security groupings, rein
forces the artificiality of contact be
tween the sexes, and alienates students
from the faculty.
Thus, segregation is in itself a cen
tral problem, and, of course, the alter
natives must be aimed at integration
of the freshman in one or more ways.
A. Coeducational Housing
As noted earlier, a major problem
for freshmen is the difficulty of estab
lishing relationships with members of
the opposite sex on any basis other
than a social or dating level. For fresh
man men, the problem is especially
acute, manifesting itself in a heighten
ing anxiety, increased insecurity, and
frustration. The institution of a sys
tem of coeducational housing would
not only ameliorate the undesirable so
cial position of freshman men but also
provide an atmosphere conducive to
more natural (spontaneous) and per
sonal relationships. Upperclassmen al
so face similar problems as the results
of a segragated housing system, and
they too could gain much from having
the option of a coeducational residence
program.
That such a program is both prac
tical and desirable is supported by the
acknowledged success of the overseas
campus program as a living and learn
ing experience. In addition, the appar
ent success of the Grove Project as a
coeducational residence suggests that
coeducation can be successful on the
home campus.
The committee believes that, in the
long run, coeducational housing should
be the prevailing, although not exclu
sive, pattern for residential education
at Stanford, and that significant steps
can and should be taken toward this
goal during the coming year, 1967-68.
Although some houses segregated by
sex should be retained for these stu
dents who do not wish to live in a co
educational residence, a major effort
should be directed toward providing
coeducational housing in its most sig
nificant sense, men and women living
in the same house. Even these houses
which remain segregated could be
placed in juxtaposition to increase the
interaction among men and women.
The goal of a residence housing both
men and women would be most effect
ively realized if the ratio is approxi
mately 1:1. Although the 1:1 ratio Is
most desirable, a ratio of 2:1 would,
we feel, be successful.
As a long range goal the Committee
recommends changing of th« admis
sions ratio to one that is closer to 1:1
as a step towards this ideal.
B. Integration of classes:
As discussed more fully in Section
111 of this report, the freshman year is
a period of growth in which freshmen
must adjust to what for many of them
is a totally new culture, with new and
demanding standards. This situation re
quires a certain amount of social sup
port to prevent excessive and destruc
tive anxiety.
The committee is convinced that the
freshman residence program too often
promotes a seeurity that reduces expo
sure to challenging and growth-moti
vating aspects of university life, there
by retarding development, rather than

preparing the freshman to meet the
challenges which are in a large mea
sure responsible for his insecurity. In
addition, individual anxieties often re
inforce each other to the detriment of
all concerned.
While it is agreed that there is val
uable support and learning through
contact with others engaged in the
same experience, this by no means re
quires that most of one's contacts be
freshmen, nor does it exclude the pos
sibility or desirability of living in con
tact with others.
In a maximally integrated system in
which freshmen constitute approxi
mately 30 per cent of the population,
reinforcement of pre-college values
would be healthily reduced, while
freshmen, still pursuing similar curri
cula, would not suffer from a dearth of
contact and interaction with other
freshmen. In a fully integrated system,
the freshman could contribute to the
atmosphere of the residence, but could
not dominate it. Social support would
be provided not only by contact with
other freshmen, but also by the pres
ence of upperclassmen who have gone
through similar experiences and who
can contribute to the freshman's sense
of social support both by advice or ex
ample and by providing living evidence
that students actually survive the
freshmen year. This system would, of
course, have the further advantage of
more fully orienting freshmen to the
challenges and opportunities of the
university, a need which can be only
partially fulfilled by the present spon
sor system.
C. Partial Integration
In the preceding discussion the mini
mum ratio of upperclassmen to fresh
men in an integrated residence is as
sumed to be well in excess of 1:1. Any
system of partial integration with ra
tios well below this minimum faces se
vere difficulties:
1. Although the population would be
enriched by the addition of more ex
perienced upperclass models, fresh
men would still dominate the dormi
tory; the balance between security
and growth would not be significant
ly changed.
2. Under one suggestion for partial in
tegration offered by Dean Gordon's
staff, upperclassmen would essential
ly be guests whose rooms happened
to be in a freshman dormitory. It is
difficult to understand what would
motivate 147 upperclassmen to accept
such a position, or why they would
feel any dedication to close personal
interaction with the freshmen in an
educational sense.
3. The sponsor system is successful
largely because a few individuals are
committed to making the best of an
unfortunate living situation for
freshmen. It is not clear that the sub
stitution of five guests for one spon
sor dedicated to working with fresh
men is desirable.
4. Partial integration in itself has never
been suggested as an optimal resi
dence system, and it is not clear that
it is a desirable step toward total
integration. The committee is con
vinced that change for its own sake
is an unsound policy at any stage in
the development of a more viable
residence system.
Freshmen have the most to gain in
a campus-wide residence program
founded on the principles of co-educa
tion and integration. The institution of
this program requires not only the
support of freshmen, but also that of
upperclassmen. It could be argued that
upperclassmen would not want to give
up their present housing system. In
answer to this objection three points
can be made:
1. It is not clear that upperclassmen
are satisfied with the present sys
tem. Every spring quarter freshmen
express dissatisfaction with the hous
ing alternatives open to them: the
success of the overseas program as
a living experience has prompted
many to call for a more desirable
program at Stanford at-Stanford;
there were five applicants for each
place in the Grove Project, and if
the seminar hadn't been required
there would have been more upper
classmen seeking this exciting new
living alternative.
2. Tn our model of a fully integrated,
coeducational house, the percentage
of freshmen living in should be kept
well below 50 per cent. Freshmen
could contribute their real enthusi
asm and the challenge of their ques
tions without dominating the houses,

so that integration would benefit
both freshmen and upperclassmen.
3. In our residence program some inde
pendent npperclass houses would re
main, if there were a demand for
them. We believe that most students
would choose to live in a coed, inte
grated house, however, if some stu
dents wished something akin to the
present system such alternatives
would be open to them. The assump
tion we are making is that the new
residenco opportunities will sell them
selves.
E. Diversity and Self-Selection
Diversity among housing alternatives
is desirable. In addition, diversity with
in each house must be maintained to
avoid provincialism within the various
alternatives. Free choice, particularly
too early in the college career, among
various living styles will eventually
produce self-selective, provincial group
ings which will contradict the ideal
of developing acceptance of individual
differences within the residence. Three
points can be made to this problem:
1. No house needs to represent a cross
section of the student body. When
too great diversity exists in a living
group, cohesiveness is lost and frag
mentation takes the form of break
ing up into small sub-groups between
which little communication exists.
Therefore, some commonality, espe
cially by interests, is desirable.
2. It may not be the case that giving
students free choice among really
worthwhile alternatives will result
in serious problems of self-selection.
At any rate, it will take time for this
to happen and if indeed problems do
arise, we should be able to deal with
them early.
3. Assuming that such problems do
arise and call for some restriction of
free choice, one possible solution
would be to limit the amount of time
that an individual could live in a par
ticular residence. By encouraging
switching and moving among stu
dents, no system would be allowed
to lock itself in and stagnate.
VII. The Tone and Character of the
Living Group: Staff and Program
The residential components of most
universities are now basically eating
and sleeping facilities, structurally like
barracks, motels, or high-rise Hiltons,
surrounded by parking lots. To become
a truly residential university, the resi
dence hall must become a center of
learning and development equal in im
portance to the lecture hall. Ideally
their staffing, planning, and adminis
tration should be the responsibility of
faculty members rather than housing
directors or business offices.
While Stanford now is a far cry from
the suggested ideal of a residence uni
versity, many steps have been pro
posed which work toward the ideal. In
tegration by class and co-education are
two strong recommendations made by
the committee, which as discussed
above have considerable value in them
selves.
However, these steps will not by
themselves result in genuine centers
for learning. The mechanical bod>
shuffling is only one step in preparing
a more conducive atmosphere for total
education; the other is the purposeful
stimulation of intellectual activities
within the residence. The character and
quality of such activities, and their
relevance to students' concerns will be
come a crucial measure and determi
ned of the contribution that residence
is providing for its component mem
bers. The program for each residence
would decide for itself what input to
organize as a stimulus for the desired
enrichment of the quality of living that
contributes to the total education of
the individual and of the group's stu
dents, faculty, ideas, and the unending
list of resources of a university com
munity are all potential and powerful
inputs. The interaction of these compo
nents now creates the particular ex
citement of a university, but these
components are being comparatively
wasted in one of the areas in which
they could be the most effective ... the
living situation. The challenge of a
idential program is to organize and
bring the components together in the
most imaginative ways to utilize the
potential to the lullest.
One of the major areas of waste Is
student-faculty relations. Both the stu
donts and the faculty complain about
the distance and seeming disinterest of
the two groups. The section in the re
port which* deals with the faculty rol£
in the residence university is only a
very small start on the road to killing
this unhealthy and unproductive gap.
(See section on faculty residents.)
Too often students miss out on much
of the university experience because of
communication gaps. A face-to-face liv
ing unit is the most obvious place for
communication and contact between
students and faculty. Often the pre
vailing ethos of a dormitory can work
against this ground level communica
tion and antithetically to the explora
tory ventures of the individual. A dorm
which is oriented around a strictly so
cial purpose may even squelch the mo
tivation branding it as "intellectual," a
word that has been mistreated from all
directions in our society. While many
houses do not fall into this trap, there
is another pitfall of ruts and habit that
restricts the growing of experience in
a different way. The entire responsi
bility of taking advantage of the under
graduate experience is on the individ
ual. and some people find themselves
vorking against odds that would dis
courage the most aggressive. Fresh
man in particular belong to this cate
gory. They need to be exposed to the
broad ranges of opportunity but also
need help to make use of them. An
adolescent peer culture reinforcing high
school anti-intellectualism is not one
)f the best possible ways to meet this
need. The outside stimulus and help
will not best be provided by authority
figures who tell people what to do. or
beat off the anti-intellectual bullies. The
best assurance that free exchange and
.sharing of experience will occur will
be found in the atmosphere of the liv
ing group and in the character of its
leadership. A lively house where there
is a constant influx of new and differ
ent stimuli where all things that need
expression can find it, has the best
chance against apathy or unspoken
social taboos. House organized activi
ties such as art exhibits, musical per
formances, seminars, or small scale
lecture series suffer the same fate as
the individual's struggle for expres
sion and exploration. Not everyone
would want to participate and now
many of those who do want to can,
"but to those who find it difficult, en
couragement, not brick walls, should
be present in the tone of the house.
The possibility of organizing houses
around special interests has been sug
gested; experimentation is in order.
Houses with distinctive interests—fine
arts, social issues, foreign policy—may
well bring together students and fac
ulty from various disciplines who
could more meaningfully and readily
develop a learning community than a
house whose residents and loosely
affiliated faculty can only share pleas
antries. There would still be ample
diversity by virtue of differences in
personality, background, majors, ca
reer plans and so on, but there would
also be a major intellectual and social
oncern they all share. More detail
for this kind of program is discussed
in the specific proposal for next year.
The program of input is just the
beginning to what happens to the life
n a particular house. It provides pos
sibly a focus or direction as well as the
important underlying communication
and resource network of faculty, tutor,
and student. It must be emphasized
that what is going to happen in every
house is going to be determined most
by the people who live there. There
is a give-and-take natural exchange
between the program of ideas for the
living group and the group's response.
Reuniting the sphere of living as a
meaningful and integral part of a stu
dent's education in no way signifies
the creation of a twenty-four-hour
classroom. The residential education
urogram is not an extension of the
formal academic structure; it is its
complement. Although the opportun
,fy for experimenting with courses
given for credit should be open, it is
only one of the myriad of possibilities
with residential education. While
proper planning, particularly in the
■'election of good faculty, is necessary
it would be unrealistic to lose sight
of the interaction from the other di
rection. A structure too rigid would
kill the potential of a residential pro
gram just as the naive assumption
that body shuffling is the whole
answer.
Flexibility and spontaneity are key
<*ords in the concept of what a pro
gram should be prepared to provide.
Fvrit the program should be externally

flexible. The development of the house
spirit would depend upon the inter
action between the particular members
and particular faculty and tutors. This
matter of orientation or direction for
the house could bow with the interest
and demand for a particular living sit
uation. Some programs would last
longer than others, some undoubtedly
will be less successful, some would
evolve of themselves into a new area.
There is flexibility to let the good pro
grams grow and let the bad ones kill
themselves without bringing the entire
system to ruin. A diversity of choice
between residences could be main
tained.
There should in addition be an in
ternal flexibility within each group.
There must be room for growth and
change within the group. If topics were
to be the basis for a house, they would
always have to be picked with enough
latitude to allow each member of the
house to approach it in his own way.
This casua', unstructured opportunity
for close faculty contact speaks directly
to the need of students who are con
cerned with relevance as a criterion of
education, relevance to themselves or
to the contemporary world. There is
much opportunity for the student to
become very involved in the formation
and execution of his own education.
People who are involved and interested
in their own work tend to be more in
terested and able to contribute to the
work of others.
Another possibility that should be
included in the program is the oppor
tunity for experimentation with self
government. All sorts of opportunities
exist outside of the adoption of a hier
archy handed from above of president,
social chairman, etc. . .
There is much to be said for the edu
cationally valuable experience of learn
ing to live with ambiguity and without
automatically following tradition or
the dictates of an authority figure to
create the quality of life of a house
out of what is there ... to create an
educationally meaningful experience.
"The ideas sound great on paper!" is
the old comment at the outset of any
innovation with the rejoiner "But how
do you make it work in reality?" usu
ally not far behind. Why doesn't this
all happen now? Wilbur, the recom
mended site for next year's project,
already has many of the features out
lined in this report. "Is there really
going to be any significant difference?"
might be one question. The answer is
twofold. Some of the kinds of things
this report talks about are already
happening. If they weren't then there
would really be no use in trying to
maximize the interaction. But so much
more could be happening, and many of
the detrimental currents that run con
trary to the purpose of attending a
university could be reduced. All sys
tems are implemented by men. There
is not any system of law, morality or
of a residence university which can
overcome the fallibility of man. There
is not a magical formula implied in this
program, it rests very heavily on the
people who participate but so does
every other system. Good systems help
him along and the committee firmly
feels that a true residential university,
is a better system than one which only
claims to be and is somewhere in the
middle.
The people involved therefore are at
the core of the program. But their
effectiveness will depend to a large
degree upon how they see their role.
Their conception of their role in this
new system must undergo as much
fundamental reinterpretation as the
system itself.
How will the inertia of the present
resident conditions be overcome? Who
will set the tone, provide the mo
mentum, and contribute the leader
ship? Our first answer to these ques
tions is the students themselves. In any
residence system students will unde
niably be the major constituency.. But
how the resident staff can contribute
is also an important issue. At the pres
ent time Stanford has faculty residents,
tutors, resident assistants, and spon
sors. The role of each should be re
viewed.
Faculty Resident*
The committee would certainly not
deny the valuable contribution of the
faculty residents toward improving the
living situation at Stanford, but in
general, the faculty resident program
simply is not given the support neces
sary to tree Its members from -other

tasks and to allow them to devote
more time, thought and emphasis to
the residence education program. The
basic change would be that of increased
commitment to the living situation. The
primary responsibility of the faculty
resident should not be to the dorm di
rector or the administration, but to the
student within the living group or com
plex. To be effective, the faculty resi
dent must be willing to accept a de
manding and time consuming involve
ment in the living situation. His pres
ence there will be much more than a
face at meals or even that of a good
friend. Presumably the resident would
be a full time member of the faculty,
for the success of the residence pro
gram would greatly depend upon his
response to the intellectual needs of the
students. Doctoral candidates, coaches,
university officials, and administrators,
however, could still participate if they
would be willing to make the same
kind of commitment to the ideal of a
residence university. The interpersonal
factor is extremely important in this
kind of situation. Most every student
complains about the brilliant man who
can't give a good lecture. The same
argument will have to be taken into
account that not everyone can fulfill
this particular kind of a role. The fac
ulty resident must, above all, be sensi
tive to the interaction among students
in the group.
The things a faculty member could
contribute are bounded only by their
individual creativity but a few sug
gestions are in order.
1. In certain living units, seminars for
academic credit could be offered.
2. Directed reading could be made avail
able to certain students under the
resident.
3. Informal and noncredit seminars
should be encourage by the faculty
resident or when an idea came out
of the group he or some of his col
leagues could serve as resource per
son.
4. A student chairman and the faculty
resident could set up a meaningful
faculty associate program. The resi
dent can draw upon close friends and
colleagues which would supply an
internal identification missing in the
present program.
What would bring the faculty to par
ticipate in this program? Much of the
same dissatisfaction with student-fac
ulty relations that would bring the
students. Where something lively is
going on, something which the faculty
member is part there would not be
the embarassed ordeals that now take
place in dormitories on campus where
everyone involved is on their best and
most strained behavior. The living con
ditions would be similar to that of an
overseas campus though the professor
would not be required to drop his own
work or leave the center of his re
search. Class loads could be lessened
for the faculty participating because
they would be in essence only relocat
ing their teaching commitments, not
dropping them. They would have a
more flexible time schedule that might
be convenient to their purposes. This
position would also be in effect on a
rotating basis.
Resident Assistants and Tutors
The role of resident assistant should
be eliminated. In other words, we
would eliminate the role of the nice
guy disciplinarian, the liaison between
the administration and the students
who has been for too long forced into
an unfortunate position of hypocrisy.
As he is employed by the administra
tion he has an obligation to enforce
University policies, but if he is to be
at all effective with the students his
identification is with them. Too often
he has resolved the conflict by the
statement, "I don't care what you do,
just do it quietly so I don't see it."
Caught in this bind he has been in
effective as a man playing to two mas
ters. It is not enough to react to stu
dent needs and problems, for the role
we see must be one of creative action —
one of initiative and not merely re
sponse. Similarly, the present tutor
system is limited because its goal is
only to answer questions, not raise
them.
The present role of tutor, however,
is closer to our purpose than the RA's.
But this role must be expanded to be
effective. Thus, the idea of tutors
should be maintained, but its purpose
significantly broadened. Like faculty
residents > (and unlike RA's)' tutors

must have autonomy from primarily ad
ministrative policy and must be respon
sible primarily to the students below.
They should be linked to the resident
director, who is then responsible to the
administration. Although academic
assistance is undeniably important, tu
tors must do more than merely toot.
Their role should be to stimulate dis
cussion, to promote all types of inter
change, and to actively work towards
an educational atmosphere. At present
RA's and tutors tend to preserve rather
than promote and to be problem
solvers, rather than catalysts. The
tutor, like the faculty resident, must
approach his job with a new vitality
and commitment.
Sponsors
When the freshman class has been
entirely integrated into the university
community then the sponsor system
will become an anachronism. But until
that point the need remains and the
present system of sponsors and tutors
should be maintained.
There are two more important con
siderations before any system is put
Into operation. How will the faculty
and tutors be selected? And what are
the costs for the program as a whole?
These problems become relevant and
solvable only after the initial commit
ment and go ahead has been made.
Therefore discussion of these aspects
of the program will be included in
the proposal for next year.
VIII. Brief Assessment of Experience
At Other Institutions
While it is not our intention to base
the justification for our proposals on
the successes and failures of other in
stitutions with their necessarily dif
ferent circumstances, it is interesting
to note the results of a study con
ducted by the Faculty Committee on
Student Residences at Stanford in 1959.
Studying twenty-one similar universities
in this country they found that they
were about equally divided between
integrated and segregated freshman
living facilities. In general each school
seem satisfied with the system it then
had. However, while all of these with
the integrated system found it the most
workable, about 25 per cent of those
with segregated freshmen replied that
they were dissatisfied with their situ
ation and it certainly increases the
noisy freshman atmosphere which is
inimical to good study habits and con
ditions." Some schools reported that
the only reason for maintaining fresh
man segregation was pressure from
the fraternities who "objected stren
uously to placing their pledges under
the influence of hard bitten rugged in
dependents."
The many success of coeducational
housing on other campuses are too well
known to require documentation.
The institutions interviewed were
Cal Tech, Reed, Pembroke, Swarth
more, Oberlin, Pomona, Carleton, Rad
clifTe, Occidental, Ohio Wesleyan, Chi
cago, Brown, Dartmouth, Princeton,
Yale, Harvard, Northwestern, Washing
ton State, Oregon, Cornell, and Ohio
State.
IX. A Proposal:
The Wilbur Experiment
The committee has set forth its ar
guments for coeducational and inte
grated residences. It has suggested that
the residence should be a center of
intellectual life, and through residence
education the rigid separation of the
student's social and intellectual lives
could be ended. It remains for the com
mittee to propose how these aims can
be fulfilled at Stanford.
It is the feeling of the committee
that significant experimentation in resi
dence education is altogether feasible
for next year. There is a wide range
of possibilities. The committee initially
considered a massive scrambling of the
university residence pattern, convert
ing most dormitories on campus to
coeducation and integration. This pro
posal was rejected for two reasons:
(1) Full integration, or anything ap
proaching it, would at this time pro
duce an undesirable ratio of freshmen
to upperclass men. (2) It would be im
possible to supply the staff necessary
to introduce residence education in any
meaningful way if the scope of the
housing experiment is so broad.
The committee decided that its aims
could best be fulfilled by an experiment
of more limited scope. Instead of dras
tically overhauling the university resi
dence pattern, one dormitory complex
could be used as a rather large "pilot"
project, in which * Integratiorr and • eo
education could be complete and intel
lectual life could be given the proper
attention. Wilbur Hall is ideal for this
purpose. It is the largest complex on
campus, with space for approximately
720 people. It is divided into eight
houses, each of which constitutes a
separate identity unit. Each house has
an adjacent cottage for a faculty resi
dent and a tutorial room where semin
ars can be held.
The committee recommends that
next fall each Wilbur house be occu
pied by two floors of men and one
floor of women, and that each house
be integrated by class at a rate of one
freshman to three upperclassmen. Con
stituted as such, Wilbur Hall would be
the site of meaningful experimentation
in residential education.
The Wilbur experiment will of neces
sity affect some of the other university
residences. Freshman men will move to
Stern and Branner, retaining the spon
sor system in its present form. Fresh
man women will remain in Roble, with
sponsors, and those living in neither
Roble or Wilbur will be integrated with
upperclass women in Florence Moore.
Lagunita, Hoskins, and Toyon will be
unaffected. The remaining upperclass
men will live in three of the row
houses. The statistical breakdown is
as follows.
Total Frosh Upcl. Total Frosh Upcl.
Men Men Men W'ran W'mn Wmn
Wilbur 480 120 360 240 60 180
Stem 590 570 20
Branner 170 160 10
Roble 260 250 10
Florence
Moore 350 90 260
Lagunita 290 0 290
Hoskins 120 0 120
Toyon 200 0 200
Row
Houses (3)100 0 100
(5) 180 0 180
Totals 1540 850 690 1440 400 1040
(Note: If women are allowed to move
off campus, adjustments can be made
easily. If the number of women moving
off is under 180, an appropriate num
ber of row houses can be converted
from women to men. Compensation
can also be made by admitting more
freshman and transfer women. If

necessary the measures can be com
bined. )
Students will be chosen for the Wil
bur experiment on a draw basis. It is
reasonable to expect an excess demand
for on-campus housing by upperclass
men, since a new option is being of
fered that will presumably attract men
who presently or would otherwise live
off campus, or in fraternities. The com
ration of the upperclassmen's popu
lation in Wilbur would thus differ
from the present composition of Stem.
If women are allowed off campus, there
would be a greater possibility of satis
fying the demand for men's housing.
The likelihood of vacant dormitory
space, with the introduction of the
Wilbur option, is highly improbable.
The logistics of putting the bodies
into Wilbur for the pilot project is
only half of our task in our proposal.
The problems of staffing the complex
and from there working out feasible
programs is the next step. Hopefully
to make this pilot project a real step
toward achieving the residential uni
versity, as much of the general report
as possible will be included, only the
scope has changed not the purpose of
the program.
Selection for next year's faculty resi
dents could be turned over to a com
mittee composed of one faculty and
one student member of the ASSU
Housing Commission and two members
from the Dean of Students Office, with
the advice of the present Committee.
Once this task has been completed, the
faculty can participate in choosing the
tutors and drawing up more detailed
plans for the program.
The committee realizes that a com
mitment to this kind of residential
education will require an overt shift
in educational effort from the class
room and lab to the residence, with
both compensation for it and relief
from other teaching duties—and quite
probably the replacement of their
other more formal academic functions
by other personnel. We also realize
that there will be a budget problem,
but emphatically deny that worthwhile
educational goals should not be pro
posed and slated because of current
pragmatic limitations.
The committee hopes that, through

further study—best done in conjunc
tion with the study of education at
Stanford—that it will be possible to
rearrange and reemphasize the com
ponents of freshman education in such
a way that existing resources would
permit a serious upgrading of resi
dence education, and the possibility
that such education could replace some
aspects of the present program. This
might well allow the same total re
sources of money and people to meet
the desired objectives by shifting the
locale and method of teaching, rather
than just adding to the staff and pro
gram.
Presently in Wilbur there are three
sponsor rooms and one tutor room
which can accommodate the new tutors.
Hopefully as many of these rooms will
be used for that purpose, but if for
any reason four tutors per house is im
possible, then the rooms could be used
for offices which would at least bring
more graduate level contact into the
residence.
One possible suggestion for Wilbur's
eight houses next year would be to
have five of them centered around a
general theme, one international house,
and two left unstructured. There has
been much agitation for an interna
tional house on campus and many pro
posals have been drawn up. Five sug
gested topics for the theme houses are
"Religion and Society," "Literature and
Fine Arts," "Science and Human Prob
lems," "The Urban Threat," and "So
cial Change."
To take only one of these themes and
speculate what the given house of
faculty, tutors and students will make
of it is another of those endless first
steps in imagination potential. The
house that was using the topic "Science
and Human Problems," for example,
would bring in a diversity of fields
from the natural sciences to the hu
manities. Many of the poignant prob
lems facing students and faculty are
centered in this topic but the same
could probably be said in a different
context for each of the five topics. The
impact of technology on our economic
and social system, the moral contro
versy over the newest discoveries in
genetics, the myth of the scientific
method are all themes to be explored.

What happens to a world view when
scientific discoveries puncture com
fortable philosophies? What is time
and how does man control it and how
docs it control man? These are ques
tions to be asked. Above all, it is im
portant to remember that the direc
tion of intellectual thrust must not be
too well defined in advance. One of
the most valuable experiences for the
living group will be coming to grips
with the topic, deciding for themselves
how the general area should be ap
proached, and then proceeding to de
velop programs and structures on their
own.
The committee is highly enthusiastic
about the creative possibilities pre
sented by the Wilbur experiment—the
first step in the direction of a fully
integrated and coeducational residence.
If the experiment even approaches the
measure of success the committee en
visions, it could prove a major innova
tion in the history of American higher
education. A well developed program
of residential education offers a poten
tial of immeasurable dimension.
X. Correlation of this report with the
overall review of education at Stanford
The key problems of residence edu
cational stimulus and the kind of staff
and budget commitments necessary
need further specific elucidations which
the committee hopes can be under
taken by the Executive Committee for
the study of education at the earliest
opportunity, in order to agree on ob
jectives and make necessary staff and
financial plans for the Wilbur Project
to be able to start in the Fall of 1967.
The committee takes this oppor
tunity to thank the following people
for individual contributions to our
meetings: Dwight Clark, Dr. Lawrence
Thomas, Miss Sally Mahoney, Dr. Mar
tin Evans, Dick Williams, Mike Roster,
Howie Holmes, Doug Davis, Bob Gor
don, Dean Hind, and Dean Novak.
February 6, 1967
Subcommittee on the Freshmen Resi
dence Program ASSU Housing Com
mission. Barbara Levin, Judy Bader.
Barbara Warren, David Koval, Chris
topher Harte, Douglas Sorenson, Scott
Soames (Co-Chairman) Elizabeth
Cohen, B. Davie Napier, Max
Maurice M. Osborne Jr. (Co-Chairman).
Doubts of the ability of Stanford's
present educational system to provide
for the needs of its students, and speci
fic questions about the relevance of
the residence program in its present
form, have stimulated students, faculty,
and staff to seek more appropriate
solutions.
The A.S.S.U., concerned about the
quality of residential experience at
Stanford — particularly in contrast to
that at the Overseas Campuses —
created through its Legislature a Hous
ing Commission, one task of which was
to review and make recommendations
concerning the freshman residence
program in its relation to education.
At about the same time, Associate
Dean of Students Robert Gordon was
asked to present proposals for a new
model of freshman residential educa
tion.
Both A.S.S.U. and Dean Gordon al
most simultaneously appointed com
mittees in the early Fall of 1966 to ad
vise them in the making of recommen
dations in this important area, and
rather than continue a too-familiar pat
tern of separate committees working
independently (and often divergently)
it was decided to merge the two.
In the merger, the Dean's Advisory
Committee agreed to accept the A.S.S.U.
invitation to become an integral part,
of its group. Dean Gordon agreed to
accept the report of the entire group
in the same light as he would have the
recommendations of his originally ap
pointed committee, and the merged
group in turn agreed to attempt in
good faith to assist him in meeting his
deadlines and obligations as best it
could.
Despite particular questions existing
about the Sponsor system, the Commit
tee felt from the outset that to limit
its discussions and report to such par
ticulars, or to start out with them,
would be to avoid the main Issues sur
rounding ,the quality and meaning of

residential education at Stanford, par
ticularly the freshman program.
The Committee thus firmly decided
that it would start from a fresh con
sideration of the issues and principles
involved, relating its recommendations
to them. It was recognized that such
an approach would be time consuming,
that it might seem Utopian to some;
yet a critque and basic statement about
the ideas of a residence university
seemed vital for future planning and
growth.
At the same time, the practical ne
cessity for more immediate recommen
dations and action was realized. The
present report is in this sense a pre
liminary, or interim report, which at
tempts to set forth and justify some
practical recommendations for residence
programs that could be adopted in
1967-68 — steps within the framework
of progression towards a more ideal
situation.
The Case for the Residential Commu
nity — The Personal Committment to
Learning
The impossibility of considering the
freshman experience in isolation from
the life and purposes of the entire un
dergraduate program has been a ma
jor premise in the subcommittee's
study of the Freshman Residence Pro
gram. Two main assumptions underlie
this approach.
One is that the university experience,
as a whole, is only one part of the con
tinuum of the educational process, a
process which neither begins nor ends
at the university gates. The educational
ideals should be the same for all four
undergraduate years in terms of what
they declare for the growth of persons.
The freshman year is only a step in
a span of development, having a spe
cial function as the first step but not
a separate one.
The second is a new conception which
views the university as a community
for learning through personal, interac
,tjon, find development,. .nsp, of

all its facilities for education. This view
emphasizes that the classroom, library
or laboratory cannot — indeed does not
even now — have a monopoly on pro
viding for the education and develop
ment of students. Else, why a residen
tial university? Why not subcontract
all residential arrangements and avoid
hotel problems?
The Committee felt strongly that
there was urgent need for institutional
endorsement of the fact that without
growth and development in personal,
social, and emotional dimensions, the
achievements of intellect are shallow
and stand in isolation from the indivi
dual and his world. The conviction that
gives personal meaning to knowledge
is a product of direct human relation
ship, and we make far too little use
of its potential.
In a more settled and comfortable
past, with much greater mutuality of
expectations and values both between
peers and between generations, the ur
gency of such questions was less, the
scope more limited and the answers
more predictable. The bull-session quite
effectively handled many aspects of
this personal-social side of development.
For this, and other reasons, relatively
little formal attention to it was felt
to be necessary, aside from some for
mal lectures on hygiene, the evils of
sex and booze, and the Fundamental
Standard. After all, boys were (and
would be) boys, and pretty soon they'd
grow up into men, producers and fa
thers. Home and society would take
care somehow that they grew up right,
and the college would provide an ac
cepted transition station on the way,
some academic input, and try to keep
the lid on boyish spirit getting out of
hand.
By contrast today, for many students
questions about one's nature, and about
one's relationship to an uncertain
world, and about this world itself are
more insistent, and more pre-occupying
.before The V&iefttipns a#?, -real,

and require believable answers from
within the individual. And, until he can
find them, this quest, this preoccupa
tion has top priority, while academics
suffer through seeming less relevant.
And though there are many students
who are relatively unconcerned about
such questions, we feel their total edu
cation would be enriched if they could
be purposefully involved.
The history of formal didactic at
tempts to speak to these burning ques
tions is rather dismal, and all over the
country, there has been a steady atro
phy of required, and even of voluntary
courses relative to personal hygiene,
sex, morals, and behavior. Both stu
dents and educators sense that because
a viable set of personal ethics and
values just grow within the individual,
attempts simply to impose them from
without are relatively futile.
Not only have curricular approaches
to such questions atrophied (happi
ly!), but American education is nearing
the end of a decade in which the entire
necessity of addressing itself to the
problem of personal growth has been
quite deliberately rejected. Sputnik was
the symbol, and such spokesmen as
Hyman Rickover took up the cudgels,
with articulate and seathing denuncia
tions of "Education for Living" — of
concepts of "adjustment," and insisted,
along with many others, on intellectual
excellence (for "excellence" read "a
chievement") as the right, and only
purpose of education.
Growth of population; of national
wealth with its stimulus to upward so
cial mobility; increasing complexity
and diversity of knowledge with its
concommitant of faculty pre-occupa
tion and relatively-narrower fields; and
increased competition have sharpened
the pressures for achievement, leaving
even loss time, thought, or energy for
development as a person.
The need to pay most serious atten
tion to this is most keenly felt by many
studetitfi hy their eldprs.
There has been some re-emergence of
an expressed need for leadership and
cooperation in working out better ways
to assist and support the individual in
his personal education and develop
ment, and when students do not raise
these questions, their education should
raise them, and speak to them.
Unstructured and spontaneous stu
dent discussion, particularly at the
freshman level, is heavily-flavored with
the need to sort oneself out, but as it
now operates, it tends less to growth
than to its more traditional social func
tion of settling into "bird-of-a-feather"
groupings in which the individual
can find comfort and support for his
own sets of values and seekings. With
in this spontaneously-forming group
ings, the dialogue tends to become in
creasingly circular, the values increas
ingly exclusive, and there is decreased
permeability to fresh ideas and ex
perience.
In an educational situation where
concentration is placed on the formal
aspects of education there is an imbal
ance which produces distortion, which
too often takes the form of rejection
of the academic sphere as "irrelevant."
Another consequence is the dangerous
polarization of university life into two
worlds; that of the classroom, and that
of social life, setting them to work
against each other instead of with each
other toward the individual's goals. The
acceptance of the residence university
ideal as being vital to education can
be one important factor in keeping
the two worlds together and moving in
the same direction, whereas the pres
ent residence program presents too
many forces that divide living from
learning.
The Committee takes as self-evident
that a truly liberal education is in fact
liberating — in making both wider and
deeper the individual's ability to per
ceive, absorb, analyze, and choose in a
vastly-increasing array of people,
events, and issues, and not in forcing
the premature adoption of limited, and
constricting attitudes. In effect this
seems the necessity of the student's
continuous and repeated exposure to
and challenge by diversity of ideas, of
values, styles, and of course people.
It is here that the meaning of residen
tial education springs to life, for it of
fers potentially the best milieu for
daily face-to-face interaction with peers,
with older students, and faculty mem
bers of both sexes — offering diversity
of age, sex, discipline and values in
the highly personal way so necessary
for exposure to lead to involvement,
and knowledge to become commitment.
The necessity of direct personal in
teraction is most strongly endorsed by
the Committee, for it is the set of
values and mental attitudes formed in
such day-in, day-out exchange that set
tle most deeply into one's fiber. Thus
to narrow the range, or dilute the qual
ity of this exchange seems antiethical
to education. Kenneth Benne, in his
article "The Uses of Fraternity" states
in this regard, "People learn value sys
tems in the first instance as they form
relations with others. These relations
in turn develop norms with corres
ponding rationales which the individual
then internalizes. If people, young or
old, can build groups with standards
that reward and strengthen honest
self - expression and self - acceptance,
creativity, mutual helpfulness and the
capacity to cope with conflict, then the
members of such groups will assimilate
these values as conditions of member
ship."
Choice, and learning to choose ra
tionally, are important educational
tasks, but should not be forced on the
individual too hurriedly, without
enough exposure to a wide range of
choices, nor without some room for
trial and error.
In summary then, the Committee
firmly believes that:
1. As education is, or should be, a con
tinuum, the freshman year cannot
be considered in isolation from the
entire undergraduate program, and al
though it has a special function as
the first step, it is an integral part
of the whole.
2. There is a grave imbalance in the
university's educational emphasis,
which tends to widen the needless,
and in our view harmful, gap be
tween the getting of knowledge and
the important business of living.
3. The deepest personal and intellectual
cpncems of students — their rela
tionships to themselves, and to an

uncertain world, — are not receiving
the institutional recognition and ef
fort they deserve.
4. That people learn most deeply by
living, and by forming personal re
lationships, and that when the resi
dence program, as at present, is
oriented to bed, board, and social
needs, the opportunities for inter
nalizing intellectual knowledge and
values are meager, and the tenden
cies to reject academic values as per
sonally-irrelevant are reinforced.
5. That choice, and learning to choose
critically are central educational
goals, but that it must depend on
close and repeated exposure to a
wide range of ideas, values, styles,
and people — people of different
ages, disciplines, sexes, and back
grounds, — and not be prematurely
forced into constricting channels
based primarily on social and not in
tellectual values.
6. Such close exposure to diversity, over
sufficient time, and if taken as the
norm, would go far in preventing
the formation of narrowed and
sterotypic attitudes and thought —
the surest signs of the ill-educated
man.
7. The way in which students live very
directly affects the whole quality of
their education: this single principle
underpins the whole concept of the
residential university.
"THE FRESHMAN CONDITION"
The paraphrase above in intentional,
— and designed to point out that being
a freshman at Stanford, or anywhere,
is an intensely personal experience of
transition. Although the general ideals
of education apply equally, — and es
pecially, — to him, the freshman also
has attributes which make him special,
but not separate.
It is the feeling of this committee
that freshmen can and should receive
the benefit of special experiences de
signed for their particular problems.
The assumption that we would like to
question is whether this need for some
special orientation experiences necessi
tates their living in a segragated fash
ion. Although it is expedient from an
"efficiency" point of view, it may gen
erate excessive anxiety over perfor
mance in freshman courses and a rein
forcement for essentially juvenile
modes of facing college stresses. His
special attributes can be summed up as
follows:
A. He obviously needs early and reli
able information about his new com
munity — where things are, what he
is to do, and so forth.
B. He is making the transition most
traditionally accepted in America as
the line between family dependency
and personal autonomy.
In actuality, the line, if there is one,
is blurred, and varies greatly from one
freshman to another. In general, the
freshman comes equipped with the cre
dentials of previous achievement and
approval — hoping he will be accepted
in his new college world, and fearing
that he may not. At the same time he
hopes that his performance and life
will be freer and larger than before.
The freshman, more poignantly than
any other undergraduate, in his transi
tion from a narrower to a hopefully
wider identity, wants the understand
ing of his old world, personal accep
tance by the new — and fears he may
have neither.
He is thus enormously vulnerable,
and as Steve Hurlbut has written in
his excellent paper, is characterized by
a "pervasive anxiety." Until he has as
similated workable norms, he feels he's
got to satisfy some kind of external
standard, and is anxious until he does.
Some more specific stresses that tend
to promote anxiety are:
I.The sudden change of status that
comes from being taken out of a
high school situation where one is
enormously successful and being put
in a class of similar big frogs from
small ponds, and feeling that they
are tougher frogs than he is:
2. The doubt about being able to live up
to tough academic demands:
3. Doubts about his being accepted by
his peers — of both sexes;
4. Being away from home;
5. Confrontation with different reli
gious and social values than those
the student has learned in his family
and home community;
6. Ambivalence about authority, and
older peopje in general.
This araciety and vulnerability are by

no means bad in themselves — and in
deed offer the most fertile soil for cul
tivation of the seeking young mind.
But the thrust of this searching anxiety
is in essence social, and approval-seek
ing — and therefore related to persons
and social groups, or the winning of ac
ceptable symbols of achievement.
The Committee feels that the perva
sive, and expectable freshman anxiety
and search for some group identity is
a double-edged sword, with potential
for both regression and for growth.
On one side, if there is failure of
approval from home, or personal ac
ceptance at college, or fewer grade
points "in the bank" than expected,
anxiety may well become dysfunction
al, with consequences such as neurotic
disturbance, refusal to compete aca
demically, and even regressive and
anti-social group-adolescent behavior,
and the reinforcement of pre-college
values.
CRITIQUE OF THE PRESENT
FRESHMAN RESIDENCE PROGRAM
The Committee feels that too many
features of the present freshman resi
dence program serve:
1. To reinforce natural anxieties among
the newest members of the Univer
sity, and
2. To promote the seeking of solutions
to this anxiety that have little if any
thing to do with educational pur
poses, but tend to promote prema
ture and mutually exclusive social
groupings.
As he moves into a freshman resi
dence, he is thrown into close contact
with a large peer-group of greater
diversity in background, attitudes, and
talent than he is likely to have known.
And, because competition and fears of
failure are keenest among peers (par
ticularly of neophytes performing simi
lar tasks,) these differences within the
larger peer-group tend to move the stu
dent into protective subgroups of
peers with attitudes and pre-college
backgrounds similar to his own, within
which he finds support. In such mutual
ly-supportive social groups, the student
can arm himself and defend himself
psychologically against any new ideas
to which he is being exposed, from fel
low students, members of the opposite
sex, and his professors. Studies will
never be taken at all seriously but will
be dealt with in a purely cognitive
fashion, ingested for the purpose of
passing exams and discarded soon af
terwards. Under these conditions, we
may have done away with the prob
lems of anxiety, but are faced with the
possibility of at least two other un
desirable consequences, 1) His atti
tudes and values may remain totally
unquestioned throughout his college
career; and 2) a group devoted to de
fending itself against the climate of an
institution may exhibit anti-social char
acteristics of alienated people every
where.
That present groups formed for mu
tual support emerge after a limited
exposure to new, and possible better
models, is certainly true, and groupings
tend to occur along pre-college lines
and values, or in rebellion against
them.
The present segregated freshman
residence situation also tends:
3. To promote the seeking of achieve
ment symbols (i.e. grades) rather
than knowledge of self or substance;
4. By a residence administration seen
as primarily regulatory and manger
ial, to aggravate the natural ambi
valence of freshmen towards author
ity with results ranging from thought
less docility to destructive rebellion;
or apathetic alienation;
5. To provide too much pressure for
distortion and ritualization of rela
tionships between the sexes — the
"dating syndrome" — and a poverty
of opportunities for simple, friendly
interaction of people, a lack fre
quently deplored by both freshmen
and upperclassmen.
Both architecture and group pres
sures, as well as well-institutionalized
pressures for achieving good grades
in a heavy curriculum conspire to rob
the freshman of privacy — both physi
cal privacy, and temporal privacy; i.e.
some time simply to be himself, to spin
his wheels, and to think, with room for
trial and error.
There is, at least in Wilbur, no at
mosphere in the dining halls in the
least conducive to conversation — and
for some reason, plastic and formica
encourage one to get In and out fast,

with emphasis on feeding the face, but
none on nourishing friendship.
All of these (observable) results are
Inimical to the purposes of stimulating
interest in new subjects, of promoting
constructive reaction to diversity, of
the discouragement of stereotypic
thinking and behavior, and of trust in
older people as human beings.
More importantly, the positive po
tentials of freshman vulnerability go
relatively untapped — or are being tap
ped for outworn purposes. For this
vulnerability is personal, and if pro
vided with daily personal interaction
with a wide range of interesting
people of different ages and different
disciplines, there is more than a good
chance that Stanford freshmen would
attach their enthusiasms and their
hearts to the new models they need
and seek — models of greater depth
and diversity, but providing the identi
ty and security they need.
The interaction between freshman
men in Wilbur and the Faculty Resi
dents has varied greatly in its intensity
and impact — with instances of great
fruitfulness, or relative neutrality and
harmony, and a very few of a truly
negative quality.
Faculty Associates to freshman resi
dences have often provided important
personal interactions between fresh
men and the faculty — but just as
often these contacts have been super
ficial and ritualized.
Sponsors, while providing the great
est impact in personal exchange, pre
sent, because of their small number,
relatively limited contact with upper
classmen's values and experiences.
While all these personal contacts in
the freshman residences do in fact en
rich the education of many freshmen,
the other fact remains that there are
simply not enough such contacts, nor
sufficient support and time for these
few people to give residential educa
tion the emphasis it deserves.
EVOLUTION OF THE PRESENT
FRESHMAN RESIDENCE PROGRAM
Whatever rationalizations may be
adduced in support of the present
freshman residence program, it ap
pears to the Committee that it is in
large measure a holdover from an
earlier set of norms — norms that re
ceived wide acceptance and support in
those times, but that are under serious
question *oday.
In the Teens, the Twenties, and even
well into the Thirties, there was more
general acceptance (in society at large
as well as in the university commu
nity) of a particular hierarchical order,
and the particular authority structure
such an order implies. One tended to
know where one stood in relation to
the order at any given period, and to
be confident that one would ascend the
ladder by predictable steps.
Perhaps because of the relative sta
bility of the social order, personal de
velopment was thought of more along
the lines of advancement within that
order — with of course the acquisition
of enough "knowledge" and academic
polish to secure preference in vocations
and the status of a college-educated
man. It was important in itself to be
a senior, or for that matter an upper
classman, and the class structure had
in itself real meaning to the student.
Hence, the development of class spirit
and cohesiveness was valued, encour
aged, and ritualized. Even the major
steps in progression along the well
worn rungs were ritualized in such
rites of passage as the annual "Frosh-
Soph War," a ritual which would have
been impossible had there been no such
open class distinction.
The residence arrangements prob
ably reflected an accept? e of this
order according to social and culture
values of the day, and were aimed at
initiating the freshman into them. A
deliberate segration of the neophyte —
either by residence, by distinguishing
badges (viz. the "Beanie"), by restric
tion of privilege, or by combinations
of these has in many human organiza
tions, served to reinforce acculturation
to desired social and behavioral norms,
and whether anyone was purposefully
aware of this or not, such considera
tions surely operated in freshman resi
dential segragation. Aside from "home
work" performed in a dorm, there was
a rather strict geographic separation
of intellectual-academic concerns and
the personal-social sphere. The class
room and laboratory (and one's closed
~oom or the stacks) were meant for
the'one — while the dorm was really
for the other, and largely designed for
it.
The early history of the sponsor
program, when Encina Hall was the
freshman men's dorm, illustrates well
its use as an instrument for indoctri
nation of the "hapless Frosh" into pre
vailing upperclassmen's values.
Most sponsors wore a block "S", and
embodied a prevailing ideal of social
and athletic prowess, coupled with a
sense of loyalty to the group, respect
for authority, and an obligation to be
exemplary to their potential succes
sors. As recently as 1955, the effective
ness of a sponsor was measured, among
other things, by the percentage of his
charges attending the pregame rallies
and intercollegiate games.
Most sponsors were also fraternity
men, and another measure of his suc
cess as a sponsor was the number of
his freshmen pledged. For the spon
sors, there was little conflict involved
in serving simultaneously the fresh
men, one's own upperclassman values,
and those of the institution and its
authorities, for all constituents had
pretty much the same understanding
of the system, and of each of their
places within it.
In the intervening years, particularly
those since World War 11, there have
been profound changes in the social
order — a disruption of settled commu
nity, sharpened preoccupations with
material competition, and a culture less
and less sure of where it stood, or what
it believed in. Particularly among those
intelligent enough to attend such col
leges as Stanford, there has been in
creasing criticism of existing institu
tions which seem to them to produce
as leaders men with narrowed vision,
preoccupation with power, and too
little time or love for people. In this
climate of malaise, and in the absence
of once tacitly-held assurances, the
young person's search for personal
identity, relevance, and belief has
emerged as a very important difference
between many students of today and
of the previous generation, and again
underscores the vital importance of the
living group experience.
Despite some expressed dissatisfac
tions with the existing sponsor system,
the sponsors and a few feculty resi
dents at Wilbur were quite probably
the first to sense both this new and
urgent need among the freshmen (and
of course in themselves,) and that the
approach to it had to be met at the
level of day-in, day-out personal inter
action.
The evolution of the present sponsor
system has been a response both to
the growing need for attention to per
sonal education and development, and
to the need to substitute a drive for
continuous search and openness for the
more comfortable, but rather water
tight, social groupings which they saw
taking place.
For the past few years, the sponsors
have been the real pioneers in residen
ital education in the freshman resi
dence program. To condemn them as
"politically motivated" or irresponsible
seems a rather defensive and negative
reaction to the admitted mistakes of
a few members, and more importantly
fails to recognize that, without much
help or understanding, they are on the
track of something very important.
There have, to be sure, been other
efforts in the direction of residential
education for freshmen — relatively
cautious additions which have been in
the general direction of enriching per
sonal experience and contact in the.
residences, and may represent an in
choate recognition of this need.
Such additions have been the Facul
ty Residents, the Faculty Associates,
the Student Associates — at first men,
later women — and later, more free
dom for dining exchanges. More for
mally, in-residence seminars, guests-in
residence, panel discussions, and even
classes have been introduced.
But the former additions (with the
exception of a few Faculty Residents)
have in general provided only super
ficial interactions, while the latter
(again with a few notable exceptions)
have borne little relation to life and
living education other than physical
proximity. There is a heavy implica
tion of the mere introduction of more
academics into residences — while the
.ru#ot iT.nortant questions to students
go, for the most part, unanswered.
Th< present freshmen residence pro
gram, in its segregation by class, by

sex, by its continued reinforcement of
separation of living from learning, is
anachronistic, and reflects values that
have become less relevant and ideas that
are no longer true — such as assump
tions that satisfactory personal devel
opment takes care of itself within an
accepted and orderly framework, (of
which the freshman class is one clear
step, houses and all); that personal
education and development are irrele
vant to, or at least peripheral to the
purposes of "Higher Education"; that
mutually-deaf social groupings are ac
ceptable parts of the social mosaic —
when the fact of the matter is that we
are badly failing to meet these now
paramount questions. Despite our be
ginning attentions to this need, the
main thrust of the freshman resi
dence program and the academic pro
gram, still tends to leave the freshman
alone in his search and to force him
into protective groupings.
FRESHMAN IN3PEORATION INTO
UNIVERSITY IJFE
As discussed above, the Committee
feels strongly that the present segre
gation of freshmen reflects values no
longer taken seriously, reinforces the
separation of learning from living
(with impoverishment of both), height
ens some dysfunctional anxieties, and
tends to force premature and relative
ly narrow security groupings, rein
forces the artificiality of contact be
tween the sexes, and alienates students
from the faculty.
Thus, segregation is in itself a cen
tral problem, and, of course, the alter
natives must be aimed at integration
of the freshman in one or more ways.
A. Coeducational Housing
As noted earlier, a major problem
for freshmen is the difficulty of estab
lishing relationships with members of
the opposite sex on any basis other
than a social or dating level. For fresh
man men, the problem is especially
acute, manifesting itself in a heighten
ing anxiety, increased insecurity, and
frustration. The institution of a sys
tem of coeducational housing would
not only ameliorate the undesirable so
cial position of freshman men but also
provide an atmosphere conducive to
more natural (spontaneous) and per
sonal relationships. Upperclassmen al
so face similar problems as the results
of a segragated housing system, and
they too could gain much from having
the option of a coeducational residence
program.
That such a program is both prac
tical and desirable is supported by the
acknowledged success of the overseas
campus program as a living and learn
ing experience. In addition, the appar
ent success of the Grove Project as a
coeducational residence suggests that
coeducation can be successful on the
home campus.
The committee believes that, in the
long run, coeducational housing should
be the prevailing, although not exclu
sive, pattern for residential education
at Stanford, and that significant steps
can and should be taken toward this
goal during the coming year, 1967-68.
Although some houses segregated by
sex should be retained for these stu
dents who do not wish to live in a co
educational residence, a major effort
should be directed toward providing
coeducational housing in its most sig
nificant sense, men and women living
in the same house. Even these houses
which remain segregated could be
placed in juxtaposition to increase the
interaction among men and women.
The goal of a residence housing both
men and women would be most effect
ively realized if the ratio is approxi
mately 1:1. Although the 1:1 ratio Is
most desirable, a ratio of 2:1 would,
we feel, be successful.
As a long range goal the Committee
recommends changing of th« admis
sions ratio to one that is closer to 1:1
as a step towards this ideal.
B. Integration of classes:
As discussed more fully in Section
111 of this report, the freshman year is
a period of growth in which freshmen
must adjust to what for many of them
is a totally new culture, with new and
demanding standards. This situation re
quires a certain amount of social sup
port to prevent excessive and destruc
tive anxiety.
The committee is convinced that the
freshman residence program too often
promotes a seeurity that reduces expo
sure to challenging and growth-moti
vating aspects of university life, there
by retarding development, rather than

preparing the freshman to meet the
challenges which are in a large mea
sure responsible for his insecurity. In
addition, individual anxieties often re
inforce each other to the detriment of
all concerned.
While it is agreed that there is val
uable support and learning through
contact with others engaged in the
same experience, this by no means re
quires that most of one's contacts be
freshmen, nor does it exclude the pos
sibility or desirability of living in con
tact with others.
In a maximally integrated system in
which freshmen constitute approxi
mately 30 per cent of the population,
reinforcement of pre-college values
would be healthily reduced, while
freshmen, still pursuing similar curri
cula, would not suffer from a dearth of
contact and interaction with other
freshmen. In a fully integrated system,
the freshman could contribute to the
atmosphere of the residence, but could
not dominate it. Social support would
be provided not only by contact with
other freshmen, but also by the pres
ence of upperclassmen who have gone
through similar experiences and who
can contribute to the freshman's sense
of social support both by advice or ex
ample and by providing living evidence
that students actually survive the
freshmen year. This system would, of
course, have the further advantage of
more fully orienting freshmen to the
challenges and opportunities of the
university, a need which can be only
partially fulfilled by the present spon
sor system.
C. Partial Integration
In the preceding discussion the mini
mum ratio of upperclassmen to fresh
men in an integrated residence is as
sumed to be well in excess of 1:1. Any
system of partial integration with ra
tios well below this minimum faces se
vere difficulties:
1. Although the population would be
enriched by the addition of more ex
perienced upperclass models, fresh
men would still dominate the dormi
tory; the balance between security
and growth would not be significant
ly changed.
2. Under one suggestion for partial in
tegration offered by Dean Gordon's
staff, upperclassmen would essential
ly be guests whose rooms happened
to be in a freshman dormitory. It is
difficult to understand what would
motivate 147 upperclassmen to accept
such a position, or why they would
feel any dedication to close personal
interaction with the freshmen in an
educational sense.
3. The sponsor system is successful
largely because a few individuals are
committed to making the best of an
unfortunate living situation for
freshmen. It is not clear that the sub
stitution of five guests for one spon
sor dedicated to working with fresh
men is desirable.
4. Partial integration in itself has never
been suggested as an optimal resi
dence system, and it is not clear that
it is a desirable step toward total
integration. The committee is con
vinced that change for its own sake
is an unsound policy at any stage in
the development of a more viable
residence system.
Freshmen have the most to gain in
a campus-wide residence program
founded on the principles of co-educa
tion and integration. The institution of
this program requires not only the
support of freshmen, but also that of
upperclassmen. It could be argued that
upperclassmen would not want to give
up their present housing system. In
answer to this objection three points
can be made:
1. It is not clear that upperclassmen
are satisfied with the present sys
tem. Every spring quarter freshmen
express dissatisfaction with the hous
ing alternatives open to them: the
success of the overseas program as
a living experience has prompted
many to call for a more desirable
program at Stanford at-Stanford;
there were five applicants for each
place in the Grove Project, and if
the seminar hadn't been required
there would have been more upper
classmen seeking this exciting new
living alternative.
2. Tn our model of a fully integrated,
coeducational house, the percentage
of freshmen living in should be kept
well below 50 per cent. Freshmen
could contribute their real enthusi
asm and the challenge of their ques
tions without dominating the houses,

so that integration would benefit
both freshmen and upperclassmen.
3. In our residence program some inde
pendent npperclass houses would re
main, if there were a demand for
them. We believe that most students
would choose to live in a coed, inte
grated house, however, if some stu
dents wished something akin to the
present system such alternatives
would be open to them. The assump
tion we are making is that the new
residenco opportunities will sell them
selves.
E. Diversity and Self-Selection
Diversity among housing alternatives
is desirable. In addition, diversity with
in each house must be maintained to
avoid provincialism within the various
alternatives. Free choice, particularly
too early in the college career, among
various living styles will eventually
produce self-selective, provincial group
ings which will contradict the ideal
of developing acceptance of individual
differences within the residence. Three
points can be made to this problem:
1. No house needs to represent a cross
section of the student body. When
too great diversity exists in a living
group, cohesiveness is lost and frag
mentation takes the form of break
ing up into small sub-groups between
which little communication exists.
Therefore, some commonality, espe
cially by interests, is desirable.
2. It may not be the case that giving
students free choice among really
worthwhile alternatives will result
in serious problems of self-selection.
At any rate, it will take time for this
to happen and if indeed problems do
arise, we should be able to deal with
them early.
3. Assuming that such problems do
arise and call for some restriction of
free choice, one possible solution
would be to limit the amount of time
that an individual could live in a par
ticular residence. By encouraging
switching and moving among stu
dents, no system would be allowed
to lock itself in and stagnate.
VII. The Tone and Character of the
Living Group: Staff and Program
The residential components of most
universities are now basically eating
and sleeping facilities, structurally like
barracks, motels, or high-rise Hiltons,
surrounded by parking lots. To become
a truly residential university, the resi
dence hall must become a center of
learning and development equal in im
portance to the lecture hall. Ideally
their staffing, planning, and adminis
tration should be the responsibility of
faculty members rather than housing
directors or business offices.
While Stanford now is a far cry from
the suggested ideal of a residence uni
versity, many steps have been pro
posed which work toward the ideal. In
tegration by class and co-education are
two strong recommendations made by
the committee, which as discussed
above have considerable value in them
selves.
However, these steps will not by
themselves result in genuine centers
for learning. The mechanical bod>
shuffling is only one step in preparing
a more conducive atmosphere for total
education; the other is the purposeful
stimulation of intellectual activities
within the residence. The character and
quality of such activities, and their
relevance to students' concerns will be
come a crucial measure and determi
ned of the contribution that residence
is providing for its component mem
bers. The program for each residence
would decide for itself what input to
organize as a stimulus for the desired
enrichment of the quality of living that
contributes to the total education of
the individual and of the group's stu
dents, faculty, ideas, and the unending
list of resources of a university com
munity are all potential and powerful
inputs. The interaction of these compo
nents now creates the particular ex
citement of a university, but these
components are being comparatively
wasted in one of the areas in which
they could be the most effective ... the
living situation. The challenge of a
idential program is to organize and
bring the components together in the
most imaginative ways to utilize the
potential to the lullest.
One of the major areas of waste Is
student-faculty relations. Both the stu
donts and the faculty complain about
the distance and seeming disinterest of
the two groups. The section in the re
port which* deals with the faculty rol£
in the residence university is only a
very small start on the road to killing
this unhealthy and unproductive gap.
(See section on faculty residents.)
Too often students miss out on much
of the university experience because of
communication gaps. A face-to-face liv
ing unit is the most obvious place for
communication and contact between
students and faculty. Often the pre
vailing ethos of a dormitory can work
against this ground level communica
tion and antithetically to the explora
tory ventures of the individual. A dorm
which is oriented around a strictly so
cial purpose may even squelch the mo
tivation branding it as "intellectual," a
word that has been mistreated from all
directions in our society. While many
houses do not fall into this trap, there
is another pitfall of ruts and habit that
restricts the growing of experience in
a different way. The entire responsi
bility of taking advantage of the under
graduate experience is on the individ
ual. and some people find themselves
vorking against odds that would dis
courage the most aggressive. Fresh
man in particular belong to this cate
gory. They need to be exposed to the
broad ranges of opportunity but also
need help to make use of them. An
adolescent peer culture reinforcing high
school anti-intellectualism is not one
)f the best possible ways to meet this
need. The outside stimulus and help
will not best be provided by authority
figures who tell people what to do. or
beat off the anti-intellectual bullies. The
best assurance that free exchange and
.sharing of experience will occur will
be found in the atmosphere of the liv
ing group and in the character of its
leadership. A lively house where there
is a constant influx of new and differ
ent stimuli where all things that need
expression can find it, has the best
chance against apathy or unspoken
social taboos. House organized activi
ties such as art exhibits, musical per
formances, seminars, or small scale
lecture series suffer the same fate as
the individual's struggle for expres
sion and exploration. Not everyone
would want to participate and now
many of those who do want to can,
"but to those who find it difficult, en
couragement, not brick walls, should
be present in the tone of the house.
The possibility of organizing houses
around special interests has been sug
gested; experimentation is in order.
Houses with distinctive interests—fine
arts, social issues, foreign policy—may
well bring together students and fac
ulty from various disciplines who
could more meaningfully and readily
develop a learning community than a
house whose residents and loosely
affiliated faculty can only share pleas
antries. There would still be ample
diversity by virtue of differences in
personality, background, majors, ca
reer plans and so on, but there would
also be a major intellectual and social
oncern they all share. More detail
for this kind of program is discussed
in the specific proposal for next year.
The program of input is just the
beginning to what happens to the life
n a particular house. It provides pos
sibly a focus or direction as well as the
important underlying communication
and resource network of faculty, tutor,
and student. It must be emphasized
that what is going to happen in every
house is going to be determined most
by the people who live there. There
is a give-and-take natural exchange
between the program of ideas for the
living group and the group's response.
Reuniting the sphere of living as a
meaningful and integral part of a stu
dent's education in no way signifies
the creation of a twenty-four-hour
classroom. The residential education
urogram is not an extension of the
formal academic structure; it is its
complement. Although the opportun
,fy for experimenting with courses
given for credit should be open, it is
only one of the myriad of possibilities
with residential education. While
proper planning, particularly in the
■'election of good faculty, is necessary
it would be unrealistic to lose sight
of the interaction from the other di
rection. A structure too rigid would
kill the potential of a residential pro
gram just as the naive assumption
that body shuffling is the whole
answer.
Flexibility and spontaneity are key
<*ords in the concept of what a pro
gram should be prepared to provide.
Fvrit the program should be externally

flexible. The development of the house
spirit would depend upon the inter
action between the particular members
and particular faculty and tutors. This
matter of orientation or direction for
the house could bow with the interest
and demand for a particular living sit
uation. Some programs would last
longer than others, some undoubtedly
will be less successful, some would
evolve of themselves into a new area.
There is flexibility to let the good pro
grams grow and let the bad ones kill
themselves without bringing the entire
system to ruin. A diversity of choice
between residences could be main
tained.
There should in addition be an in
ternal flexibility within each group.
There must be room for growth and
change within the group. If topics were
to be the basis for a house, they would
always have to be picked with enough
latitude to allow each member of the
house to approach it in his own way.
This casua', unstructured opportunity
for close faculty contact speaks directly
to the need of students who are con
cerned with relevance as a criterion of
education, relevance to themselves or
to the contemporary world. There is
much opportunity for the student to
become very involved in the formation
and execution of his own education.
People who are involved and interested
in their own work tend to be more in
terested and able to contribute to the
work of others.
Another possibility that should be
included in the program is the oppor
tunity for experimentation with self
government. All sorts of opportunities
exist outside of the adoption of a hier
archy handed from above of president,
social chairman, etc. . .
There is much to be said for the edu
cationally valuable experience of learn
ing to live with ambiguity and without
automatically following tradition or
the dictates of an authority figure to
create the quality of life of a house
out of what is there ... to create an
educationally meaningful experience.
"The ideas sound great on paper!" is
the old comment at the outset of any
innovation with the rejoiner "But how
do you make it work in reality?" usu
ally not far behind. Why doesn't this
all happen now? Wilbur, the recom
mended site for next year's project,
already has many of the features out
lined in this report. "Is there really
going to be any significant difference?"
might be one question. The answer is
twofold. Some of the kinds of things
this report talks about are already
happening. If they weren't then there
would really be no use in trying to
maximize the interaction. But so much
more could be happening, and many of
the detrimental currents that run con
trary to the purpose of attending a
university could be reduced. All sys
tems are implemented by men. There
is not any system of law, morality or
of a residence university which can
overcome the fallibility of man. There
is not a magical formula implied in this
program, it rests very heavily on the
people who participate but so does
every other system. Good systems help
him along and the committee firmly
feels that a true residential university,
is a better system than one which only
claims to be and is somewhere in the
middle.
The people involved therefore are at
the core of the program. But their
effectiveness will depend to a large
degree upon how they see their role.
Their conception of their role in this
new system must undergo as much
fundamental reinterpretation as the
system itself.
How will the inertia of the present
resident conditions be overcome? Who
will set the tone, provide the mo
mentum, and contribute the leader
ship? Our first answer to these ques
tions is the students themselves. In any
residence system students will unde
niably be the major constituency.. But
how the resident staff can contribute
is also an important issue. At the pres
ent time Stanford has faculty residents,
tutors, resident assistants, and spon
sors. The role of each should be re
viewed.
Faculty Resident*
The committee would certainly not
deny the valuable contribution of the
faculty residents toward improving the
living situation at Stanford, but in
general, the faculty resident program
simply is not given the support neces
sary to tree Its members from -other

tasks and to allow them to devote
more time, thought and emphasis to
the residence education program. The
basic change would be that of increased
commitment to the living situation. The
primary responsibility of the faculty
resident should not be to the dorm di
rector or the administration, but to the
student within the living group or com
plex. To be effective, the faculty resi
dent must be willing to accept a de
manding and time consuming involve
ment in the living situation. His pres
ence there will be much more than a
face at meals or even that of a good
friend. Presumably the resident would
be a full time member of the faculty,
for the success of the residence pro
gram would greatly depend upon his
response to the intellectual needs of the
students. Doctoral candidates, coaches,
university officials, and administrators,
however, could still participate if they
would be willing to make the same
kind of commitment to the ideal of a
residence university. The interpersonal
factor is extremely important in this
kind of situation. Most every student
complains about the brilliant man who
can't give a good lecture. The same
argument will have to be taken into
account that not everyone can fulfill
this particular kind of a role. The fac
ulty resident must, above all, be sensi
tive to the interaction among students
in the group.
The things a faculty member could
contribute are bounded only by their
individual creativity but a few sug
gestions are in order.
1. In certain living units, seminars for
academic credit could be offered.
2. Directed reading could be made avail
able to certain students under the
resident.
3. Informal and noncredit seminars
should be encourage by the faculty
resident or when an idea came out
of the group he or some of his col
leagues could serve as resource per
son.
4. A student chairman and the faculty
resident could set up a meaningful
faculty associate program. The resi
dent can draw upon close friends and
colleagues which would supply an
internal identification missing in the
present program.
What would bring the faculty to par
ticipate in this program? Much of the
same dissatisfaction with student-fac
ulty relations that would bring the
students. Where something lively is
going on, something which the faculty
member is part there would not be
the embarassed ordeals that now take
place in dormitories on campus where
everyone involved is on their best and
most strained behavior. The living con
ditions would be similar to that of an
overseas campus though the professor
would not be required to drop his own
work or leave the center of his re
search. Class loads could be lessened
for the faculty participating because
they would be in essence only relocat
ing their teaching commitments, not
dropping them. They would have a
more flexible time schedule that might
be convenient to their purposes. This
position would also be in effect on a
rotating basis.
Resident Assistants and Tutors
The role of resident assistant should
be eliminated. In other words, we
would eliminate the role of the nice
guy disciplinarian, the liaison between
the administration and the students
who has been for too long forced into
an unfortunate position of hypocrisy.
As he is employed by the administra
tion he has an obligation to enforce
University policies, but if he is to be
at all effective with the students his
identification is with them. Too often
he has resolved the conflict by the
statement, "I don't care what you do,
just do it quietly so I don't see it."
Caught in this bind he has been in
effective as a man playing to two mas
ters. It is not enough to react to stu
dent needs and problems, for the role
we see must be one of creative action —
one of initiative and not merely re
sponse. Similarly, the present tutor
system is limited because its goal is
only to answer questions, not raise
them.
The present role of tutor, however,
is closer to our purpose than the RA's.
But this role must be expanded to be
effective. Thus, the idea of tutors
should be maintained, but its purpose
significantly broadened. Like faculty
residents > (and unlike RA's)' tutors

must have autonomy from primarily ad
ministrative policy and must be respon
sible primarily to the students below.
They should be linked to the resident
director, who is then responsible to the
administration. Although academic
assistance is undeniably important, tu
tors must do more than merely toot.
Their role should be to stimulate dis
cussion, to promote all types of inter
change, and to actively work towards
an educational atmosphere. At present
RA's and tutors tend to preserve rather
than promote and to be problem
solvers, rather than catalysts. The
tutor, like the faculty resident, must
approach his job with a new vitality
and commitment.
Sponsors
When the freshman class has been
entirely integrated into the university
community then the sponsor system
will become an anachronism. But until
that point the need remains and the
present system of sponsors and tutors
should be maintained.
There are two more important con
siderations before any system is put
Into operation. How will the faculty
and tutors be selected? And what are
the costs for the program as a whole?
These problems become relevant and
solvable only after the initial commit
ment and go ahead has been made.
Therefore discussion of these aspects
of the program will be included in
the proposal for next year.
VIII. Brief Assessment of Experience
At Other Institutions
While it is not our intention to base
the justification for our proposals on
the successes and failures of other in
stitutions with their necessarily dif
ferent circumstances, it is interesting
to note the results of a study con
ducted by the Faculty Committee on
Student Residences at Stanford in 1959.
Studying twenty-one similar universities
in this country they found that they
were about equally divided between
integrated and segregated freshman
living facilities. In general each school
seem satisfied with the system it then
had. However, while all of these with
the integrated system found it the most
workable, about 25 per cent of those
with segregated freshmen replied that
they were dissatisfied with their situ
ation and it certainly increases the
noisy freshman atmosphere which is
inimical to good study habits and con
ditions." Some schools reported that
the only reason for maintaining fresh
man segregation was pressure from
the fraternities who "objected stren
uously to placing their pledges under
the influence of hard bitten rugged in
dependents."
The many success of coeducational
housing on other campuses are too well
known to require documentation.
The institutions interviewed were
Cal Tech, Reed, Pembroke, Swarth
more, Oberlin, Pomona, Carleton, Rad
clifTe, Occidental, Ohio Wesleyan, Chi
cago, Brown, Dartmouth, Princeton,
Yale, Harvard, Northwestern, Washing
ton State, Oregon, Cornell, and Ohio
State.
IX. A Proposal:
The Wilbur Experiment
The committee has set forth its ar
guments for coeducational and inte
grated residences. It has suggested that
the residence should be a center of
intellectual life, and through residence
education the rigid separation of the
student's social and intellectual lives
could be ended. It remains for the com
mittee to propose how these aims can
be fulfilled at Stanford.
It is the feeling of the committee
that significant experimentation in resi
dence education is altogether feasible
for next year. There is a wide range
of possibilities. The committee initially
considered a massive scrambling of the
university residence pattern, convert
ing most dormitories on campus to
coeducation and integration. This pro
posal was rejected for two reasons:
(1) Full integration, or anything ap
proaching it, would at this time pro
duce an undesirable ratio of freshmen
to upperclass men. (2) It would be im
possible to supply the staff necessary
to introduce residence education in any
meaningful way if the scope of the
housing experiment is so broad.
The committee decided that its aims
could best be fulfilled by an experiment
of more limited scope. Instead of dras
tically overhauling the university resi
dence pattern, one dormitory complex
could be used as a rather large "pilot"
project, in which * Integratiorr and • eo
education could be complete and intel
lectual life could be given the proper
attention. Wilbur Hall is ideal for this
purpose. It is the largest complex on
campus, with space for approximately
720 people. It is divided into eight
houses, each of which constitutes a
separate identity unit. Each house has
an adjacent cottage for a faculty resi
dent and a tutorial room where semin
ars can be held.
The committee recommends that
next fall each Wilbur house be occu
pied by two floors of men and one
floor of women, and that each house
be integrated by class at a rate of one
freshman to three upperclassmen. Con
stituted as such, Wilbur Hall would be
the site of meaningful experimentation
in residential education.
The Wilbur experiment will of neces
sity affect some of the other university
residences. Freshman men will move to
Stern and Branner, retaining the spon
sor system in its present form. Fresh
man women will remain in Roble, with
sponsors, and those living in neither
Roble or Wilbur will be integrated with
upperclass women in Florence Moore.
Lagunita, Hoskins, and Toyon will be
unaffected. The remaining upperclass
men will live in three of the row
houses. The statistical breakdown is
as follows.
Total Frosh Upcl. Total Frosh Upcl.
Men Men Men W'ran W'mn Wmn
Wilbur 480 120 360 240 60 180
Stem 590 570 20
Branner 170 160 10
Roble 260 250 10
Florence
Moore 350 90 260
Lagunita 290 0 290
Hoskins 120 0 120
Toyon 200 0 200
Row
Houses (3)100 0 100
(5) 180 0 180
Totals 1540 850 690 1440 400 1040
(Note: If women are allowed to move
off campus, adjustments can be made
easily. If the number of women moving
off is under 180, an appropriate num
ber of row houses can be converted
from women to men. Compensation
can also be made by admitting more
freshman and transfer women. If

necessary the measures can be com
bined. )
Students will be chosen for the Wil
bur experiment on a draw basis. It is
reasonable to expect an excess demand
for on-campus housing by upperclass
men, since a new option is being of
fered that will presumably attract men
who presently or would otherwise live
off campus, or in fraternities. The com
ration of the upperclassmen's popu
lation in Wilbur would thus differ
from the present composition of Stem.
If women are allowed off campus, there
would be a greater possibility of satis
fying the demand for men's housing.
The likelihood of vacant dormitory
space, with the introduction of the
Wilbur option, is highly improbable.
The logistics of putting the bodies
into Wilbur for the pilot project is
only half of our task in our proposal.
The problems of staffing the complex
and from there working out feasible
programs is the next step. Hopefully
to make this pilot project a real step
toward achieving the residential uni
versity, as much of the general report
as possible will be included, only the
scope has changed not the purpose of
the program.
Selection for next year's faculty resi
dents could be turned over to a com
mittee composed of one faculty and
one student member of the ASSU
Housing Commission and two members
from the Dean of Students Office, with
the advice of the present Committee.
Once this task has been completed, the
faculty can participate in choosing the
tutors and drawing up more detailed
plans for the program.
The committee realizes that a com
mitment to this kind of residential
education will require an overt shift
in educational effort from the class
room and lab to the residence, with
both compensation for it and relief
from other teaching duties—and quite
probably the replacement of their
other more formal academic functions
by other personnel. We also realize
that there will be a budget problem,
but emphatically deny that worthwhile
educational goals should not be pro
posed and slated because of current
pragmatic limitations.
The committee hopes that, through

further study—best done in conjunc
tion with the study of education at
Stanford—that it will be possible to
rearrange and reemphasize the com
ponents of freshman education in such
a way that existing resources would
permit a serious upgrading of resi
dence education, and the possibility
that such education could replace some
aspects of the present program. This
might well allow the same total re
sources of money and people to meet
the desired objectives by shifting the
locale and method of teaching, rather
than just adding to the staff and pro
gram.
Presently in Wilbur there are three
sponsor rooms and one tutor room
which can accommodate the new tutors.
Hopefully as many of these rooms will
be used for that purpose, but if for
any reason four tutors per house is im
possible, then the rooms could be used
for offices which would at least bring
more graduate level contact into the
residence.
One possible suggestion for Wilbur's
eight houses next year would be to
have five of them centered around a
general theme, one international house,
and two left unstructured. There has
been much agitation for an interna
tional house on campus and many pro
posals have been drawn up. Five sug
gested topics for the theme houses are
"Religion and Society," "Literature and
Fine Arts," "Science and Human Prob
lems," "The Urban Threat," and "So
cial Change."
To take only one of these themes and
speculate what the given house of
faculty, tutors and students will make
of it is another of those endless first
steps in imagination potential. The
house that was using the topic "Science
and Human Problems," for example,
would bring in a diversity of fields
from the natural sciences to the hu
manities. Many of the poignant prob
lems facing students and faculty are
centered in this topic but the same
could probably be said in a different
context for each of the five topics. The
impact of technology on our economic
and social system, the moral contro
versy over the newest discoveries in
genetics, the myth of the scientific
method are all themes to be explored.

What happens to a world view when
scientific discoveries puncture com
fortable philosophies? What is time
and how does man control it and how
docs it control man? These are ques
tions to be asked. Above all, it is im
portant to remember that the direc
tion of intellectual thrust must not be
too well defined in advance. One of
the most valuable experiences for the
living group will be coming to grips
with the topic, deciding for themselves
how the general area should be ap
proached, and then proceeding to de
velop programs and structures on their
own.
The committee is highly enthusiastic
about the creative possibilities pre
sented by the Wilbur experiment—the
first step in the direction of a fully
integrated and coeducational residence.
If the experiment even approaches the
measure of success the committee en
visions, it could prove a major innova
tion in the history of American higher
education. A well developed program
of residential education offers a poten
tial of immeasurable dimension.
X. Correlation of this report with the
overall review of education at Stanford
The key problems of residence edu
cational stimulus and the kind of staff
and budget commitments necessary
need further specific elucidations which
the committee hopes can be under
taken by the Executive Committee for
the study of education at the earliest
opportunity, in order to agree on ob
jectives and make necessary staff and
financial plans for the Wilbur Project
to be able to start in the Fall of 1967.
The committee takes this oppor
tunity to thank the following people
for individual contributions to our
meetings: Dwight Clark, Dr. Lawrence
Thomas, Miss Sally Mahoney, Dr. Mar
tin Evans, Dick Williams, Mike Roster,
Howie Holmes, Doug Davis, Bob Gor
don, Dean Hind, and Dean Novak.
February 6, 1967
Subcommittee on the Freshmen Resi
dence Program ASSU Housing Com
mission. Barbara Levin, Judy Bader.
Barbara Warren, David Koval, Chris
topher Harte, Douglas Sorenson, Scott
Soames (Co-Chairman) Elizabeth
Cohen, B. Davie Napier, Max
Maurice M. Osborne Jr. (Co-Chairman).
Doubts of the ability of Stanford's
present educational system to provide
for the needs of its students, and speci
fic questions about the relevance of
the residence program in its present
form, have stimulated students, faculty,
and staff to seek more appropriate
solutions.
The A.S.S.U., concerned about the
quality of residential experience at
Stanford — particularly in contrast to
that at the Overseas Campuses —
created through its Legislature a Hous
ing Commission, one task of which was
to review and make recommendations
concerning the freshman residence
program in its relation to education.
At about the same time, Associate
Dean of Students Robert Gordon was
asked to present proposals for a new
model of freshman residential educa
tion.
Both A.S.S.U. and Dean Gordon al
most simultaneously appointed com
mittees in the early Fall of 1966 to ad
vise them in the making of recommen
dations in this important area, and
rather than continue a too-familiar pat
tern of separate committees working
independently (and often divergently)
it was decided to merge the two.
In the merger, the Dean's Advisory
Committee agreed to accept the A.S.S.U.
invitation to become an integral part,
of its group. Dean Gordon agreed to
accept the report of the entire group
in the same light as he would have the
recommendations of his originally ap
pointed committee, and the merged
group in turn agreed to attempt in
good faith to assist him in meeting his
deadlines and obligations as best it
could.
Despite particular questions existing
about the Sponsor system, the Commit
tee felt from the outset that to limit
its discussions and report to such par
ticulars, or to start out with them,
would be to avoid the main Issues sur
rounding ,the quality and meaning of

residential education at Stanford, par
ticularly the freshman program.
The Committee thus firmly decided
that it would start from a fresh con
sideration of the issues and principles
involved, relating its recommendations
to them. It was recognized that such
an approach would be time consuming,
that it might seem Utopian to some;
yet a critque and basic statement about
the ideas of a residence university
seemed vital for future planning and
growth.
At the same time, the practical ne
cessity for more immediate recommen
dations and action was realized. The
present report is in this sense a pre
liminary, or interim report, which at
tempts to set forth and justify some
practical recommendations for residence
programs that could be adopted in
1967-68 — steps within the framework
of progression towards a more ideal
situation.
The Case for the Residential Commu
nity — The Personal Committment to
Learning
The impossibility of considering the
freshman experience in isolation from
the life and purposes of the entire un
dergraduate program has been a ma
jor premise in the subcommittee's
study of the Freshman Residence Pro
gram. Two main assumptions underlie
this approach.
One is that the university experience,
as a whole, is only one part of the con
tinuum of the educational process, a
process which neither begins nor ends
at the university gates. The educational
ideals should be the same for all four
undergraduate years in terms of what
they declare for the growth of persons.
The freshman year is only a step in
a span of development, having a spe
cial function as the first step but not
a separate one.
The second is a new conception which
views the university as a community
for learning through personal, interac
,tjon, find development,. .nsp, of

all its facilities for education. This view
emphasizes that the classroom, library
or laboratory cannot — indeed does not
even now — have a monopoly on pro
viding for the education and develop
ment of students. Else, why a residen
tial university? Why not subcontract
all residential arrangements and avoid
hotel problems?
The Committee felt strongly that
there was urgent need for institutional
endorsement of the fact that without
growth and development in personal,
social, and emotional dimensions, the
achievements of intellect are shallow
and stand in isolation from the indivi
dual and his world. The conviction that
gives personal meaning to knowledge
is a product of direct human relation
ship, and we make far too little use
of its potential.
In a more settled and comfortable
past, with much greater mutuality of
expectations and values both between
peers and between generations, the ur
gency of such questions was less, the
scope more limited and the answers
more predictable. The bull-session quite
effectively handled many aspects of
this personal-social side of development.
For this, and other reasons, relatively
little formal attention to it was felt
to be necessary, aside from some for
mal lectures on hygiene, the evils of
sex and booze, and the Fundamental
Standard. After all, boys were (and
would be) boys, and pretty soon they'd
grow up into men, producers and fa
thers. Home and society would take
care somehow that they grew up right,
and the college would provide an ac
cepted transition station on the way,
some academic input, and try to keep
the lid on boyish spirit getting out of
hand.
By contrast today, for many students
questions about one's nature, and about
one's relationship to an uncertain
world, and about this world itself are
more insistent, and more pre-occupying
.before The V&iefttipns a#?, -real,

and require believable answers from
within the individual. And, until he can
find them, this quest, this preoccupa
tion has top priority, while academics
suffer through seeming less relevant.
And though there are many students
who are relatively unconcerned about
such questions, we feel their total edu
cation would be enriched if they could
be purposefully involved.
The history of formal didactic at
tempts to speak to these burning ques
tions is rather dismal, and all over the
country, there has been a steady atro
phy of required, and even of voluntary
courses relative to personal hygiene,
sex, morals, and behavior. Both stu
dents and educators sense that because
a viable set of personal ethics and
values just grow within the individual,
attempts simply to impose them from
without are relatively futile.
Not only have curricular approaches
to such questions atrophied (happi
ly!), but American education is nearing
the end of a decade in which the entire
necessity of addressing itself to the
problem of personal growth has been
quite deliberately rejected. Sputnik was
the symbol, and such spokesmen as
Hyman Rickover took up the cudgels,
with articulate and seathing denuncia
tions of "Education for Living" — of
concepts of "adjustment," and insisted,
along with many others, on intellectual
excellence (for "excellence" read "a
chievement") as the right, and only
purpose of education.
Growth of population; of national
wealth with its stimulus to upward so
cial mobility; increasing complexity
and diversity of knowledge with its
concommitant of faculty pre-occupa
tion and relatively-narrower fields; and
increased competition have sharpened
the pressures for achievement, leaving
even loss time, thought, or energy for
development as a person.
The need to pay most serious atten
tion to this is most keenly felt by many
studetitfi hy their eldprs.
There has been some re-emergence of
an expressed need for leadership and
cooperation in working out better ways
to assist and support the individual in
his personal education and develop
ment, and when students do not raise
these questions, their education should
raise them, and speak to them.
Unstructured and spontaneous stu
dent discussion, particularly at the
freshman level, is heavily-flavored with
the need to sort oneself out, but as it
now operates, it tends less to growth
than to its more traditional social func
tion of settling into "bird-of-a-feather"
groupings in which the individual
can find comfort and support for his
own sets of values and seekings. With
in this spontaneously-forming group
ings, the dialogue tends to become in
creasingly circular, the values increas
ingly exclusive, and there is decreased
permeability to fresh ideas and ex
perience.
In an educational situation where
concentration is placed on the formal
aspects of education there is an imbal
ance which produces distortion, which
too often takes the form of rejection
of the academic sphere as "irrelevant."
Another consequence is the dangerous
polarization of university life into two
worlds; that of the classroom, and that
of social life, setting them to work
against each other instead of with each
other toward the individual's goals. The
acceptance of the residence university
ideal as being vital to education can
be one important factor in keeping
the two worlds together and moving in
the same direction, whereas the pres
ent residence program presents too
many forces that divide living from
learning.
The Committee takes as self-evident
that a truly liberal education is in fact
liberating — in making both wider and
deeper the individual's ability to per
ceive, absorb, analyze, and choose in a
vastly-increasing array of people,
events, and issues, and not in forcing
the premature adoption of limited, and
constricting attitudes. In effect this
seems the necessity of the student's
continuous and repeated exposure to
and challenge by diversity of ideas, of
values, styles, and of course people.
It is here that the meaning of residen
tial education springs to life, for it of
fers potentially the best milieu for
daily face-to-face interaction with peers,
with older students, and faculty mem
bers of both sexes — offering diversity
of age, sex, discipline and values in
the highly personal way so necessary
for exposure to lead to involvement,
and knowledge to become commitment.
The necessity of direct personal in
teraction is most strongly endorsed by
the Committee, for it is the set of
values and mental attitudes formed in
such day-in, day-out exchange that set
tle most deeply into one's fiber. Thus
to narrow the range, or dilute the qual
ity of this exchange seems antiethical
to education. Kenneth Benne, in his
article "The Uses of Fraternity" states
in this regard, "People learn value sys
tems in the first instance as they form
relations with others. These relations
in turn develop norms with corres
ponding rationales which the individual
then internalizes. If people, young or
old, can build groups with standards
that reward and strengthen honest
self - expression and self - acceptance,
creativity, mutual helpfulness and the
capacity to cope with conflict, then the
members of such groups will assimilate
these values as conditions of member
ship."
Choice, and learning to choose ra
tionally, are important educational
tasks, but should not be forced on the
individual too hurriedly, without
enough exposure to a wide range of
choices, nor without some room for
trial and error.
In summary then, the Committee
firmly believes that:
1. As education is, or should be, a con
tinuum, the freshman year cannot
be considered in isolation from the
entire undergraduate program, and al
though it has a special function as
the first step, it is an integral part
of the whole.
2. There is a grave imbalance in the
university's educational emphasis,
which tends to widen the needless,
and in our view harmful, gap be
tween the getting of knowledge and
the important business of living.
3. The deepest personal and intellectual
cpncems of students — their rela
tionships to themselves, and to an

uncertain world, — are not receiving
the institutional recognition and ef
fort they deserve.
4. That people learn most deeply by
living, and by forming personal re
lationships, and that when the resi
dence program, as at present, is
oriented to bed, board, and social
needs, the opportunities for inter
nalizing intellectual knowledge and
values are meager, and the tenden
cies to reject academic values as per
sonally-irrelevant are reinforced.
5. That choice, and learning to choose
critically are central educational
goals, but that it must depend on
close and repeated exposure to a
wide range of ideas, values, styles,
and people — people of different
ages, disciplines, sexes, and back
grounds, — and not be prematurely
forced into constricting channels
based primarily on social and not in
tellectual values.
6. Such close exposure to diversity, over
sufficient time, and if taken as the
norm, would go far in preventing
the formation of narrowed and
sterotypic attitudes and thought —
the surest signs of the ill-educated
man.
7. The way in which students live very
directly affects the whole quality of
their education: this single principle
underpins the whole concept of the
residential university.
"THE FRESHMAN CONDITION"
The paraphrase above in intentional,
— and designed to point out that being
a freshman at Stanford, or anywhere,
is an intensely personal experience of
transition. Although the general ideals
of education apply equally, — and es
pecially, — to him, the freshman also
has attributes which make him special,
but not separate.
It is the feeling of this committee
that freshmen can and should receive
the benefit of special experiences de
signed for their particular problems.
The assumption that we would like to
question is whether this need for some
special orientation experiences necessi
tates their living in a segragated fash
ion. Although it is expedient from an
"efficiency" point of view, it may gen
erate excessive anxiety over perfor
mance in freshman courses and a rein
forcement for essentially juvenile
modes of facing college stresses. His
special attributes can be summed up as
follows:
A. He obviously needs early and reli
able information about his new com
munity — where things are, what he
is to do, and so forth.
B. He is making the transition most
traditionally accepted in America as
the line between family dependency
and personal autonomy.
In actuality, the line, if there is one,
is blurred, and varies greatly from one
freshman to another. In general, the
freshman comes equipped with the cre
dentials of previous achievement and
approval — hoping he will be accepted
in his new college world, and fearing
that he may not. At the same time he
hopes that his performance and life
will be freer and larger than before.
The freshman, more poignantly than
any other undergraduate, in his transi
tion from a narrower to a hopefully
wider identity, wants the understand
ing of his old world, personal accep
tance by the new — and fears he may
have neither.
He is thus enormously vulnerable,
and as Steve Hurlbut has written in
his excellent paper, is characterized by
a "pervasive anxiety." Until he has as
similated workable norms, he feels he's
got to satisfy some kind of external
standard, and is anxious until he does.
Some more specific stresses that tend
to promote anxiety are:
I.The sudden change of status that
comes from being taken out of a
high school situation where one is
enormously successful and being put
in a class of similar big frogs from
small ponds, and feeling that they
are tougher frogs than he is:
2. The doubt about being able to live up
to tough academic demands:
3. Doubts about his being accepted by
his peers — of both sexes;
4. Being away from home;
5. Confrontation with different reli
gious and social values than those
the student has learned in his family
and home community;
6. Ambivalence about authority, and
older peopje in general.
This araciety and vulnerability are by

no means bad in themselves — and in
deed offer the most fertile soil for cul
tivation of the seeking young mind.
But the thrust of this searching anxiety
is in essence social, and approval-seek
ing — and therefore related to persons
and social groups, or the winning of ac
ceptable symbols of achievement.
The Committee feels that the perva
sive, and expectable freshman anxiety
and search for some group identity is
a double-edged sword, with potential
for both regression and for growth.
On one side, if there is failure of
approval from home, or personal ac
ceptance at college, or fewer grade
points "in the bank" than expected,
anxiety may well become dysfunction
al, with consequences such as neurotic
disturbance, refusal to compete aca
demically, and even regressive and
anti-social group-adolescent behavior,
and the reinforcement of pre-college
values.
CRITIQUE OF THE PRESENT
FRESHMAN RESIDENCE PROGRAM
The Committee feels that too many
features of the present freshman resi
dence program serve:
1. To reinforce natural anxieties among
the newest members of the Univer
sity, and
2. To promote the seeking of solutions
to this anxiety that have little if any
thing to do with educational pur
poses, but tend to promote prema
ture and mutually exclusive social
groupings.
As he moves into a freshman resi
dence, he is thrown into close contact
with a large peer-group of greater
diversity in background, attitudes, and
talent than he is likely to have known.
And, because competition and fears of
failure are keenest among peers (par
ticularly of neophytes performing simi
lar tasks,) these differences within the
larger peer-group tend to move the stu
dent into protective subgroups of
peers with attitudes and pre-college
backgrounds similar to his own, within
which he finds support. In such mutual
ly-supportive social groups, the student
can arm himself and defend himself
psychologically against any new ideas
to which he is being exposed, from fel
low students, members of the opposite
sex, and his professors. Studies will
never be taken at all seriously but will
be dealt with in a purely cognitive
fashion, ingested for the purpose of
passing exams and discarded soon af
terwards. Under these conditions, we
may have done away with the prob
lems of anxiety, but are faced with the
possibility of at least two other un
desirable consequences, 1) His atti
tudes and values may remain totally
unquestioned throughout his college
career; and 2) a group devoted to de
fending itself against the climate of an
institution may exhibit anti-social char
acteristics of alienated people every
where.
That present groups formed for mu
tual support emerge after a limited
exposure to new, and possible better
models, is certainly true, and groupings
tend to occur along pre-college lines
and values, or in rebellion against
them.
The present segregated freshman
residence situation also tends:
3. To promote the seeking of achieve
ment symbols (i.e. grades) rather
than knowledge of self or substance;
4. By a residence administration seen
as primarily regulatory and manger
ial, to aggravate the natural ambi
valence of freshmen towards author
ity with results ranging from thought
less docility to destructive rebellion;
or apathetic alienation;
5. To provide too much pressure for
distortion and ritualization of rela
tionships between the sexes — the
"dating syndrome" — and a poverty
of opportunities for simple, friendly
interaction of people, a lack fre
quently deplored by both freshmen
and upperclassmen.
Both architecture and group pres
sures, as well as well-institutionalized
pressures for achieving good grades
in a heavy curriculum conspire to rob
the freshman of privacy — both physi
cal privacy, and temporal privacy; i.e.
some time simply to be himself, to spin
his wheels, and to think, with room for
trial and error.
There is, at least in Wilbur, no at
mosphere in the dining halls in the
least conducive to conversation — and
for some reason, plastic and formica
encourage one to get In and out fast,

with emphasis on feeding the face, but
none on nourishing friendship.
All of these (observable) results are
Inimical to the purposes of stimulating
interest in new subjects, of promoting
constructive reaction to diversity, of
the discouragement of stereotypic
thinking and behavior, and of trust in
older people as human beings.
More importantly, the positive po
tentials of freshman vulnerability go
relatively untapped — or are being tap
ped for outworn purposes. For this
vulnerability is personal, and if pro
vided with daily personal interaction
with a wide range of interesting
people of different ages and different
disciplines, there is more than a good
chance that Stanford freshmen would
attach their enthusiasms and their
hearts to the new models they need
and seek — models of greater depth
and diversity, but providing the identi
ty and security they need.
The interaction between freshman
men in Wilbur and the Faculty Resi
dents has varied greatly in its intensity
and impact — with instances of great
fruitfulness, or relative neutrality and
harmony, and a very few of a truly
negative quality.
Faculty Associates to freshman resi
dences have often provided important
personal interactions between fresh
men and the faculty — but just as
often these contacts have been super
ficial and ritualized.
Sponsors, while providing the great
est impact in personal exchange, pre
sent, because of their small number,
relatively limited contact with upper
classmen's values and experiences.
While all these personal contacts in
the freshman residences do in fact en
rich the education of many freshmen,
the other fact remains that there are
simply not enough such contacts, nor
sufficient support and time for these
few people to give residential educa
tion the emphasis it deserves.
EVOLUTION OF THE PRESENT
FRESHMAN RESIDENCE PROGRAM
Whatever rationalizations may be
adduced in support of the present
freshman residence program, it ap
pears to the Committee that it is in
large measure a holdover from an
earlier set of norms — norms that re
ceived wide acceptance and support in
those times, but that are under serious
question *oday.
In the Teens, the Twenties, and even
well into the Thirties, there was more
general acceptance (in society at large
as well as in the university commu
nity) of a particular hierarchical order,
and the particular authority structure
such an order implies. One tended to
know where one stood in relation to
the order at any given period, and to
be confident that one would ascend the
ladder by predictable steps.
Perhaps because of the relative sta
bility of the social order, personal de
velopment was thought of more along
the lines of advancement within that
order — with of course the acquisition
of enough "knowledge" and academic
polish to secure preference in vocations
and the status of a college-educated
man. It was important in itself to be
a senior, or for that matter an upper
classman, and the class structure had
in itself real meaning to the student.
Hence, the development of class spirit
and cohesiveness was valued, encour
aged, and ritualized. Even the major
steps in progression along the well
worn rungs were ritualized in such
rites of passage as the annual "Frosh-
Soph War," a ritual which would have
been impossible had there been no such
open class distinction.
The residence arrangements prob
ably reflected an accept? e of this
order according to social and culture
values of the day, and were aimed at
initiating the freshman into them. A
deliberate segration of the neophyte —
either by residence, by distinguishing
badges (viz. the "Beanie"), by restric
tion of privilege, or by combinations
of these has in many human organiza
tions, served to reinforce acculturation
to desired social and behavioral norms,
and whether anyone was purposefully
aware of this or not, such considera
tions surely operated in freshman resi
dential segragation. Aside from "home
work" performed in a dorm, there was
a rather strict geographic separation
of intellectual-academic concerns and
the personal-social sphere. The class
room and laboratory (and one's closed
~oom or the stacks) were meant for
the'one — while the dorm was really
for the other, and largely designed for
it.
The early history of the sponsor
program, when Encina Hall was the
freshman men's dorm, illustrates well
its use as an instrument for indoctri
nation of the "hapless Frosh" into pre
vailing upperclassmen's values.
Most sponsors wore a block "S", and
embodied a prevailing ideal of social
and athletic prowess, coupled with a
sense of loyalty to the group, respect
for authority, and an obligation to be
exemplary to their potential succes
sors. As recently as 1955, the effective
ness of a sponsor was measured, among
other things, by the percentage of his
charges attending the pregame rallies
and intercollegiate games.
Most sponsors were also fraternity
men, and another measure of his suc
cess as a sponsor was the number of
his freshmen pledged. For the spon
sors, there was little conflict involved
in serving simultaneously the fresh
men, one's own upperclassman values,
and those of the institution and its
authorities, for all constituents had
pretty much the same understanding
of the system, and of each of their
places within it.
In the intervening years, particularly
those since World War 11, there have
been profound changes in the social
order — a disruption of settled commu
nity, sharpened preoccupations with
material competition, and a culture less
and less sure of where it stood, or what
it believed in. Particularly among those
intelligent enough to attend such col
leges as Stanford, there has been in
creasing criticism of existing institu
tions which seem to them to produce
as leaders men with narrowed vision,
preoccupation with power, and too
little time or love for people. In this
climate of malaise, and in the absence
of once tacitly-held assurances, the
young person's search for personal
identity, relevance, and belief has
emerged as a very important difference
between many students of today and
of the previous generation, and again
underscores the vital importance of the
living group experience.
Despite some expressed dissatisfac
tions with the existing sponsor system,
the sponsors and a few feculty resi
dents at Wilbur were quite probably
the first to sense both this new and
urgent need among the freshmen (and
of course in themselves,) and that the
approach to it had to be met at the
level of day-in, day-out personal inter
action.
The evolution of the present sponsor
system has been a response both to
the growing need for attention to per
sonal education and development, and
to the need to substitute a drive for
continuous search and openness for the
more comfortable, but rather water
tight, social groupings which they saw
taking place.
For the past few years, the sponsors
have been the real pioneers in residen
ital education in the freshman resi
dence program. To condemn them as
"politically motivated" or irresponsible
seems a rather defensive and negative
reaction to the admitted mistakes of
a few members, and more importantly
fails to recognize that, without much
help or understanding, they are on the
track of something very important.
There have, to be sure, been other
efforts in the direction of residential
education for freshmen — relatively
cautious additions which have been in
the general direction of enriching per
sonal experience and contact in the.
residences, and may represent an in
choate recognition of this need.
Such additions have been the Facul
ty Residents, the Faculty Associates,
the Student Associates — at first men,
later women — and later, more free
dom for dining exchanges. More for
mally, in-residence seminars, guests-in
residence, panel discussions, and even
classes have been introduced.
But the former additions (with the
exception of a few Faculty Residents)
have in general provided only super
ficial interactions, while the latter
(again with a few notable exceptions)
have borne little relation to life and
living education other than physical
proximity. There is a heavy implica
tion of the mere introduction of more
academics into residences — while the
.ru#ot iT.nortant questions to students
go, for the most part, unanswered.
Th< present freshmen residence pro
gram, in its segregation by class, by

sex, by its continued reinforcement of
separation of living from learning, is
anachronistic, and reflects values that
have become less relevant and ideas that
are no longer true — such as assump
tions that satisfactory personal devel
opment takes care of itself within an
accepted and orderly framework, (of
which the freshman class is one clear
step, houses and all); that personal
education and development are irrele
vant to, or at least peripheral to the
purposes of "Higher Education"; that
mutually-deaf social groupings are ac
ceptable parts of the social mosaic —
when the fact of the matter is that we
are badly failing to meet these now
paramount questions. Despite our be
ginning attentions to this need, the
main thrust of the freshman resi
dence program and the academic pro
gram, still tends to leave the freshman
alone in his search and to force him
into protective groupings.
FRESHMAN IN3PEORATION INTO
UNIVERSITY IJFE
As discussed above, the Committee
feels strongly that the present segre
gation of freshmen reflects values no
longer taken seriously, reinforces the
separation of learning from living
(with impoverishment of both), height
ens some dysfunctional anxieties, and
tends to force premature and relative
ly narrow security groupings, rein
forces the artificiality of contact be
tween the sexes, and alienates students
from the faculty.
Thus, segregation is in itself a cen
tral problem, and, of course, the alter
natives must be aimed at integration
of the freshman in one or more ways.
A. Coeducational Housing
As noted earlier, a major problem
for freshmen is the difficulty of estab
lishing relationships with members of
the opposite sex on any basis other
than a social or dating level. For fresh
man men, the problem is especially
acute, manifesting itself in a heighten
ing anxiety, increased insecurity, and
frustration. The institution of a sys
tem of coeducational housing would
not only ameliorate the undesirable so
cial position of freshman men but also
provide an atmosphere conducive to
more natural (spontaneous) and per
sonal relationships. Upperclassmen al
so face similar problems as the results
of a segragated housing system, and
they too could gain much from having
the option of a coeducational residence
program.
That such a program is both prac
tical and desirable is supported by the
acknowledged success of the overseas
campus program as a living and learn
ing experience. In addition, the appar
ent success of the Grove Project as a
coeducational residence suggests that
coeducation can be successful on the
home campus.
The committee believes that, in the
long run, coeducational housing should
be the prevailing, although not exclu
sive, pattern for residential education
at Stanford, and that significant steps
can and should be taken toward this
goal during the coming year, 1967-68.
Although some houses segregated by
sex should be retained for these stu
dents who do not wish to live in a co
educational residence, a major effort
should be directed toward providing
coeducational housing in its most sig
nificant sense, men and women living
in the same house. Even these houses
which remain segregated could be
placed in juxtaposition to increase the
interaction among men and women.
The goal of a residence housing both
men and women would be most effect
ively realized if the ratio is approxi
mately 1:1. Although the 1:1 ratio Is
most desirable, a ratio of 2:1 would,
we feel, be successful.
As a long range goal the Committee
recommends changing of th« admis
sions ratio to one that is closer to 1:1
as a step towards this ideal.
B. Integration of classes:
As discussed more fully in Section
111 of this report, the freshman year is
a period of growth in which freshmen
must adjust to what for many of them
is a totally new culture, with new and
demanding standards. This situation re
quires a certain amount of social sup
port to prevent excessive and destruc
tive anxiety.
The committee is convinced that the
freshman residence program too often
promotes a seeurity that reduces expo
sure to challenging and growth-moti
vating aspects of university life, there
by retarding development, rather than

preparing the freshman to meet the
challenges which are in a large mea
sure responsible for his insecurity. In
addition, individual anxieties often re
inforce each other to the detriment of
all concerned.
While it is agreed that there is val
uable support and learning through
contact with others engaged in the
same experience, this by no means re
quires that most of one's contacts be
freshmen, nor does it exclude the pos
sibility or desirability of living in con
tact with others.
In a maximally integrated system in
which freshmen constitute approxi
mately 30 per cent of the population,
reinforcement of pre-college values
would be healthily reduced, while
freshmen, still pursuing similar curri
cula, would not suffer from a dearth of
contact and interaction with other
freshmen. In a fully integrated system,
the freshman could contribute to the
atmosphere of the residence, but could
not dominate it. Social support would
be provided not only by contact with
other freshmen, but also by the pres
ence of upperclassmen who have gone
through similar experiences and who
can contribute to the freshman's sense
of social support both by advice or ex
ample and by providing living evidence
that students actually survive the
freshmen year. This system would, of
course, have the further advantage of
more fully orienting freshmen to the
challenges and opportunities of the
university, a need which can be only
partially fulfilled by the present spon
sor system.
C. Partial Integration
In the preceding discussion the mini
mum ratio of upperclassmen to fresh
men in an integrated residence is as
sumed to be well in excess of 1:1. Any
system of partial integration with ra
tios well below this minimum faces se
vere difficulties:
1. Although the population would be
enriched by the addition of more ex
perienced upperclass models, fresh
men would still dominate the dormi
tory; the balance between security
and growth would not be significant
ly changed.
2. Under one suggestion for partial in
tegration offered by Dean Gordon's
staff, upperclassmen would essential
ly be guests whose rooms happened
to be in a freshman dormitory. It is
difficult to understand what would
motivate 147 upperclassmen to accept
such a position, or why they would
feel any dedication to close personal
interaction with the freshmen in an
educational sense.
3. The sponsor system is successful
largely because a few individuals are
committed to making the best of an
unfortunate living situation for
freshmen. It is not clear that the sub
stitution of five guests for one spon
sor dedicated to working with fresh
men is desirable.
4. Partial integration in itself has never
been suggested as an optimal resi
dence system, and it is not clear that
it is a desirable step toward total
integration. The committee is con
vinced that change for its own sake
is an unsound policy at any stage in
the development of a more viable
residence system.
Freshmen have the most to gain in
a campus-wide residence program
founded on the principles of co-educa
tion and integration. The institution of
this program requires not only the
support of freshmen, but also that of
upperclassmen. It could be argued that
upperclassmen would not want to give
up their present housing system. In
answer to this objection three points
can be made:
1. It is not clear that upperclassmen
are satisfied with the present sys
tem. Every spring quarter freshmen
express dissatisfaction with the hous
ing alternatives open to them: the
success of the overseas program as
a living experience has prompted
many to call for a more desirable
program at Stanford at-Stanford;
there were five applicants for each
place in the Grove Project, and if
the seminar hadn't been required
there would have been more upper
classmen seeking this exciting new
living alternative.
2. Tn our model of a fully integrated,
coeducational house, the percentage
of freshmen living in should be kept
well below 50 per cent. Freshmen
could contribute their real enthusi
asm and the challenge of their ques
tions without dominating the houses,

so that integration would benefit
both freshmen and upperclassmen.
3. In our residence program some inde
pendent npperclass houses would re
main, if there were a demand for
them. We believe that most students
would choose to live in a coed, inte
grated house, however, if some stu
dents wished something akin to the
present system such alternatives
would be open to them. The assump
tion we are making is that the new
residenco opportunities will sell them
selves.
E. Diversity and Self-Selection
Diversity among housing alternatives
is desirable. In addition, diversity with
in each house must be maintained to
avoid provincialism within the various
alternatives. Free choice, particularly
too early in the college career, among
various living styles will eventually
produce self-selective, provincial group
ings which will contradict the ideal
of developing acceptance of individual
differences within the residence. Three
points can be made to this problem:
1. No house needs to represent a cross
section of the student body. When
too great diversity exists in a living
group, cohesiveness is lost and frag
mentation takes the form of break
ing up into small sub-groups between
which little communication exists.
Therefore, some commonality, espe
cially by interests, is desirable.
2. It may not be the case that giving
students free choice among really
worthwhile alternatives will result
in serious problems of self-selection.
At any rate, it will take time for this
to happen and if indeed problems do
arise, we should be able to deal with
them early.
3. Assuming that such problems do
arise and call for some restriction of
free choice, one possible solution
would be to limit the amount of time
that an individual could live in a par
ticular residence. By encouraging
switching and moving among stu
dents, no system would be allowed
to lock itself in and stagnate.
VII. The Tone and Character of the
Living Group: Staff and Program
The residential components of most
universities are now basically eating
and sleeping facilities, structurally like
barracks, motels, or high-rise Hiltons,
surrounded by parking lots. To become
a truly residential university, the resi
dence hall must become a center of
learning and development equal in im
portance to the lecture hall. Ideally
their staffing, planning, and adminis
tration should be the responsibility of
faculty members rather than housing
directors or business offices.
While Stanford now is a far cry from
the suggested ideal of a residence uni
versity, many steps have been pro
posed which work toward the ideal. In
tegration by class and co-education are
two strong recommendations made by
the committee, which as discussed
above have considerable value in them
selves.
However, these steps will not by
themselves result in genuine centers
for learning. The mechanical bod>
shuffling is only one step in preparing
a more conducive atmosphere for total
education; the other is the purposeful
stimulation of intellectual activities
within the residence. The character and
quality of such activities, and their
relevance to students' concerns will be
come a crucial measure and determi
ned of the contribution that residence
is providing for its component mem
bers. The program for each residence
would decide for itself what input to
organize as a stimulus for the desired
enrichment of the quality of living that
contributes to the total education of
the individual and of the group's stu
dents, faculty, ideas, and the unending
list of resources of a university com
munity are all potential and powerful
inputs. The interaction of these compo
nents now creates the particular ex
citement of a university, but these
components are being comparatively
wasted in one of the areas in which
they could be the most effective ... the
living situation. The challenge of a
idential program is to organize and
bring the components together in the
most imaginative ways to utilize the
potential to the lullest.
One of the major areas of waste Is
student-faculty relations. Both the stu
donts and the faculty complain about
the distance and seeming disinterest of
the two groups. The section in the re
port which* deals with the faculty rol£
in the residence university is only a
very small start on the road to killing
this unhealthy and unproductive gap.
(See section on faculty residents.)
Too often students miss out on much
of the university experience because of
communication gaps. A face-to-face liv
ing unit is the most obvious place for
communication and contact between
students and faculty. Often the pre
vailing ethos of a dormitory can work
against this ground level communica
tion and antithetically to the explora
tory ventures of the individual. A dorm
which is oriented around a strictly so
cial purpose may even squelch the mo
tivation branding it as "intellectual," a
word that has been mistreated from all
directions in our society. While many
houses do not fall into this trap, there
is another pitfall of ruts and habit that
restricts the growing of experience in
a different way. The entire responsi
bility of taking advantage of the under
graduate experience is on the individ
ual. and some people find themselves
vorking against odds that would dis
courage the most aggressive. Fresh
man in particular belong to this cate
gory. They need to be exposed to the
broad ranges of opportunity but also
need help to make use of them. An
adolescent peer culture reinforcing high
school anti-intellectualism is not one
)f the best possible ways to meet this
need. The outside stimulus and help
will not best be provided by authority
figures who tell people what to do. or
beat off the anti-intellectual bullies. The
best assurance that free exchange and
.sharing of experience will occur will
be found in the atmosphere of the liv
ing group and in the character of its
leadership. A lively house where there
is a constant influx of new and differ
ent stimuli where all things that need
expression can find it, has the best
chance against apathy or unspoken
social taboos. House organized activi
ties such as art exhibits, musical per
formances, seminars, or small scale
lecture series suffer the same fate as
the individual's struggle for expres
sion and exploration. Not everyone
would want to participate and now
many of those who do want to can,
"but to those who find it difficult, en
couragement, not brick walls, should
be present in the tone of the house.
The possibility of organizing houses
around special interests has been sug
gested; experimentation is in order.
Houses with distinctive interests—fine
arts, social issues, foreign policy—may
well bring together students and fac
ulty from various disciplines who
could more meaningfully and readily
develop a learning community than a
house whose residents and loosely
affiliated faculty can only share pleas
antries. There would still be ample
diversity by virtue of differences in
personality, background, majors, ca
reer plans and so on, but there would
also be a major intellectual and social
oncern they all share. More detail
for this kind of program is discussed
in the specific proposal for next year.
The program of input is just the
beginning to what happens to the life
n a particular house. It provides pos
sibly a focus or direction as well as the
important underlying communication
and resource network of faculty, tutor,
and student. It must be emphasized
that what is going to happen in every
house is going to be determined most
by the people who live there. There
is a give-and-take natural exchange
between the program of ideas for the
living group and the group's response.
Reuniting the sphere of living as a
meaningful and integral part of a stu
dent's education in no way signifies
the creation of a twenty-four-hour
classroom. The residential education
urogram is not an extension of the
formal academic structure; it is its
complement. Although the opportun
,fy for experimenting with courses
given for credit should be open, it is
only one of the myriad of possibilities
with residential education. While
proper planning, particularly in the
■'election of good faculty, is necessary
it would be unrealistic to lose sight
of the interaction from the other di
rection. A structure too rigid would
kill the potential of a residential pro
gram just as the naive assumption
that body shuffling is the whole
answer.
Flexibility and spontaneity are key
<*ords in the concept of what a pro
gram should be prepared to provide.
Fvrit the program should be externally

flexible. The development of the house
spirit would depend upon the inter
action between the particular members
and particular faculty and tutors. This
matter of orientation or direction for
the house could bow with the interest
and demand for a particular living sit
uation. Some programs would last
longer than others, some undoubtedly
will be less successful, some would
evolve of themselves into a new area.
There is flexibility to let the good pro
grams grow and let the bad ones kill
themselves without bringing the entire
system to ruin. A diversity of choice
between residences could be main
tained.
There should in addition be an in
ternal flexibility within each group.
There must be room for growth and
change within the group. If topics were
to be the basis for a house, they would
always have to be picked with enough
latitude to allow each member of the
house to approach it in his own way.
This casua', unstructured opportunity
for close faculty contact speaks directly
to the need of students who are con
cerned with relevance as a criterion of
education, relevance to themselves or
to the contemporary world. There is
much opportunity for the student to
become very involved in the formation
and execution of his own education.
People who are involved and interested
in their own work tend to be more in
terested and able to contribute to the
work of others.
Another possibility that should be
included in the program is the oppor
tunity for experimentation with self
government. All sorts of opportunities
exist outside of the adoption of a hier
archy handed from above of president,
social chairman, etc. . .
There is much to be said for the edu
cationally valuable experience of learn
ing to live with ambiguity and without
automatically following tradition or
the dictates of an authority figure to
create the quality of life of a house
out of what is there ... to create an
educationally meaningful experience.
"The ideas sound great on paper!" is
the old comment at the outset of any
innovation with the rejoiner "But how
do you make it work in reality?" usu
ally not far behind. Why doesn't this
all happen now? Wilbur, the recom
mended site for next year's project,
already has many of the features out
lined in this report. "Is there really
going to be any significant difference?"
might be one question. The answer is
twofold. Some of the kinds of things
this report talks about are already
happening. If they weren't then there
would really be no use in trying to
maximize the interaction. But so much
more could be happening, and many of
the detrimental currents that run con
trary to the purpose of attending a
university could be reduced. All sys
tems are implemented by men. There
is not any system of law, morality or
of a residence university which can
overcome the fallibility of man. There
is not a magical formula implied in this
program, it rests very heavily on the
people who participate but so does
every other system. Good systems help
him along and the committee firmly
feels that a true residential university,
is a better system than one which only
claims to be and is somewhere in the
middle.
The people involved therefore are at
the core of the program. But their
effectiveness will depend to a large
degree upon how they see their role.
Their conception of their role in this
new system must undergo as much
fundamental reinterpretation as the
system itself.
How will the inertia of the present
resident conditions be overcome? Who
will set the tone, provide the mo
mentum, and contribute the leader
ship? Our first answer to these ques
tions is the students themselves. In any
residence system students will unde
niably be the major constituency.. But
how the resident staff can contribute
is also an important issue. At the pres
ent time Stanford has faculty residents,
tutors, resident assistants, and spon
sors. The role of each should be re
viewed.
Faculty Resident*
The committee would certainly not
deny the valuable contribution of the
faculty residents toward improving the
living situation at Stanford, but in
general, the faculty resident program
simply is not given the support neces
sary to tree Its members from -other

tasks and to allow them to devote
more time, thought and emphasis to
the residence education program. The
basic change would be that of increased
commitment to the living situation. The
primary responsibility of the faculty
resident should not be to the dorm di
rector or the administration, but to the
student within the living group or com
plex. To be effective, the faculty resi
dent must be willing to accept a de
manding and time consuming involve
ment in the living situation. His pres
ence there will be much more than a
face at meals or even that of a good
friend. Presumably the resident would
be a full time member of the faculty,
for the success of the residence pro
gram would greatly depend upon his
response to the intellectual needs of the
students. Doctoral candidates, coaches,
university officials, and administrators,
however, could still participate if they
would be willing to make the same
kind of commitment to the ideal of a
residence university. The interpersonal
factor is extremely important in this
kind of situation. Most every student
complains about the brilliant man who
can't give a good lecture. The same
argument will have to be taken into
account that not everyone can fulfill
this particular kind of a role. The fac
ulty resident must, above all, be sensi
tive to the interaction among students
in the group.
The things a faculty member could
contribute are bounded only by their
individual creativity but a few sug
gestions are in order.
1. In certain living units, seminars for
academic credit could be offered.
2. Directed reading could be made avail
able to certain students under the
resident.
3. Informal and noncredit seminars
should be encourage by the faculty
resident or when an idea came out
of the group he or some of his col
leagues could serve as resource per
son.
4. A student chairman and the faculty
resident could set up a meaningful
faculty associate program. The resi
dent can draw upon close friends and
colleagues which would supply an
internal identification missing in the
present program.
What would bring the faculty to par
ticipate in this program? Much of the
same dissatisfaction with student-fac
ulty relations that would bring the
students. Where something lively is
going on, something which the faculty
member is part there would not be
the embarassed ordeals that now take
place in dormitories on campus where
everyone involved is on their best and
most strained behavior. The living con
ditions would be similar to that of an
overseas campus though the professor
would not be required to drop his own
work or leave the center of his re
search. Class loads could be lessened
for the faculty participating because
they would be in essence only relocat
ing their teaching commitments, not
dropping them. They would have a
more flexible time schedule that might
be convenient to their purposes. This
position would also be in effect on a
rotating basis.
Resident Assistants and Tutors
The role of resident assistant should
be eliminated. In other words, we
would eliminate the role of the nice
guy disciplinarian, the liaison between
the administration and the students
who has been for too long forced into
an unfortunate position of hypocrisy.
As he is employed by the administra
tion he has an obligation to enforce
University policies, but if he is to be
at all effective with the students his
identification is with them. Too often
he has resolved the conflict by the
statement, "I don't care what you do,
just do it quietly so I don't see it."
Caught in this bind he has been in
effective as a man playing to two mas
ters. It is not enough to react to stu
dent needs and problems, for the role
we see must be one of creative action —
one of initiative and not merely re
sponse. Similarly, the present tutor
system is limited because its goal is
only to answer questions, not raise
them.
The present role of tutor, however,
is closer to our purpose than the RA's.
But this role must be expanded to be
effective. Thus, the idea of tutors
should be maintained, but its purpose
significantly broadened. Like faculty
residents > (and unlike RA's)' tutors

must have autonomy from primarily ad
ministrative policy and must be respon
sible primarily to the students below.
They should be linked to the resident
director, who is then responsible to the
administration. Although academic
assistance is undeniably important, tu
tors must do more than merely toot.
Their role should be to stimulate dis
cussion, to promote all types of inter
change, and to actively work towards
an educational atmosphere. At present
RA's and tutors tend to preserve rather
than promote and to be problem
solvers, rather than catalysts. The
tutor, like the faculty resident, must
approach his job with a new vitality
and commitment.
Sponsors
When the freshman class has been
entirely integrated into the university
community then the sponsor system
will become an anachronism. But until
that point the need remains and the
present system of sponsors and tutors
should be maintained.
There are two more important con
siderations before any system is put
Into operation. How will the faculty
and tutors be selected? And what are
the costs for the program as a whole?
These problems become relevant and
solvable only after the initial commit
ment and go ahead has been made.
Therefore discussion of these aspects
of the program will be included in
the proposal for next year.
VIII. Brief Assessment of Experience
At Other Institutions
While it is not our intention to base
the justification for our proposals on
the successes and failures of other in
stitutions with their necessarily dif
ferent circumstances, it is interesting
to note the results of a study con
ducted by the Faculty Committee on
Student Residences at Stanford in 1959.
Studying twenty-one similar universities
in this country they found that they
were about equally divided between
integrated and segregated freshman
living facilities. In general each school
seem satisfied with the system it then
had. However, while all of these with
the integrated system found it the most
workable, about 25 per cent of those
with segregated freshmen replied that
they were dissatisfied with their situ
ation and it certainly increases the
noisy freshman atmosphere which is
inimical to good study habits and con
ditions." Some schools reported that
the only reason for maintaining fresh
man segregation was pressure from
the fraternities who "objected stren
uously to placing their pledges under
the influence of hard bitten rugged in
dependents."
The many success of coeducational
housing on other campuses are too well
known to require documentation.
The institutions interviewed were
Cal Tech, Reed, Pembroke, Swarth
more, Oberlin, Pomona, Carleton, Rad
clifTe, Occidental, Ohio Wesleyan, Chi
cago, Brown, Dartmouth, Princeton,
Yale, Harvard, Northwestern, Washing
ton State, Oregon, Cornell, and Ohio
State.
IX. A Proposal:
The Wilbur Experiment
The committee has set forth its ar
guments for coeducational and inte
grated residences. It has suggested that
the residence should be a center of
intellectual life, and through residence
education the rigid separation of the
student's social and intellectual lives
could be ended. It remains for the com
mittee to propose how these aims can
be fulfilled at Stanford.
It is the feeling of the committee
that significant experimentation in resi
dence education is altogether feasible
for next year. There is a wide range
of possibilities. The committee initially
considered a massive scrambling of the
university residence pattern, convert
ing most dormitories on campus to
coeducation and integration. This pro
posal was rejected for two reasons:
(1) Full integration, or anything ap
proaching it, would at this time pro
duce an undesirable ratio of freshmen
to upperclass men. (2) It would be im
possible to supply the staff necessary
to introduce residence education in any
meaningful way if the scope of the
housing experiment is so broad.
The committee decided that its aims
could best be fulfilled by an experiment
of more limited scope. Instead of dras
tically overhauling the university resi
dence pattern, one dormitory complex
could be used as a rather large "pilot"
project, in which * Integratiorr and • eo
education could be complete and intel
lectual life could be given the proper
attention. Wilbur Hall is ideal for this
purpose. It is the largest complex on
campus, with space for approximately
720 people. It is divided into eight
houses, each of which constitutes a
separate identity unit. Each house has
an adjacent cottage for a faculty resi
dent and a tutorial room where semin
ars can be held.
The committee recommends that
next fall each Wilbur house be occu
pied by two floors of men and one
floor of women, and that each house
be integrated by class at a rate of one
freshman to three upperclassmen. Con
stituted as such, Wilbur Hall would be
the site of meaningful experimentation
in residential education.
The Wilbur experiment will of neces
sity affect some of the other university
residences. Freshman men will move to
Stern and Branner, retaining the spon
sor system in its present form. Fresh
man women will remain in Roble, with
sponsors, and those living in neither
Roble or Wilbur will be integrated with
upperclass women in Florence Moore.
Lagunita, Hoskins, and Toyon will be
unaffected. The remaining upperclass
men will live in three of the row
houses. The statistical breakdown is
as follows.
Total Frosh Upcl. Total Frosh Upcl.
Men Men Men W'ran W'mn Wmn
Wilbur 480 120 360 240 60 180
Stem 590 570 20
Branner 170 160 10
Roble 260 250 10
Florence
Moore 350 90 260
Lagunita 290 0 290
Hoskins 120 0 120
Toyon 200 0 200
Row
Houses (3)100 0 100
(5) 180 0 180
Totals 1540 850 690 1440 400 1040
(Note: If women are allowed to move
off campus, adjustments can be made
easily. If the number of women moving
off is under 180, an appropriate num
ber of row houses can be converted
from women to men. Compensation
can also be made by admitting more
freshman and transfer women. If

necessary the measures can be com
bined. )
Students will be chosen for the Wil
bur experiment on a draw basis. It is
reasonable to expect an excess demand
for on-campus housing by upperclass
men, since a new option is being of
fered that will presumably attract men
who presently or would otherwise live
off campus, or in fraternities. The com
ration of the upperclassmen's popu
lation in Wilbur would thus differ
from the present composition of Stem.
If women are allowed off campus, there
would be a greater possibility of satis
fying the demand for men's housing.
The likelihood of vacant dormitory
space, with the introduction of the
Wilbur option, is highly improbable.
The logistics of putting the bodies
into Wilbur for the pilot project is
only half of our task in our proposal.
The problems of staffing the complex
and from there working out feasible
programs is the next step. Hopefully
to make this pilot project a real step
toward achieving the residential uni
versity, as much of the general report
as possible will be included, only the
scope has changed not the purpose of
the program.
Selection for next year's faculty resi
dents could be turned over to a com
mittee composed of one faculty and
one student member of the ASSU
Housing Commission and two members
from the Dean of Students Office, with
the advice of the present Committee.
Once this task has been completed, the
faculty can participate in choosing the
tutors and drawing up more detailed
plans for the program.
The committee realizes that a com
mitment to this kind of residential
education will require an overt shift
in educational effort from the class
room and lab to the residence, with
both compensation for it and relief
from other teaching duties—and quite
probably the replacement of their
other more formal academic functions
by other personnel. We also realize
that there will be a budget problem,
but emphatically deny that worthwhile
educational goals should not be pro
posed and slated because of current
pragmatic limitations.
The committee hopes that, through

further study—best done in conjunc
tion with the study of education at
Stanford—that it will be possible to
rearrange and reemphasize the com
ponents of freshman education in such
a way that existing resources would
permit a serious upgrading of resi
dence education, and the possibility
that such education could replace some
aspects of the present program. This
might well allow the same total re
sources of money and people to meet
the desired objectives by shifting the
locale and method of teaching, rather
than just adding to the staff and pro
gram.
Presently in Wilbur there are three
sponsor rooms and one tutor room
which can accommodate the new tutors.
Hopefully as many of these rooms will
be used for that purpose, but if for
any reason four tutors per house is im
possible, then the rooms could be used
for offices which would at least bring
more graduate level contact into the
residence.
One possible suggestion for Wilbur's
eight houses next year would be to
have five of them centered around a
general theme, one international house,
and two left unstructured. There has
been much agitation for an interna
tional house on campus and many pro
posals have been drawn up. Five sug
gested topics for the theme houses are
"Religion and Society," "Literature and
Fine Arts," "Science and Human Prob
lems," "The Urban Threat," and "So
cial Change."
To take only one of these themes and
speculate what the given house of
faculty, tutors and students will make
of it is another of those endless first
steps in imagination potential. The
house that was using the topic "Science
and Human Problems," for example,
would bring in a diversity of fields
from the natural sciences to the hu
manities. Many of the poignant prob
lems facing students and faculty are
centered in this topic but the same
could probably be said in a different
context for each of the five topics. The
impact of technology on our economic
and social system, the moral contro
versy over the newest discoveries in
genetics, the myth of the scientific
method are all themes to be explored.

What happens to a world view when
scientific discoveries puncture com
fortable philosophies? What is time
and how does man control it and how
docs it control man? These are ques
tions to be asked. Above all, it is im
portant to remember that the direc
tion of intellectual thrust must not be
too well defined in advance. One of
the most valuable experiences for the
living group will be coming to grips
with the topic, deciding for themselves
how the general area should be ap
proached, and then proceeding to de
velop programs and structures on their
own.
The committee is highly enthusiastic
about the creative possibilities pre
sented by the Wilbur experiment—the
first step in the direction of a fully
integrated and coeducational residence.
If the experiment even approaches the
measure of success the committee en
visions, it could prove a major innova
tion in the history of American higher
education. A well developed program
of residential education offers a poten
tial of immeasurable dimension.
X. Correlation of this report with the
overall review of education at Stanford
The key problems of residence edu
cational stimulus and the kind of staff
and budget commitments necessary
need further specific elucidations which
the committee hopes can be under
taken by the Executive Committee for
the study of education at the earliest
opportunity, in order to agree on ob
jectives and make necessary staff and
financial plans for the Wilbur Project
to be able to start in the Fall of 1967.
The committee takes this oppor
tunity to thank the following people
for individual contributions to our
meetings: Dwight Clark, Dr. Lawrence
Thomas, Miss Sally Mahoney, Dr. Mar
tin Evans, Dick Williams, Mike Roster,
Howie Holmes, Doug Davis, Bob Gor
don, Dean Hind, and Dean Novak.
February 6, 1967
Subcommittee on the Freshmen Resi
dence Program ASSU Housing Com
mission. Barbara Levin, Judy Bader.
Barbara Warren, David Koval, Chris
topher Harte, Douglas Sorenson, Scott
Soames (Co-Chairman) Elizabeth
Cohen, B. Davie Napier, Max
Maurice M. Osborne Jr. (Co-Chairman).
