# The 						Current Constitution
## 
### 
Preamble
We. the students of Stanford University, in order to advance our interests,
define our responsibilities, and provide for our meaningful participation in the
governance of the University, do hereby associate and establish this Constitu
tion.
Article I: Name and
Membership
Section 1. Name
The name of the organization under this Constitution shall be the Associated
Students of Stanford University, hereafter referred to as the Association. '
Section 2. Membership
All registered students of Stanford University, and only such persons, shall be
members of this Association. As members they shall be entitled to vote, to
hold office in the Association, and to exercise the various rights and privileges
of membership They shall aiso be liable for such fees as this Association
may assess.
Section 3. Representative of the Student Body
The Association shall be the sole representative of the entire Stanford student
body.
A. Within the University
Only the Association and its designees shall represent the entire Stanford
student body in any dealings with other elements of the University.
B. Outside of the University
Only the Association and its designees shall have the right to represent the
entire Stanford student body in non university affairs.
Article II: Legislative Branch
Section 1. Final Representative Authority
The final representative authority of the Association shall be vested in the
Senate of the Association The Senate shall be composed of twenty-one voting
members, and such ex-officio members without vote as are herein provided
or may be provided in the By-Laws of the Association Ten of these shall be
elected by and shall represent the undergraduate members of the Association,
ten shall be elected by and shall represent the graduate and professional school
members of the Association, and the twenty-first shall be the Senate Chair

Section 2. Membership in the Senate
A. General
1. The twenty elected regular members of the Senate, along with the
twenty elected alternate members, shall be chosen each year in the
Association general election. This election shall be held on two con
secutive weekdays during the second, third, or fourth week of Spring
Quarter, the exact date to be specified in the By-Laws of the Associa
tion.
2. Each of the elected regular and alternate members of the Senate shall,
at the time of their election and during their continuance in office, be
members of the Association and of the constituency they represent.
However, during the general election, members of the Association may
be elected from the constituency in which they will be enrolled during
the next academic year
3. An elected member of the Senate shall cease to be a member of the
Senate upon the event of his or her death, resignation, disqualification,
recall, or expulsion Except as otherwise provided in the By-Laws of the
Association, the Senate shall call such special elections as are required
to fill vacant regular seats in the Senate, and may at its discretion call
special elections to fill vacant alternate seats.
4. In the event that one or more regular seats in the Senate are vacant, the
membership of the Senate for the purpose of determining quorums and
counting votes shall be considered to be twenty-one minus the number
of vacant regular seats.
5. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as preventing the Senate
from enforcing appropriate sanctions against candidates whose actions
in seeking office were in violation of the laws governing student elections.
B. Election of (<ndergraduate Senators
1. The ten regular undergraduate members of the Senate shall be elected
at-large by all undergraduate members of the Association. Each under
graduate member of the Association voting may cast one vote for each
of ten candidates seeking election to the Senate. The ten candidates
who receive the largest number of votes shall become regular members
of the Senate.
2. The ten candidates for undergraduate Senate seats who receive t e next
largest number of votes shall become alternate members of the Senate
Each regular and alternate undergraduate member of the Senate shall
be assigned a rank in accordance with the number of votes received,
provided that members elected in any special election shall be ranked
below those elected in the general election or in previous special elec
tions held since the general election. Should any regular undergraduate
member of the Senate cease to be a member of the Senate, that seat
shall be awarded to the highest-ranking alternate member, who shall
then become a regular member.
C. Election of Graduate Senators
1. The ten regular graduate and professional school members of the Senate
shall be elected from one or more districts as specified in the By-Laws of
the Association, the composition of which shall be based on an equitable
apportionment of the graduate and professional school members of the
Association Each graduate and professional school member of the
Association voting may cast one vote in the district to which he or
she belongs for each of as many regular Senate seats are assigned to
that district. In each district, the candidates equal in number to the
number of regular Senate seats assigned to that district who receive the
largest number of votes shall become regular members of the Senate.
No member of the Association shall vote in a district of which he or she
is not a member
2. In each district, the candidates equal in number to the number of reg
ular Senate seats assigned to that district who receive the next largest
number of votes shall become alternate members of the Senate Each
ARTICLE 11. LEGISLATIVE BRANCH
regular and alternate graduate and professional school member of the
Senate shall be assigned a rank in accordance with the number of votes
received divided by the number of eligible voters in their district, pro
vided that members elected in any special election shall be ranked below
those elected in the general election or in previous special elections held
since the general election. Should any regular graduate or professional
school member of the Senate cease to be a member of the Senate, that
seat shall be awarded to the highest-ranking alternate member from that
district, who shall then become a regular member
D. Duties of Alternate Senators
1. Alternate members may attend all meetings of the Senate and engage
in debate. In addition, they shall have such privileges in the committees
of the Senate as may be provided in the By-Laws of the Association
2. When a regular undergraduate member of the Senate fails to be in atten
dence at a meeting, the highest ranking undergraduate alternate member
present shall be allowed to vote, to be counted as a part of a quorum,
and to perform all functions of a regular member.
3. When a regular graduate or professional school member of the Senate
fails to be in attendence at a meeting, the highest-ranking alternate
member from the absent member's district shall be allowed to vote, to be
counted as a part of a quorum, and to perform all functions of a regular
member. Should neither regular nor alternate members from a given
district be present in sufficient numbers to fill all regular Senate seats
assigned to that district, the highest-ranking alternate member from
among the remaining districts shall be allowed to vote, to be counted as
a part of a quorom. and to perform all functions of a regular member.
4. A regular member who arrives late at a meeting may reclaim the right to
vote from the alternate acting as his or her substitute by so informing
the Senate Chair.
E. Ex-Officio Members '
1. The Council of Presidents shall be ex-officio members without vote.
2. The Financial Manager shall be an ex-officio member without vote.
Section 3. Term
A. Senate Elect
Members of the Association elected and certified as members of the new
Senate shall meet as the Senate Elect within one week after certification by
the Senate, and at regular intervals thereafter.
B. Organization of the Senate Elect
The Senate Elect shall elect its officers and organize itself in a manner similar
to that of the Senate Members of the Senate Elect shall be ex-officio members
of the Senate and observers on any body containing a member of the Senate.
Members of the Senate shall be ex-officio members of the Senate Elect.
C. Chair of the Senate Elect
The Chair of the Senate shall be the Chair of the Senate Elect until that body
has selected another Chair
D. Transition from the Senate Elect to the Senate
At a date specified in the By-Laws of the Association, or 14 days before the
end of Spring quarter, whichever comes first, the Senate and Senate Elect
shall dissolve and the former members of the Senate Elect shall constitute
the new Senate.
E. Initial Meeting of the New Senate
The new Senate shall meet at least once in Spring quarter, at which time it
shall formalize the membership of Senate committees and the appointment of
Senate officers.

Section 4. Presiding Officer
The Senate shall elect a Chairman, who shall preside over meetings of that
body. The Senate shall elect a Deputy Chairman to preside in the absence
of the Chairman. The presiding officer shall vote only when his vote would be
decisive.
Section 5. Procedure
The Senate shall have the power to choose its other officers, to determine its
rules of procedure, to constitute committees, to judge the credentials of its
members, and to discipline its members.
Section 6. Quorom
One half of the regular members of the Senate plus one shall constitute a
quorom to conduct business
Section 7. Constitutional Interpretation
The Senate shall have the power to interpret this Constitution and the By-
Laws of the Association.
Section 8. Budgetary and Financial Policy
Except as otherwise provided in this Constitution the Senate shall have the
ultimate authority to determine the budget of the Association and its agencies
and their budgetary, financial, investment, business, and operating policies,
and to establish rules ensuring that funds derived from fees levied upon the
members of the Association are expended and accounted for properly
Section 9. Agencies of the Association
The Senate shall have the power to create, modify, and abolish agencies of
the Association for specific purposes, including but not limited to projects
providing services to members of the Association The functions, structure,
officers, and finances of all such agencies shall be specified in the By-Laws.
However, corporate subsidiaries of the Association shall be subject to their
own corporate charters and by-laws.
Section 10. Nominations Commission
A. Jurisdiction
All members of the Association appointed to such positions on the following
bodies as are reserved for members of the Association shall be nominated by
the Association through its Nominations Commission with the concurrence
of the Senate, as provided herein: committees and commissions of the Uni
versity President and of the Academic Council, University Committees and
Administrative Panels, committees of the Board of Trustees of the University,
sub-committees of the above-named committees, and such additional com
mittees and other bodies as may be from time to time specified in agreements
approved by the President of the University and by the Senate.
Alternative procedures for these nomination may be specified from time to
time in agreements approved by the Senate and the President of the University,
either of whom may terminate such an agreement at any time.
B. Membership
1. The Nominations Commission shall consist of 7 members of the Asso
ciation. and such ex-officio members without vote as may be provided
in the By-Laws of the Association.
a. Three members of the Commission shall be appointed by the Sen
ate by a two-thirds vote. These three members shall include at
least one graduate, and at least one undergraduate, member of the
Association.
b. Four members of the Commission shall be nominated by the Coun
cil of Presidents and confirmed by the Senate by a two-thirds vote.
These four members shall include at least one graduate, and at
least one undergraduate, member of the Association.
ARTICLE 11. LEGISLATIVE BRANCH
2. The qualifications for. and additional procedures for the nomination
of. members of the Commission, and its rules of procedure, shall be
specified in the By-Laws of the Association. Four voting member of the
Commission shall constitute a quorum.
3. Members of the Nominations Commission shall be chosen .during the
Winter Quarter, and shall serve a one-year term of office, beginning on
a date specified in the By-Laws of the Association, but no later than
the first week of Spring quarter. They shall continue to serve until their
successors have taken office, or until they have resigned or been removed
by the Senate.
4. Members of the Commission may be removed from office by a majority
vote of the Senate either upon the recommendation of a majority of
the Commission or upon the joint recommendation of the Chair of the
Commission and the Council of Presidents, or by a two-thirds vote of
the Senate.
5. In the event that a position on the Commission becomes vacant, the
Senate shall, at its next meeting, appoint a new member to serve the
remainder of the term of the original member, such appointment to be
by a two-thirds vote.
6. In the event that a quorum of the Commission is unable to meet during
the Summer quarter or between quarters, or during a quarter after at
tempting to do so for two weeks or more, the Senate shall provide for
a body to carry out the duties and responsibilities of the Commission
until the Commission is able to resume meeting.
C. Chair
At the time of their confirmation, one of the members of the Commission shall
be designated by the Senate as Chair of the Commission. The Senate may.
by a two-thirds vote, remove the chair and designate another member of the
Commission as chair.
D. Normal Nomination Procedure for Representatives
The Nominations Commission shall announce all positions for which it seeks
representatives to the entire Association All members of the Association
shall be accorded equal opportunity to apply for these positions. Selections
of representatives by the Nominations Commission and their confirmation by
the Senate shall be by majority vote
E. Nomination through the Applicant Pool
If circumstances do not permit the announcement of a particular position for
which a representative of the Association is sought, then the Nominations
Commission may select a representative from a general applicant pool. All
members of the Association shall be accorded equal opportunity to apply
for this applicant pool. The Senate shall confirm all such selections of the
Nominations Commission by a two-thirds vote
F. Removal of Representatives
1. The Nominations Commission may recommend to the Senate the re
moval of any representatives of the Association who do not regularly
attend meetings of their Committee or do not accomplish their legiti
mate portion of the Committee's work At least 48 hours notice must
be given to both the Association representative and the Chair of the
concerned Committee, and both shall be invited to speak on this issue
before the Commission
2. Upon this recommendation the Senate may remove, by a two-thirds vote,
the Association representative from the concerned Committee. At least
48 hours notice must be given to both the Association representative
and the Chair of the concerned Committee, and both shall be invited
to speak on this issue before the Senate. Upon removal the Senate
shall direct the Nominations Commission to nominate one or more new
representatives as a replacement.
3. No one shall be replaced on a committee for political reasons

Section 11. Confirmation of Appointments
The Senate shall have the right to confirm appointments of representatives of
the Stanford student body, except in those cases where an alternate procedure
has been approved by two-thirds of the Association voting in a general election
Such confirmation shall be by majority vote of those regular members of the
Senate present and voting.
Section 12. Elections
The Senate shall have the power to make laws governing all student elections.
Section 13. By-Laws
The Senate may enact, amend, or repeal the By-Laws of the Association
upon approval by two-thirds of the members present and voting, provided
that notice has been given at the previous regular meeting
Section 14. Meetings
The Senate shall hold regular bi-weekly meetings unless otherwise decided by
the Senate. Minutes shall be kept and shall be made available, upon request,
to all members of the Association.
Article III: Executive Branch
Section 1. Council of Presidents
The Council of Presidents of the Association shall be the chief executives of
the Association
Section 2. Qualifications
Members of the Council shall, at the time of their election and during their
continuance in office, be members in good standing of the Association.
Section 3. Election
The Council shall be elected by a majority of the Association voting in elections
held during the third and fourth weeks of the spring quarter Provisions for
nominations shall be specified in the By-Laws of the Association
Section 4. Term
Upon certification of their election by the Senate, the members of the new
Council shall meet as the Council Elect. The Council Elect shall organize
itself in a manner similar to that of the Council. Members of the Council
Elect shall sit as ex-officio members of the Senate Elect and as observers
on any body containing a member of the Council. At a date specified in the
By-Laws of the Association, or 14 days before the end of Spring quarter,
whichever comes first, the Council and Council Elect shall dissolve and the
former members of the Council Elect shall constitute the new Council.
Section 5. Powers
The Council shall serve an administrative role. They shall oversee and coor
dinate the day to day operations and activities of the Association They are
also responsible for facilitating and coordinating independent student efforts
They shall be the chief representatives of the Association, both inside the
University community and outside.
Any member of the Council shall have the power to call special Meetings of
the Association, to establish committees and subgroups as deemed desirable.
The Council shall have the right to veto any bill or resolution passed by the
Senate. Any such veto must be signed by three members of the Council
The Council shall notify, in writing, the Senate of the veto and the reasons
therefore within seventy hours after the adjournment of the meeting during
which the bill was passed At the next meeting of the Senate a motion to
override the veto shall be in order
Article IV: Judicial Branch
Section 1. Judiciary Authority
The Association shall recognize the authority of University judicial bodies
over members of the Association only if those judicial bodies shall have been
approved by two-thirds of those members of the Association voting in a general
election.
Section 2. Rights of the Accused
The accused person shall have the following rights. The judicial body hearing
the case shall inform the accused person of his rights guaranteed under this
section at the time he is notified of the charges against him.
1. To be informed of all the charges and of the alleged acts upon which
those charges are based
2. To be allowed a reasonable time in which to prepare a defense
3. To hear all evidence upon which charges are based, and to answer this
evidence through rebuttal.
4. To call witnesses before the judicial body and to confront any other
witnesses before the judicial body.
5. To be assured that, unless the defendant asks for an open hearing, any
matters of facts which would tend to identify the person or persons
involved in a case would be kept confidential.
6. To have an open hearing
7. To request that any member of the judicial body be disqualified because
of prejudice.
8. To be informed of the above rights by proper summons.
9. To be considered innocent until proven guilty beyond a reasonable doubt
10. To be assured that no record of the case is placed on his transcript
11. To have no person presenting evidence against him sit in judgment of
him.
12. In instances of conviction under State or Federal law. the judicial body
shall not assess penalties if the circumstances of the case indicate that
such penalties would be inequitable to the defendant when imposed
in addition to civil or criminal penalties. This limitation shall not ap
ply when the judicial body's proceedings are deemed necessary by the
judicial body to protect the University community from risk or harm.
Nothing in this paragraph, however, shall be interpreted as barring or
delaying action by the judicial body on a case because a similar charge
is pending before a civil court
Article V: Finances
Section 1. Association Fee
A. General
An Association Fee shall be levied by the Association upon its membership
This Fee shall be used for the organizational and basic programming ex
penses. and minor capital improvements, of student organizations requiring
small amounts of funding, including appropriate agencies of the Association
B. Authorization
1. By a date specified in the By-Laws of the Association, but in any case
no later than the day prior to the beginning of the Spring quarter general
election, the Senate shall enact legislation specifying the amount of the
Association Fee for the following fiscal year. The total amount may be
contingent on the success or failure of one or more Special Fee requests
on the ballot in the Spring quarter general election, provided that both

any contingent amounts and the non-contingent or base amount are
approved by the Senate prior to the election, in accordance with the
provisions of this Section.
This legislation shall require notice at the previous regular meeting of the
Senate specifying the amount to be authorized, and must be approved
by a vote of two-thirds of the membership of the Senate. If no such
legislation is enacted by this deadline, then the Association Fee for the
following fiscal year shall be the same as that assessed during the current
fiscal year.
2. After the day prior to the first day of the Spring quarter general election,
the amount of the Association Fee for the following fiscal year shall be
changed only persuant to an initiative or referendum of the members of
the Association, provided that this is done either before the collection
schedule for the Association and Special Fees has been finally approved,
or with the consent of the University.
Section 2. Special Fees
A. Placement on the Ballot
Every Spring quarter, during the general elections held for the Senate and
Council of Presidents, the Association may levy one or more Special Fees via
a referenda Special Fees shall be sought by student organizations to cover
their organizational and basic programming expenses A student organization
shall have its request for a Special Fee placed on the ballot after following any
one of the following four procedures
1. Prepare a detailed budget for the student organization for the next fiscal
year, including the amount sought from the Special Fee. and submit this,
along with the current budget and a summary of actual expenditures, to
the Association in the form of a petition Such petitions bearing the sig
natures of 20 per cent of the members of the Association requesting to
place the Special Fee on the ballot for Association consideration shall be
presented to the Council of Presidents, who must examine for authen
ticity the signatures on the petitions within seven days after receiving
it. Upon verifying the petition, the Council of Presidents shall then au
thorize the placement of the Special Fee on the ballot for Association
consideration
2. Prepare a detailed budget for the student organization for the next fiscal
year, including the amount sought from the Special Fee. and submit this,
along with the current budget and a summary of actual expenditures,
to the Association in the form of a petition and to the Senate. Such
petitions bearing the signatures of 10 per cent of the members of the
Association requesting to place the Special Fee on the ballot for Associ
ation consideration shall be presented to the Council of Presidents, who
must examine for authenticity the signatures on the petitions within
seven days after receiving it. Upon verifying the petition, the Council of
Presidents shall then authorize the placement of the Special Fee on the
ballot for Association consideration, provided that this request has also
been approved by three-fifths of the members of the Senate.
3. Prepare a detailed budget for the student organization for the next fiscal
year, including the amount sought from the Special Fee, and submit this,
along with the current budget and a summary of actual expenditures,
to the Senate. Upon approval by three-fifths of the members of the
Senate, the Council of Presidents shall then authorize the placement
of the Special Fee on the ballot for Association consideration, provided
that the last time this student organization appeared on the ballot for a
Special Fee. of at least substantially the same amount presently sought,
those in favor of the Special Fee constituted at least 60 per cent of the
members of the Association voting on the Special Fee
4. Prepare a detailed budget for the student organization for the next fiscal
year, including the amount sought from the Special Fee. and submit this,
along with the current budget and a summary of actual expenditures, to
the Association in the form of a petition Such petitions bearing the sig
natures of 10 per cent of the members of the Association requesting to
place the Special Fee on the ballot for Association consideration shall be
presented to the Council of Presidents, who must examine for authen
ticity the signatures on the petitions within seven days after receiving
it. Upon verifying the petition, the Council of Presidents shall then au
thorize the placement of the Special Fee on the ballot for Association
consideration, provided that the last time this student organization ap
peared on the ballot for a Special Fee. of at least substantially the same
amount presently sought those in favor of the Special Fee constituted
at least 60 per cent of the members of the Association voting on the
Special Fee
ARTICLE V. FINANCES
One of the above procedures must be completed by a deadline specified in
the By-Laws of the Association, but no later than 21 days before the general
election. The Council of Presidents shall give public notice in the Stanford
Daily of the Special Fee requests which will appear on the ballot and their
amounts at least 7 days before the general election.
The Senate shall have the authority to specify the form in which the detailed
budget and summary of actual expenditures must be presented and the in
formation they must contain, and to establish regulations defining the proper
form for petitions and governing the circulation thereof.
B. Placement on the Ballot in Extenuating Circumstances
If a student organization has completed one of the above procedures within
21 days of the general election then the Council of Presidents and the Senate
may. if they determine that extenuating circumstances prevented an earlier
completion of one of these procedures, authorize the placement of a Special
Fee on the ballot for Association consideration. In this case within two days
after authorization, the Council of Presidents shall give public notice in the
Stanford Daily of the Special Fee(s) and their amount(s) to be placed on the
ballot for student consideration
C. Financial Information
During the general election a summary of all financial information submitted
by the student organization seeking a Special Fee shall be made available to
all members of the Association.
D. Division of Special Fee Requests
Regardless of which procedure for placement of a Special Fee request on the
ballot was followed, the detailed budget for the next fiscal year of a student
organization seeking a Special Fee may be divided into two sections by a vote
of three-fifths of the members of the Senate. Each section, along with an
appropriate amount sought from the student organization s initial Special Fee
request, its current budget, and the summary of actual expenditures to date,
shall be considered as a separate and independent Special Fee request, shall
appear separately on the ballot, and shall require separate approval by the
members of the Association as provided herein. The sum of the two Special
Fee requests appearing on the ballot shall equal the amount sought in the
organization's initial Special Fee request.
E. Approval by the Association
During the general election each member of the Association may cast one vote
either in favor of or in opposition to each Special Fee. A Special Fee shall be
deemed to have passed if a majority of those voting on the it were in favor
and if those in favor constituted at least 15 per cent of the members of the
Association
F. Approval by the University
Upon certification of the appropriate election result, the Council of Presidents
shall submit all those Special Fee requests which were approved by the Asso
ciation. and the Assocation Fee authorized by the Senate, to the President of
the University for his or her approval.
Section 3. Collection of the Association Fee and Spe
cial Fees
A. Collection Schedule
After the Spring election results have been certified by the Senate, the Finan
cial Manager shall devise and submit to the Senate for approval a schedule
for the levying of the Association and Special Fees which must conform to
the following four principles:
1. The amount levied during each of Autumn. Winter, and Spring quarters
shall be substantially the same, while that levied during Summer quarter
shall be approximately one half this amount
2. The amount levied each quarter shall be an integral amount of dollars

3. The amount levied each quarter shall be apportioned among the Associ
ation and Special Fees in a manner that shall provide an adequate cash
flow for the concerned student organizations
4. All costs incurred by the Association in administering the approval, dis
bursement. and refund processes, and in enforcing compliance by the
recipients of such funds with their authorized budgets, along with an
appropriate portion of the general election costs, shall be paid by a sur
charge levied on the Association Fee and the authorized Special Fees.
This surcharge shall be a uniform percentage of each Fee.
B. Collection of Fees
The University shall collect the appropriate amount every quarter at the same
time it collects charges for tuition The University shall transfer all collected
monies to the Financial Manager, who shall then distribute them into the
appropriate financial accounts.
Section 4. Refunds of the Association Fee and Spe
cial Fees
Any member of the Association who voted during the election in which the
Special Fee(s) were authorized, and any present member of the Association
who was not. at the time of this general election, a member of the Association,
shall be entitled to a refund of at least the amount assessed in support of
the the entire, or any portion of. the Association or any Special Fee. This
amount shall be specified in the collection schedule for the Fees, and should
be as close as practical to the actual per capita amount collected for the Fee
in question.
Obtaining this refund may deprive the member of the Association of some or
all of the services offered by the student organizations receiving these monies
Section 5. Distribution of the Association Fee and
Special Fees
A. Distribution of the Association Fee
The Association Fee shall be distributed by one or more bodies of the As
sociation as authorized in the By-Laws of the Association. The Senate shall
retain ultimate authority over the distribution of the Association Fee
B. Deviations from Special Fee Budgets
The Financial Manger shall notify the Senate and the Council of Presidents
whenever a student organization who has obtained a Special Fee significantly
deviates from their budget. Either the Senate or the Council of Presidents
may then direct the Financial Manager to halt any distribution of funds from
the concerned student organization's account that would force it outside of
its budget
C. Modifications of Special Fee Budgets
Any student organization who has obtained a Special Fee may modify their
budget, subject to the approval of the Financial Manager. The Senate shall
retain ultimate authority over the approval of such modifications
Section 6. Budget,
A. General
1. All Association funds shall be expended within the purposes of the
Association, and within the educational purposes of the University All
funds derived from fees levied upon members of the Association shall
be expended within the educational purposes of the University
2. No funds shall be received or expended by the Association or its agen
cies unless authorized by the Operating Budget or Capital Budget of the
Association or by the budget of the relevant Association agency Au
thorization shall consist of the f»pprpyal by the Senate of the appropriate
budget or a modification thereof.
ARTICLE V. FINANCES
B. Operating Budget
1. The Operating Budget of the Association shall be used for the basic
operating expenses of the Association, including but not limited to the
Senate. Council of Presidents, Financial Office. Association Office. Stu
dents' Organizations Fund. Nominations and Elections Commissions,
and such other activities and expenses as are so classified by the Sen
ate. The Operating Budget shall be divided into two parts, representing
those expenses funded by the Operating Budget Allowance provided by
the University, and those expenses not so funded.
2. Sources of funds for the Operating Budget shall include but not be
limited to the Operating Budget Allowance provided by the University,
income earned from the investment of funds owned by or in the custody
of the Association, the net operating profit of the profit-making agencies
of the Association, indirect cost recovery charges, and gifts. The Senate
shall adopt policies governing the rates of reinvestment, if any. out of
income from different sources. Solicitation of gifts from sources outside
the University shall be undertaken in accordance with University policies
regarding gift solicitation and acceptance, and in consultation with the
appropriate University officers.
3. The Association shall annually negotiate with the University an Oper
ating Budget Allowance. The funds in this allowance are to be used for
the basic operating expenses of the Association, including but not lim
ited to all or part of the expenses of the Senate. Council of Presidents.
Financial Office. Association Office. Students' Organizations Fund, and
the Nominations and Elections Commissions, The procedures by which
the Association formulates and approves its annual request for this al
lowance. negotiates this request with the University, and accepts the
results of these negotiations, shall be specified in the By-Laws of the
Association.
4. By a date specified in the By-Laws of the Association, but in any case no
later than the beginning of the new fiscal year, the Senate shall approve
the operating budget for that fiscal year. If no budget is approved by
the Senate by this deadline, the budget for the new fiscal year shall
be identical to that of the previous fiscal year. All modifications to
the operating budget shall be approved by the Senate before becoming
effective.
5. Upon approval by the Senate, but in any case no later than the beginning
of the new fiscal year, the Financial Manager shall submit the operating
budget approved by the Senate, or the previous year's budget if no
new budget has been approved, to the President of the University or
designee Within 14 days after the receipt of this budget, the President
or designee shall either approve the Operating Budget, or shall return
it to the Senate with a statement of the modifications necessary for it
to be approved Any adjustments to that part of the operating budget
funded by the Operating Budget Allowance shall require the approval of
the President or designee.
C. Other Budgets
The budgets of all Association agencies shall be prepared in accordance with
procedures provided in the By-Laws of the Association, and shall be approved
by the Senate prior to the beginning of each fiscal year. All modifications to
the these budgets shall be approved by the Senate before becoming effective.
D. Capital Expenditures
All capital expenditures of the Association and its agencies shall be contained
either in the Operating Budget of the Association or the budgets of such
agencies, or in a separate Capital Budget. This Capital Budget, and all mod
ifications to it. shall be approved by the Senate before becoming effective
Section 7. Students' Organizations Fund
A. General
1. The Students' Organizations Fund (herein after referred to as the
Fund") shall be the depository for the receiving, holding, disbursing,
and accounting for the monies of the various organizations using the
Fund.

2. The Financial Manager shall have the power to make rules and regula
tions governing the operation of the fund and the handling and protection
of the monies deposited with it, including the powers to make a charge
against any organization to cover the expense of handling that organi
zation's funds and to determine the disposition of funds deposited in
inactive or unclaimed accounts. The Senate shall retain the ultimate
authority over all rules and regulations of the Fund.
3. The Financial Manager shall be responsible for the enforcement of the
rules of the Fund.
B. Banking Requirement
1. Any student organization which receives funds from fees assessed upon
the members of the Association shall be required to deposit all funds of
that organization with the Students' Organizations Fund and to comply
with its rules and regulations. This requirement shall be independent of.
and in addition to. any University regulations concerning the handling
of student organizations' monies.
2. The Senate shall have the authority to specify the conditions and terms
under which, and the process by which, exemptions from this require
ment may be made, and to provide for the enforcement of this require
ment through appropriate sanctions. No exemption shall be approved
for a period longer than one fiscal year, nor earlier than during the fiscal
year preceding the one for which the exemption is valid The Senate
shall retain the ultimate authority over the approval, modification, and
termination of all exemptions.
3. Any other student organization recognized by the University may deposit
its monies with the Fund, provided that it complies with the Fund's rules
and regulations
Section 8. Financial Manager
A. Duties
Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and of the By-Laws of the
Association, the Financial Manager shall be directly responsible to the Senate
for the performance of the following duties:
1. As chief financial officer of the Association, the Financial Manager shall
exercise control over the budget and finances of the Association and its
agencies on a day-to-day basis, and shall report on their condition to
the Senate.
2. As comptroller of the Association, the Financial Manager shall ensure
that all expenditures of funds from the Association, its agencies, or
the Students' Organizations Fund, are duly authorized and documented
and within the purpose, functions, and budget of the specific agency or
organization.
3. The Financial Manager shall supervise the disbursement and refunding
of funds derived from the Association and Special Fees, and shall ensure
that organizations receiving such funds remain in compliance with their
authorized budgets.
4. The Financial Manager shall assume such additional responsibilities as
are provided in this Constitution and the By-Laws of the Association,
or by the Senate.
B. Selection
1. The Financial Manager Selection Committee shall consist of the current
Financial Manager or designee, one member of the Council of Presidents,
and two members of the Senate, one graduate and one undergraduate,
chosen by the Senate By a date specified in the By-Laws of the Asso
ciation. but in any case no later than the beginning of the sixth week
of Winter quarter, the Selection Committee shall nominate an individual
to serve as Associate Financial Manager This nomination shall require
confirmation by a two-thirds vote of the Senate.
2. Once confirmed by the Senate, the Associate Financial Manager shall
undertake such responsibilities as are assigned by the Financial Man
ager. in order to become familiar with the duties and responsibilities of
the Financial Manager and with the finances and operations of the As
sociation and its agencies During this period, the Associate Financial
Manager shall be a non-voting ex-officio member of all bodies on which
the Financial Manager serves.
ARTICLE V. FINANCES
3. By a date specified in the By-Laws of the Association, but in any case
no later than the beginning of the sixth week of Spring quarter, the
Financial Manager Selection Committee shall reconvene and evaluate
the performance of the Associate Financial Manager The Selection
Committee shall then decide either to nominate the Associate Financial
Manager as Financial Manager, or to interview additional candidates
before making a nomination. The final nomination shall be transmitted
to the current Senate before it dissolves, where it shall require a two
thirds vote for approval.
4. On a date specified in the By-Laws of the Association, but in any case no
later than the last day of Spring quarter, the new Financial Manger shall
take office, provided that his or her appointment has been confirmed by
the Senate. The Financial Manager shall serve until a successor has
taken office.
5. In the event of a vacancy in the office of Financial Manager, the Finan
cial Manager Selection Committee (excluding the Financial Manager or
designee) shall convene and nominate a replacement for confirmation by
the Senate, such confirmation requiring a two-thirds vote.
During this process, the Council of Presidents may nominate an Act
ing Financial Manager, who shall take office immediately upon nomi
nation. but whose office shall terminate upon the adjournment of the
next meeting of the Senate unless confirmed at that meeting by a two
thirds vote. Following confirmation by the Senate, the Acting Financial
Manager shall serve for a period of no more than 30 days, not count
ing days between quarters, but may be re-appointed for an additional
term of fourteen days if no replacement has been found, such reappoint
requiring prior approval of the Senate by a two-thirds vote.
6. The Financial Manager shall not, during his or her term of office, serve
as an elected member of the Senate or of the Council of Presidents
However, provided that he or she is not reapplying for the position
of Financial Manager, the current Financial Manager may run in the
Spring quarter general election for election to the new Senate or Council
of Presidents and. if elected, may serve on that body throughout the
normal term of office.
7. At the time that it approves the nomination of the Financial Manager,
the Senate shall also approve a contract or letter of appointment spec
ifying the terms and conditions under which he or she shall hold office.
C. Removal
The Financial Manager may be removed by a vote of two-thirds of the mem
bership of the Senate. The Financial Manager must be notified in writing of
the intent to introduce such a motion not less than forty-eight hours prior to
the opening of the Senate meeting at which the motion will be considered,
and must be given an opportunity to speak in opposition to the motion at
that meeting.
D. Fi naiicial Office
1. The Financial Manager shall have the power to appoint one or more
assistants, subject to approval by the Senate All persons appointed as
assistants shall require confirmation by a two-thirds vote of the Senate
before their appointments become effective.
2. The Senate shall have the power to create additional positions subordi
nate to the Financial Manager, to specify their responsibilities, and to
provide for the selection of persons to fill them. All persons appointed
to such positions shall require confirmation by a two-thirds vote of the
Senate before their appointments become effective. All such positions
shall be under the supervision and direction of the Financial Manager
3. The Financial Manager, together with the assistants and such additional
subordinate positions, shall collectively be referred to as the Financial
Office.
E. Association Office
The Association Office shall provide administrative and financial services for
the Association, its agencies, the Students' Organizations Fund, and student
organizations designated by the Senate. The Office shall function under the
supervision of the Financial Manager. Secretarial and other staff members of
the Office shall be employees of the University, and their employment shall
be under the Financial Manager, who for these purposes shall function as a

department head in the appropriate University administrative structure, and
the Council of Presidents
Section 9. General Provisions
A. Fiscal Year
The fiscal year of the Association and its agencies shall begin on September
1 and end on August 31. All student organizations receiving funds from fees
assessed upon members of the Association shall be required to use this fiscal
year
B. Annual Audit
The financial records of the Association, its agencies, and the Students' Or
ganizations Fund shall be reviewed annually by an independent outside auditor
accepted by the Financial Manager and the President of the University.
C. Contracts
1. Any agreement or contract proposed to be entered into by the Associa
tion or any of its agencies shall be presented to the Financial Manager
for prior approval and signature. The Financial Manager shall retain
copies of all approved contracts The Association, its agencies, and the
Students' Organizations Fund will not be held responsible for contracts
not signed by the Financial Manager such contracts shall be the per
sonal responsibility of the persons signing them The Senate shall have
the ultimate authority over the approval of all contracts.
2. No agent, officer, employee, or other person shall make any contract,
agreement, promise, or undertaking in the name of or on behalf of the
Association or its agencies, except persuant to authority contained in
this Constitution or otherwise granted by the Senate
\
D. Borrowing
The Association shall have the power to borrow money. The Senate shall
have the ultimate authority over the approval of all borrowing.
Article VI: Initiative,
Referendum, and Recall
Section 1. Initiative and Referendum
The membership of the Association shall have the power to initiate any act
within the power of the Senate, including By-Law amendments, or to annul any
act of the Senate, including By-Law amendments, provided that five percent of
the membership of the Association shall sign a petition calling for an election
on either a bill or a proposition annulling a bill. The petition, along with
the bill or proposition, shall be submitted to the Council of Presidents. The
Council of Presidents shall, if they determine the petition to be in good order
within the limitations of the Constitution, direct the Elections Commission to
conduct an election on the bill or proposition in not less than six nor more than
fifteen days after they shall have received the petition Public notice of such
an election shall be given in the Stanford student newspaper not less than
four days before it shall take place. The bill or proposition shall be adopted
upon approval by a majority of the members of the Association voting in the
election Any proposals made within twenty-five days of the end of the quarter
may. at the discretion of the Senate, be postponed for vote until not more
than fifteen days after the opening of the following quarter, provided that any
such postponement in the Spring Quarter shall be until the following Autumn
Quarter .
ARTICLE VI. INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM, AND RECALL
Section 2. Recall and Dissolution
The membership of the Association shall have the power to recall the Council
of Presidents, the Financial Manager, and members and officers of the Senate
It shall also have the power to dissolve the Senate and to call for elections for
the Senate.
A. Recall of the Council of Presidents or the Financial Manager
A petition to recall the Council of Presidents or the Financial Manager shall
be submitted to the Senate and shall not be valid unless it contains the sig
natures of at least fifteen percent of the membership of the Association. The
Senate shall, if it determines the signatures on the petition to be authentic
and sufficient in number, direct the Elections Commission to conduct a recall
election on two consecutive days, not less than six nor more than 15 days after
it has made its determination If the Senate does not make a determination
as to the authenticity of the signatures and their sufficiency in number within
seven days after the petitions have been submitted to the Chairman or the
Deputy Chairman of the Senate, its responsibilites devolve to the Elections
Commission, which must make its determination as to the authenticity of the
signatures and their sufficiency in number within five days after such respon
sibility has devolved to it from the Senate. If the petitions are determined to
be in order, the Elections Commission shall conduct a recall election on two
consecutive days not less than six nor more than 15 days after the petitions
were determined to be in order. Public notice of such election shall be given
in the Stanford Daily not less than four days before it shall take place. The
officer shall be removed from office with the concurrence of two-thirds of the
members of the Association voting in the recall election, as determined by
the Elections Commission. The election on any petition for recall submitted
within twenty-five days of the end of the quarter may. at the discretion of the
Senate or the Elections Commission, be postponed for vote until not more
than 15 days after the opening of the following quarter, providing that any
such postponement in the Spring Quarter shall be until the following Autumn
Quarter.
B. Recall of the Officers or the Members of the Senate
A petition to recall officers or members of the Senate shall be submitted to
the Council of Presidents In the case of officers of the Senate, the petition
shall not be valid unless it contains the signatures of at least fifteen percent
of the members of the Association In the case of members of the Senate,
the petition shall not be valid unless it contains the signatures of at least
fifteen percent of the members of the constituency the Senator in question
represents. The Council of Presidents shall, if they determine the signatures
on the petition to be authentic and sufficient in number, direct the Elections
Commission to conduct a recall election on two consecutive days not less than
six nor more than 15 days after the petitions were determined to be in order. If
the Council of Presidents does not make a determination as to the authenticity
and sufficiency in number of the signatures within seven days after they were
submitted to them, their responsibilities devolve to the Elections Commission,
which must make its determination as to the authenticity and sufficiency
in number of the signatures within five days after such responsibility has
devolved to it from the Council of Presidents. If the petitions are determined
to be in order, the Elections Commission shall conduct a recall election on two
consecutive days not less than six nor more than 15 days after the petitions
were determined to be in order. Public notice of such election shall be given
in the Stanford Daily not less than four days before it shall take place. The
officer shall be removed from office with the concurrence of two-thirds of the
members of the Association voting in the recall election, as determined by
the Elections Commission. All members of the Association may vote in recall
elections for officers of the Senate, but in recall elections for members of the
Senate, only members of the constituency the Senator in question represented
may vote. The election on any petition for recall submitted within 25 days of
the end of the quarter may., at the discretion of the Council of Presidents or the
Elections Commission, be postponed for vote until not more than 15 days after
the opening of the following quarter, providing that any such postponement
in the Spring Quarter shall be until the following Autumn Quarter.
C. Dissolution of the Senate
A petition to dissolve the Senate shall be submitted to the Council of Presi
dents and shall not be valid unless it contains the signatures of at least twenty
percent of the members of the Association The Council of Presidents shall, if
they determine the signatures on the petition to be authentic and sufficient in
number, direct the Elections Commission to conduct an election on the matter

of Senate dissolution on two consecutive days not less than six nor more than
15 days after the petitions were determined to be in order. Public notice of
such election shall be given in the Stanford Daily not less than four days
before it shall take place. The election on any petition for Senate dissolution
submitted within 25 days of the end of the quarter may. at the discretion of
the Council of Presidents, be postponed for vote until not more than 15 days
after the opening of the following quarter, providing that such postponement
in the Spring Quarter shall be until the following Autumn Quarter. If the Elec
tions Commission determines that at least two-thirds of the members of the
Association voting supported the dissolution of the Senate, the Senate shall
be dissolved, and may not meet or conduct business and the Council of Presi
dents of the Association shall direct the Elections Commission to conduct new
elections for the Senate on two consecutive days not less than seven nor more
than fifteen days after the dissolution of the Senate was voted. If dissolution
was voted less than 25 days before the end of Spring Quarter, elections for a
new Senate shall be postponed until the third week of the following Autumn
Quarter.
Article VII: Amendment
Section 1. Submission
Amendments to this Constitution shall be submitted to the membership of
the Association for ratificaton upon approval by two-thirds of the membership
of the Senate, provided that notice has been given at the previous regular
meeting, or upon petition by five percent of the membership of the Association.
Section 2. Petitions
Petitions proposing amendments shall be submitted to the Council of Presi
dents. who shall direct the Elections Commission to conduct an election on
the amendment in not less than six nor more than twenty-four days after
the opening of the following quarter. Any such postponement in the Spring
Quarter shall be until the following Autumn Quarter.
Section 3. Notice
All proposed amendments, together with the part of the Constitution affected
thereby, shall be published in the Stanford student newspaper during the week
prior to the ratification election on the amendment.
Section 4. Ratification
Proposed amendments shall be adopted upon approval by two-thirds of the
members of the Association voting in the ratification election and by the Board
of Trustees.
Article VIII: Disposition of
Assets in the Event of
Dissolution of the Association
Section 1. Property of the Association
Should this Association cease to exist, all its property shall be held in trust by
the University for a period of not less than five years. If any general student
association be formed and recognized within a five-year period by a majority
vote of registered students at the University during an election in which over
15 per cent of said students voted for recognition, then all such property so
held shall remain and belong to this successor organization. If no such general
student organization succeeds to the present Association within the specified
five years, unqualified title to all the property of the Association shall then be
vested in the University.
Section 2. Property in the Custody of the Associa
tion
Should this Association cease to exist, property in the custody of the As
sociation. including monies deposited in the Students' Organizations Fund,
shall, if the owner organization continues in existence, be held by the Univer
sity for the owner organization upon the same terms and conditions as the
Association held such property
