# AN ENDANGERED CULTURE
## University move to end student-run dining in Suites prompts disbelief, anger 
### MILES UNTERREINER MANAGING EDITOR 
Originally published on Feb. 21, 2013.

Frank Hassan has been head chef
in Suites' Bollard Eating Club for
seven years, and he specializes in
making two things: an incredible
breakfast and memories.

It's the former you'll get if you walk into
Bollard between 7:30 and 9:15 a.m. week
day mornings, where dozens of students
chatter under an enormous banner
erected by unknown admirers at some point
over the past decade featuring Frank's
beaming face and the club's informal title:
"The Bollard Empire."
But it's the memories that last, and over
the three years I've eaten and worked at
Suites, I've picked up quite a few: Frank
volunteering to wake up two hours early to
have breakfast ready for the track team by
5:30 a.m. the days we left early for out-of
state meets; Frank and I watching the
Mubarak regime fall on the Bollard TV
while he offered keen political observations
on his native Egypt; the way he enthusiasti
cally greets every male student with a heav
ily accented "my main man!" and every fe
male with a "good morning, beautiful";
Frank giving my mom a big hug when I
brought her to Bollard to visit during my
junior year.

I'll take those memories with me when I
finally leave Stanford this spring. It's hard
enough knowing I may never come back,
but this year is an especially difficult one in
which to say goodbye. That's because next
fall for the first time in eight years
Prank Hassan may not be coming back ei
ther.

♦ ♦♦
Residential Education (ResEd) has four
offices and 39 professional employees, and
the ResEd Central Office is located on the
second floor of Tresidder Union in Suite 9.

Ever since ResEd first assumed respon
sibility for paying Suites Dining's student
workers in the fall of 2010, I'd been visiting
the Central Office every few weeks to pick
up my paycheck for cleaning the kitchens. I
needed the money and I kept on coming
back, so when I walk up the spiral staircase
and through the clear glass door, I smile
and wave to Alyssa Ray, the Central Office's
friendly and familiar administrative assis


MEHMET INONU/The Stanford Daily
Bollard head chef Frank Hassan is
known among Suites residents for both
his breakfast cooking and the connections
he has forged with residents over
the seven years he has worked in Suites.
tant.
This time, however, I'm not here to pick up
a paycheck. I'm here to meet with Dean of
ResEd Deborah Golder, ResEd Associate
Dean Nate Boswell '99 M.A. 'O9 and ResEd
Director of Operations Aaron Buzay.
On Jan. 30, Boswell and Buzay sent an
email to Res Ed's Suites student email list in
forming all residents that next year for the
first time since Suites Dining was founded in
1982 students will no longer run Suites'
four eating clubs. They will be replaced, due
to what the email described as "health and
safety concerns" and "a pressing desire to
lower the board rate," with an outside corpo
ration.

Avanti, Beefeaters, Bollard and Middle
Earth have served food to Suites residents
six days a week for the past 30 years under
student management, which is currently pro
vided by the student-run 501(c)(3) nonprofit
Governor's Corner Dining Societies (GCDS).
One chef runs each eating club and is assisted
by a student CEO and CFO who oversee all
four clubs, eight student managers (two per
eating club) and a team of paid student "hash
ers" (that's me) who clean the kitchens before
and after meals.
Frank has cooked in Bollard for seven
years. Dennis has been head chef in
Beefeaters for 22. Tony has led Avanti for 18
years. And Caroline is new to Middle Earth
this year, having recently moved to the area
with her husband and two kids.
As part of the move to corporate manage
ment, the chefs' contracts are not being re
newed.
I want to know why, and it's the chefs I'm
thinking about as I shake hands and sit down
with Boswell, Buzay and Golder.
The conversation begins pleasantly
enough, although they tend to use a lot of bu
reaucratically vague sentences with the
words "moving forward," "sustainable" and
"conversation" thrown in. But something
Golder says about the selection process for
the new, non-student contractor rubs me the
wrong way.
"We always involve students in decision
making," she says.
This is news to me. In fact, the first time
ResEd notified all Suites residents that they
were considering replacing student leader
ship with a corporate contractor was when
Boswell and Buzay sent the email informing
residents that the decision had already been
made. I decide to point this out.
"How have you involved students in deci
sion-making up to this point? I mean, besides
the managers, have you gotten feedback from
students at Suites on this?"
Buzay looks confused.
"You mean have we run, like, a...a sur
vey?"
"No, I mean what have you done? I know
you haven't run a formal survey, but have you
talked to students at Suites about this
change?"
"So we sent out... we sent out the email to
the Suites community..."
"Right. So up until the point you sent the
email, though, you hadn't talked to any stu
dents in Suites besides the CEO and CFO?"
There's more talk of "moving forward"
and "sustainable business," from which I con
clude that the answer to my initial question is
"no."

Fortunately, a survey that asked Suites
residents if they approved or disapproved of
the proposed change had been sent out to the
Suites email list —just not by Res Ed. I know,
because I created it. It took me approximate
ly five minutes to draft.
149 Suites residents answered the poll,
and 143 of them —95.97 percent disap
proved of Res Ed's decision to contract food
services to an outside vendor and not to re
new the current chefs' contracts. I had made
a comments section available on the survey
form, and I'm interested to know what
Boswell, Buzay and Golder think of the stu
dent opinions they never solicited. I decide to
read a few representative student responses
aloud.
"Number one: 'I am very disappointed
with the decision from ResEd to take over
contracting and management of Suites Din
ing. I do not like that our chefs are being
treated in this manner. They have put years
of dedication and service into their jobs and
Stanford.'
"Number two: 'As far as I know, this deci
sion from ResEd was reached with no consul
tation from the general student community in
Suites, which is undemocratic, unaccountable
and unacceptable.'
"Number three: 'The students who run
Beefeaters and Dennis provide the best din
ing service found on campus. All the outside
corporations that I have seen on campus
come in sub-par to the standards at the Eat
ing Clubs, and I think this is a bureaucratic

and stupid decision.'
"What would you say to that?" I prompt
the ResEd administrators.

There's a very, very long silence.
♦ ♦♦

When I finally walk out of Tresidder Union
Suite 9 an hour later, the first thing I do is
drive home, sit down at my computer and
start writing. I separate my document into
three headings: board bill costs; health and
safety; and financial mismanagement.

Board bill costs
In more than an hour of conversation, the
trio of ResEd administrators had repeatedly
cited Suites' high board bill as a pressing rea
son to seek a less expensive corporate vendor
to provide food. But a closer inspection of
University financial records indicates that
this justification makes little sense.
To begin with, the Suites board bill is no
higher than that of the Row houses, which are
currently managed by private contractor Stu
dent Organized Services, Inc. (SOS) mak
ing it difficult to see how changing to a private
contractor will lower the board rate.

The problem, however, goes deeper: the
University, not GCDS, is itself responsible for
creating the problem it now insists upon step
ping in to fix.
Prior to 2007, the quarterly Suites board
bill was among the lowest on campus at, ac
cording to former GCDS CEO Leah Sawyer
'O7, approximately $1,200 per student per
quarter. Suites Dining also provided more
meals per week —l7 than the more ex
pensive Row houses, which typically provided
10.

In 2008, however, the University com
bined the Suites Dining Society bill which
covers food—with the University Housing
bill, which covers housing maintenance costs.
Since then, Student Housing a division
of Residential & Dining Enterprises (R&DE)
has dramatically raised its prices, forcing
up the total costs that appeal 1 on the Suites
board bill. From the 2011-12 academic year to
the 2012-13 academic year alone, Housing
raised its prices by 25 percent. Housing main
tenance now takes up just under a quarter of
Suites residents' room and board expenses at
approximately $5OO per resident per quarter.
Res Ed's attempt to fix Suites' rising board
rate made matters even worse. According to
former GCDS CEO J.T. Sullivan 'll, ResEd
responded to Housing-driven Suites board
bill inflation by setting an overall room and
board price cap of $2,000 per student per
quarter. Since ResEd has little to no power to
limit the price charged by R&DE, however,
the Housing portion of the board bill kept
climbing resulting in smaller and smaller
percentages of student money going to GCDS
for food and a budget crunch for GCDS man
agers.
The budgetary strains caused by ResEd
and R&DE were exacerbated, moreover, by
additional overhead costs imposed by the
University. In 2009 a year after the Hous
ing bill was merged with the Suites Dining
bill ResEd began auditing and regulating
GCDS financial operations. With Res Ed's
heightened involvement came two additional
categories on Suites students' board bill: "Ad
min" and "Overhead."
Prior to the beginning of Res Ed's
takeover in 2009, Suites was run entirely by
students they collected students' board
bills, paid chefs and hashers and even distrib
uted room keys. But ever since ResEd
stepped in in 2009, students have been paying
ResEd administrators to reread Suites finan
cial documents, incurring overhead costs that
further drive up the board bill total.
Those total costs were $161.57 per student
in 2011-12. Multiplied by the roughly 260 stu
dents who live in Suites, the total amount of
overhead paid last year to ResEd administra
tors to do the work student financial man
agers formerly did themselves is about
$42,000 more student money, as a 2011-12
Suites financial manager (FM) I interviewed
put it, "disappearing down the black hole that
is Residential Education."
According to Avanti chef Anton "Tony"
Dietz, who has 19 years of experience in food
services administration, any outside contrac
tor is likely to levy additional administrative
fees amounting to between eight and 11 per
cent of Suites' total budget. Suites' budget in
2011-12 totaled approximately $l.l million.
Assuming administrative charges at the typi
cal corporate rate, Suites residents next year
will be shelling out an additional $lOO,OOO in
surcharges.

Health and safety
During that interview in Suite 9, Boswell,
Buzay and Golder repeatedly advanced stu
dent health and safety as a "considerable con
cern" but failed to mention almost any specif
ic instances of health and safety violations.
The only specific evidence Golder offered was
a claim that multiple fires had recently bro
ken out at Suites.

"If we weren't fixing all the fires that
come," exclaimed Golder at one point, "they
[GCDS] wouldn't be getting by."

There was, in fact, only one fire at Suites
recently, not "all the fires that come," and it
was caused by two inexperienced Suites resi
dents — not student managers using the
Avanti kitchen to boil a large pot of hot oil on
a Saturday evening in May 2012 in a disas
trous attempt to fry empanadas for Cinco de
Mayo. Fortunately, a chef was hosting a free
movie-and-food night for residents on his day
off in a neighboring club the kind of thing
Suites chefs tend to do. He and a student
manager immediately rushed in and put out
the blaze with the club's fire extinguisher,
which GCDS had properly placed according
to fire code.
No outside contractor, short of completely
barring student access to the kitchen, could
have prevented that fire, and switching to a
corporate vendor will do nothing to prevent
the possibility of similar fires in the future.
Suites has a similar record in other areas
of health and safety. I was hashing in
Beefeaters on Jan. 15 when the Santa Clara
County public health inspector came to visit
this quarter. She left just as I finished clean
ing, having found zero health violations. The
other three clubs were also inspected that
day, with two violations found in Avanti, two
in Bollard and four in Middle Earth (one of
which was caused by Housing's failure to re
pair the salad bar). Suites' average number of
violations was two per kitchen, and none were
classified as "major."
The average number of food inspection vi
olations for Row houses —which are run by
exactly the sort of contractor that will be
moving into Suites next year —is 3.83 per
house. Ten locations on campus, including
Row houses managed by corporate contrac
tor SOS, were found responsible for "major"
violations.
Records of documented Suites health vio
lations in the past support this year's results.
After health inspectors visited Suites in the
spring of 2012, GCDS' then-CEO Sullivan
met with Boswell and Buzay to determine
who was responsible for the 26 reported vio
lations. Almost all of the violations were mi
nor among the worst appeal's to have been
some mold in an ice machine. Other violations
included a broken paper towel dispenser, the
ice scooper not being in its plastic cup and the
cleaning solution being too strong.
Boswell, Buzay and Sullivan collectively
assigned responsibility for each violation to
one of three groups: University Housing,
GCDS and ResEd and/or its student manag
er employees (ResEd now pays student man
agers, while GCDS' pay to chefs and its CEO
and CFO remains an entirely separate cate
gory). Of the 26 total violations, Housing was
found responsible for 10 including the
mold in the ice machine and ResEd and/or
its student manager employees were found to
have committed 16.
GCDS the student nonprofit that
ResEd now wants to eliminate was held
responsible for zero.
Financial mismanagement
In our interview, Golder had been espe
cially emphatic about student mismanage
ment of money. Arguing that students had
"run [Suites] into the ground" amid "years of
mismanagement," she claimed that "the only
reason they [GCDS] are getting by is because
we're supporting them, frankly. And if we
weren't, they wouldn't be getting by."
According to two financial managers who
worked in Suites prior to Res Ed's takeover in
2009, GCDS had never gone over budget or
had to borrow money from the University.
When I pressed her, Golder offered only one
piece of evidence to support her assertion.
According to Golder, ResEd had advanced
GCDS "tens of thousands of dollars" from
Res Ed's own budget that has to be paid back
at the end of the 2012-13 academic year. But
this the only evidence ResEd has provided
thus far of student financial mismanagement
is, according to student managers, flat-out
wrong.

Suites managers say ResEd allowed
GCDS advance access to money from its own
budget this year —in other words, Suites
spent some of its own money ahead of sched
ule. No money needs to be paid back to
ResEd at the end of the year. There is no
loan for students to pay off.
Boswell and Buzay also noted that, prior
to ResEd involvement, GCDS lacked a rec
ognized tax ID number and liability insur
ance. That much is true. But former GCDS
CEO Sullivan oversaw the 2011 purchase of a
liability policy valued at $2 million and incor
porated GCDS as a 501(c)(3) nonprofit, meet
ing Res Ed's requirements.
Moreover, several student managers re
ported that ResEd officials have argued that
the four Suites chefs are overpaid. But last
year's chef contract reveals that an academic
year's pay for a chef at Suites in 2011-12 was
$51,182. That's hardly a gold mine in the Bay
Area let alone Palo Alto especially since
ResEd, according to Avanti chef Tony, al
ready mandated a wage freeze for Suites
chefs three years ago, eliminating the annual
cost-of-living increase formerly granted by
GCDS.

In any case, Suites chefs deserve compen
sation appropriate for their skill level and ex
perience. Tony was born in Germany in 1946
and began his apprenticeship to a baker at age
14. Since then, he has catered White House
functions on the top floor of Washington Hos
pital Center with President Jimmy Carter in
attendance, personally overseen food produc
tion for the 1977 Hollywood release party of
the original "Star Wars," crafted all the food
for the set of "The Love Boat" and worked at
elite San Francisco hotels from the Hilton to
the Fairmont to the Stanford Court Renais
sance.

He was hired as an executive chef for the
Saga Corporation by Ernie Arbuckle '33
MBA '36 after whom the Graduate School
of Business' Arbuckle Dining Pavilion is
named and taught at the California Culi
nary Academy. He shook hands with Princess
Grace of Monaco and Charlton Heston and
catered parties for Ronald Reagan's Chair
man of the Council of Economic Advisers
Michael Boskin, who is currently a Stanford
economics professor.
That's Tony. He's been working in Avanti
for 18 years, and ResEd is not going to renew
his contract. And don't even get me started on
Caroline, Dennis and Frank.

If there's anything else that GCDS has
done wrong, ResEd wouldn't tell me. The
three administrators didn't even seem to
know how changing to corporate manage
ment would theoretically solve the nonexist
ent problems they think they've identified.
When I pressed Golder on how exactly
ResEd knows switching to an outside con
tractor will lower the board rate, improve
health and safety or enhance the quality of
management, her response was simple: "We
don't."
♦ ♦♦
When I walk in to see Frank right after
breakfast, he's already busy preparing lunch,
and I already know what he's going to say.
"Miles, my main man, how we doin'?"
As we chat, I notice that he's posted Renee
Donovan 'ls's recent Stanford Daily profile of
him to the kitchen's refrigerator door. Some
one has drawn little stars around it. During
our conversation, two students drop in to
cheerfully give Frank more copies. He adds
them to a stack he's gradually accumulating
on the table.
Frank has been told nothing by ResEd of
ficials other than that his contract will not be
renewed at the end of the year. When I ask
how he feels about the possibility of losing his
job, he abruptly stops chopping vegetables
and looks directly at me.
"Listen to this. I enjoy when I come here
in the morning and I cook for everybody. I
feel more happy than ... Listen, they are hap
py with me."
"Everybody loves you, Frank."
"And I love them more than what they love
me. Believe me. I swear to God. You know,
that's why I come so early in the morning."
Frank seems to care only about his stu
dents, and he doesn't want to talk about him
self or his problems. I have to ask several
times before he finally opens up about how
hard this will be for him.
"I'm now going to be 59 years old. How I
save money for my retirement? Do you un
derstand me?"
I did. Frank had stalled his retirement
planning a ways back, and every time I came
in for breakfast, I would ask which new place
he had in mind. Hawaii and the South Seas
were the dream, or maybe the California
coast. But on $51,182 a year, Arizona made
more sense, and it was Arizona we had talked
about the most.
"This make my life ..." He searches for
the right word. "Worried. Now they come
over here, they cut my salary, and they ask
me, 'Be smiling.' How can I be smiling when I
am worried about my rent?"
I don't know how to answer that one.
While I'm busy thinking of something to say,
Frank shuffles over to the chef's closet. "Let
me show you something, Miles."
He unfolds a single sheet of white paper
and hands it to me.
"Dear Mr. Hassan," the paper reads, "Be
cause of the increased cost of maintenance,
taxes, insurance, utilities, we must reluctant
ly inform you that your rent is being in
creased by $lOO.OO per month. Effective
01/01/2013 your new monthly rent will be
$1,800.00."
Frank shrugs. "The landlord, he wants his
money."
Overpaid. Right.
But Frank only truly begins to look wor
ried when he starts, hesitantly, to talk about
Student Organized Services.
♦ ♦♦
Student Organized Services, Inc. (SOS),
contrary to its name and friendly-looking
website, is not, and never has been, run by
students. The for-profit, privately held com
pany, headquartered in Redwood City, cur
rently operates food-related labor services
for the entire Row a job contracted to it by
Res Ed.
SOS's CEO is Nick Peters '94, who
worked for ResEd before founding SOS in
September of 1994. In 1995, Peters became
CEO of another company: Stanford Eating
Clubs (SEC), which took over management of
the old, student-run Toy on Eating Clubs
while SOS began to expand, house by house,
onto the Row.

In 2005, Zac Sargeant took the helm at
SEC as its CEO and managing director. He
was its last CEO the formerly student-run
Toyon Eating Clubs, founded in 1892, shut
down in 2009 after 107 years of continuous
operation.
In 2008 according to his resume, while
still serving as CEO of SEC Sargeant was
hired as assistant director of ResEd, where
he works to this day. His office is just down
the hallway from the boardroom in Tresidder
Union where I had my interview with
Boswell, Buzay and Golder.
For one year, Sargeant simultaneously
worked for a company that receives Universi
ty dining contracts and for the Stanford office
responsible for selecting dining contractors.
Sargeant is also Peters' brother-in-law.

According to Tony, SOS has repeatedly bid
to administer Suites Dining since 1995, the
year Peters assumed control at SEC and
Tony's first year as head chef in Avanti.
GCDS student leadership felt comfortable
running things on their own, according to
Tony and refused to contract their own jobs
out to SOS.

Sawyer, the former student manager and

Their own words
"For a long, long time, SOS and the
University were interested in taking
over Governor's Corner."
Colin Wessells 'OB,
former Avanti FM
"They were not involved. At all."
ResEd Dean Deborah Golder,
on SOS' involvement in Suites
"How can I be smiling when I am
worried about my rent?"
Bollard Chef Frank Hassan


LORENA RINCON-CRUZ/The Stanford Daily
143 of 149 Suites residents surveyed disapproved of ResEd's decision to contract management
of the formerly student-run Suites Dining to an outside corporation.
GCDS CEO who worked at Suites from 2005
to 2007, remembered Peters as a shadowy fig
ure whose precise source of authority was un
clear but who frequently attempted to wield
that authority as a bludgeon against student
independence.
"I don't even remember why Nick Peters
was an authority to us, but he was," she re
called. "Mostly he was just trying to tell us
'no.' Special dinners we were going to put on,
what we could and couldn't do with our money
... but he wasn't our boss, so I don't think we
really took him all that seriously."
According to Sawyer, Peters clearly dis
liked Suites' tradition of student freedom but
lacked the power to do anything about it.
"We just always knew him as some guy
who was clearly uncomfortable with us having
authority as students," she remembered. "But
at that time, he didn't have the authority to ac
tually tell us what to do, so we were always
just kind of annoyed by him."
Colin Wessells 'OB M.S. 'l2 Ph.D. 'l2
who said the business experience he gained as
financial manager in Avanti from 2006 to 2008
eventually helped him become CEO of his own
Silicon Valley startup has a clear memory
of Peters as a businessman who repeatedly of
fered the clubs a bad deal.
"Every year or so he would come over to
Suites and see if, now that there was new stu
dent management there, they would be inter
ested in partnering with SOS," Wessells re
called.
Student managers, however, weren't buy
ing it.
"They would look over the materials and
documents that SOS would present, and usu
ally it wouldn't be a good deal," Wessells not
ed. "Typically, the terms that [Peters] would
be offering would be, 'Okay, you guys are go
ing to keep managing the clubs, but we're go
ing to provide oversight and a fee.'"
According to Wessells, that proposed ad
ministrative fee typically amounted to be
tween $lOO and $2OO per resident per quarter
on top of the existing board bill. Multiplied by
the roughly 260 students in Suites, SOS's bid
for service, if successful, would have netted
Peters' firm between $78,000 and $156,000 in
student money every year.
"For a long, long time," Wessells conclud
ed, "SOS and the University were interested
in taking over Governor's Corner."
But a long tradition of student independ
ence, and a lack of concrete administrative
power over Suites Dining, stood in their way.
Then Peters' brother-in-law joined ResEd,
and the balance of power began to shift.

Potential conflict of interest
It was not until 2009 the year after
ResEd hired Sargeant as its assistant director
that, according to chefs and former student
managers, the threat of an SOS takeover be
came realistic.
First ResEd began regulating Suites' fi
nancial operations. Administrators then as
sumed control of paying student hashers
and began paying them less. Then ResEd cut
a managerial position from each club, reduc
ing the total number of student managers
from 12 to the current eight.
When chefs and managers, fearful of a
complete SOS takeover, finally discovered the
relationship between Sargeant and Peters in
the spring of 2011, ResEd denied the exis
tence of any conflict of interest.
But oddly for a situation in which ResEd
claimed that there was no conflict of interest,
Sargeant who had initially served as GCD-
S's primary contact in ResEd suddenly
stopped showing up to meetings with GCDS
managers, and the websites connecting
Sargeant to Peters were erased.
ResEd eventually abandoned its attempt
to replace student leadership with an outside
contractor, and Boswell admitted that Suites
managers had "worked diligently over the
course of the summer to meet all relevant, up
graded University requirements." Captained
by Sullivan, then the GCDS CEO, Suites man
agers won their right to remain independent.
Or so they thought.
In our interview, Golder denied that SOS
had ever been involved, in any capacity, with
Suites Dining during her tenure.
"They were not involved," she said em
phatically when I asked. "At all."
Opaque, overbearing and indifferent
Frank used to work for SOS. He left in
2007 when, a few weeks into the school year,
he was recruited away by then-GCDS CEO
Sawyer to work in Bollard instead.
"The students here, they came, they took
me away from them," Frank remembered
fondly. "They pay me more."
"Better benefits?"
"Better everything! You understand? I
wasn't happy with [SOS]."
Sawyer puts it more bluntly.
"Basically, he was abused," she recalled.
"He would come in, his kitchen would be a dis
aster, there would be no one for him to go to ...
he was incredibly unhappy."
"If you don't treat your employees well,"
she reflected with thinly veiled anger about
Frank's mistreatment under SOS, "they're
going to find another job."
Frank, in typical fashion, only expresses
concerns about his students, and especially
about what might happen to them after an
SOS takeover at Suites next year.
"One thing I know for sure," he said, "is
they [SOS] don't care about the students."
"Not at all?"
"At all. Just money."
Suites Dining is the largest remaining
student-run, independent eating location on
campus, with approximately 260 residents
and an annual operating budget of over $l.l
million. Whichever company wins that con
tract next year will be flush with cash cash
ResEd requires students to pay, and cash
from which any for-profit corporation will
skim significant fees.
If the past is any indication of the future,
that corporation will likely be SOS.
The entanglement between Stanford's Of
fice of Residential Education and SOS is
complex and runs deep. When I contacted
Peters to request a personal interview for
this story, he declined to speak with me and
referred me instead to Buzay in ResEd, who
handles all of SOS's media inquiries.
Boswell mentioned in our interview that
he himself was "connected" to SOS, but does
n't specify how. Sargeant, the onetime Gener

al Manager of SEC and Peters' brother-in
law, was still reluctant to talk.
"I believe that Aaron and Nate can pro
vide you with all the information requested,"
he wrote in response to my emailed request
for an interview.

When Avanti chef Tony said there's
"something insidious about this whole thing,"
these are the kind of connections that sup
port his suspicion. Wessells, the former
Avanti financial manager, speculated that
money might be changing hands somewhere.
"What it smells of to me is basically that
there are people in the University that have
their own motives," Wessells mused. "And
whether they stand to profit from taking
over the clubs ... maybe that could be the
case."
Despite Golder's assertion that a "Uni
versity-required" bidding process governs
the selection of contracted vendors for stu
dent residences, SOS did not have to compet
itively bid to manage the Row for over 15
years.

The first year for which ResEd held a bid
ding process for Row management was 2011-
12. In the year after receiving that bid ac
cording to members of the Stanford Labor
Action Coalition (SLAC), a student-led work
ers' advocacy group SOS slashed Row
workers' health benefits by half and reduced
their bonuses from $l,OOO to a maximum of
$4O.
Stanford's Living Wage Policy states
clearly that workers on campus shall have
"the right to self-organization, to form, join,
or assist labor organizations, to bargain col
lectively ... and to engage in other concerted
activities for the purpose of collective bar
gaining or other mutual aid or protection."
But when SLAC held a Worker-Student
Council meeting on Jan. 16, 2012, to provide
a "safe space" for workers seeking relief
from SOS benefit cuts advertised in both
Spanish and English Sargeant, a ResEd
employee, barged in without introducing
himself a few minutes into the meeting, ac
cused the workers of organizing a strike
(which SLAC had never discussed) and "in
timidated" the workers into silence.
"They seemed to know who he was," re
called SLAC member Laurel Fish 'l4. "His
accusations were very aggressive."
"We tried to have a conversation with [the
workers]," Fish remembered, "but it was
clear that they weren't expressing their con
cerns and didn't feel like they could talk
openly."
It remains unclear why a ResEd adminis
trator interfered in a private meeting of
workers contracted by a third-party corpora
tion and why ResEd paid so little attention to
the Living Wage Policy's protection of "the
right to self-organization."
SOS's financial operations for the Row
are almost completely opaque to house resi
dents. When I met with a Row financial man
ager to go over his house's finances, he was
surprised to learn that Suites residents have
full and transparent access to their entire
board bill. ResEd, he said, takes all the mon
ey from his residents' room and board pay
ment, gives him about $B5O per resident per
quarter to spend on either food or social dues
and doesn't tell him what they do with the
rest.
"Even as a financial manager, I don't see
where half the student money goes," he said.
I end up having to go directly to Buzay for
that information. The numbers, which Row fi
nancial managers never see, are clear.
Total board bill costs in Suites and on the
Row are almost exactly the same $5,999
per year for Suites residents and $5,992 for
residents on the Row. But there's one major
difference: Governor's Corner Dining Soci
eties deliver seven more meals per week than
Row houses at almost exactly the same price.
Row residents receive 10 meals a week,
typically lunch and dinner Monday through
Friday. Suites residents, by contrast, get 17:
everything the Row provides, including open
kitchen and snacks, plus a custom-cooked
Frank breakfast extravaganza every morn
ing and brunch and dinner on Sundays.
Suites student managers provide those
seven extra meals, moreover, on a lower food
budget. GCDS spends about $5O less per
quarter per student on food than SOS (an av
erage of $726 for GCDS and $775 for SOS).
And they provide those meals as any stu
dent who has had Dennis' lobster, Frank's
filet mignon sandwiches, Caroline's Mexican
or Tony's chocolate mousse can tell you
without compromising quality, a feat Tony
says he accomplishes by buying only "what's
seasonal and freshly available" and "minimiz
ing or eliminating waste." That's not even in
cluding the quarterly Gala Dinners and Spe
cial Dinners every Suites eating club delivers
or the spring quarter Suites-wide Special
Party, for which student managers bring in
live music, ice sculptures and entertainment.
And as a student-run nonprofit, all the
money Suites saves on food goes to better pay
for student hashers and then- chefs, rather
than the bank account of a for-profit company.
Frank made $9OO per week for 33 weeks
of work about $29,700 annually when
he first started at SOS. He makes $20,000
more than that at Suites, plus 100 percent
coverage of his (and his dependents') health
care and dental costs.
In "Hiring a Chef," the sample advertise
ment SOS CEO Peters encourages student
managers on the Row to post when searching
for new chefs, Peters suggests pay of
"$BOO/week DOE [depending on experience]
+ negotiable benefits." That's $26,400 per
year about half what Suites chefs make.
Part-time student hashers at Suites make
$l5 an hour and used to make even more be
fore Res Ed-enforced pay cuts took their toll.
Even after the ResEd pay cuts, Suites hash
ers still make more than the Stanford-man
dated living wage. Buzay, however, said that
Peters the CEO of the organization re
sponsible for food-service labor operations
for the entire Row "didn't know" that
Stanford's Living Wage Policy, enacted in
2007, "even existed" until four years after it
came into effect. In 2011, SOS was finally
forced to conform to the policy, which man
dates that all campus workers, including
those hired by third-party contractors, be
paid at least $12.40 an hour when also provid
ed with benefits.

But there's no better way to compare the
performance of SOS and GCDS than to talk

to someone who's experienced both. When I
finally sat down with a former Suites hasher
who currently lives on the Row, his answer is
clear: GCDS outperforms SOS in every area
of food service.
"The food is better, the open kitchen is
better everything is way better," he said
of Suites Dining. He thinks it's "stupid" of
ResEd to consider contracting management
of Suites to any outside company, much less
SOS.
When I told him one of Res Ed's ostensi
ble justifications for eliminating GCDS is
health and safety concerns, he laughed in dis
belief.
"We have so many health violations," he
said of the SOS-managed Row house in
which he currently lives. "The number of vi
olations we have ..." He trailed off, shaking
his head.
When I asked him to list some of the spe
cific health violations in his house, he de
murred, afraid that his kitchen staff might
lose their jobs.
For the 2011-12 bidding process for the
Row the first it had ever held ResEd
conducted a closed bid in which, according to
Buzay, four vendors submitted offers: Ara
mark, College Chefs, Sodexo and SOS.
Sodexo is a French multinational corpora
tion with 16 billion euros in annual consoli
dated revenue. It employs 413,000 people
worldwide in 80 countries and serves 50 mil
lion consumers daily. Aramark operates in 22
countries, had revenues of $12.5 billion last
year and is the 23rd-largest employer on the
Fortune 500. Both companies have come un
der intense criticism for unethical business
and labor practices. And the first hit on a
Google search for "College Chefs reviews" is
an entry in the Ripoff Report detailing the
company's practice of "profiteering from stu
dents and their parents."
When I ask Buzay which criteria ResEd
uses to select vendors, he says they choose "a
vendor that can come in and abide by the stu
dent-management model. Working closely
with students, work closely with the commu
nity ... so we're not mass producing food."
First of all, that description sounds an
awful lot like GCDS, which is entirely made
up of students from their own living commu
nity
And second, in a closed bidding process in
which SOS's only three competitors were two
multinationals that have no experience work
ing closely with students on Stanford's cam
pus and a third company with a terrible rep
utation for its work on college campuses,
SOS's selection to manage the Row was like
ly a foregone conclusion.
Boswell, Buzay and Golder claimed not to
know who will be selected as the bidders for
next year's Suites contract. But given
Res Ed's past bidding practices on the Row,
there's little reason to believe the bidding
process for Suites will go any differently.
Growing burden of ResEd oversight
When I asked her about Res Ed's height
ened oversight of GCDS since administrators
first intervened in 2009, Dean Golder insist
ed that Res Ed's involvement has been pro
ductive and beneficial.
"We've done our best to help them be suc
cessful," she declared. "And that's just factu
ally accurate."
But according to everyone who isn't a
ResEd administrator, increased ResEd in
terference has been actively detrimental to
the effective student management of Suites
Dining. Not a single manager I interviewed
could think of even one way in which in
creased ResEd oversight had made their job
easier.
The number of ways managers say it has
made their jobs harder, however, is remark
able. According to several different man
agers, all of whom wished to remain anony
mous, ResEd meddling has made club man
agement dramatically less efficient, more ex
pensive and less effective.
One of the most frustrating changes for
managers has been Res Ed's enforced sepa

ration of club expenditures into food
which student managers are allowed to pur
chase themselves using the GCDS account
and capital items like cups, plates and club
improvements, which must be either ap
proved and paid for by ResEd (using GCDS
money) or purchased using personal student
funds and submitted for reimbursement.
According to one student manager, the
most significant problem with Res Ed's new
policy before which student managers
were free to allocate funds as they saw fit
has been the delayed payment of vendors
who provide both food and capital items. Stu
dent managers will pay for the food portion
of the invoice immediately, but ResEd will
take several weeks to pay for the capital
items, leaving vendors complaining that
they've been underpaid.
Reimbursement the other Res Ed-e
nforced way for student managers to purchase
capital items has proven even more incon
venient, mostly because ResEd appears to
consistently run weeks behind schedule. One
manager purchased a new stereo for his club
in early December using personal funds and
still hasn't received a ResEd reimbursement
check. In September, ResEd administrators
forgot to pay Bollard's water bill, and Frank
had to pay the cost out of pocket. He finally
got a reimbursement check for $248.73 on
Jan. 24.
In Middle Earth, student managers keep
a running list of things R&DE to whom,
according to the board bill, Suites residents
pay total annual maintenance fees of over
$380,000 has promised to fix but hasn't.
There are currently 12 items on that list,
ranging from the salad bar to the stove tap to
the mop rack.
When multiple fix-it requests went unan
swered, managers had to resort to personal
emails and phone calls. Many of the requests
for maintenance have gone unanswered since
fall quarter. As one current Suites manager I
interviewed fumed, "Housing does absolute
ly nothing."
Last year, R&DE installed a shiny new
dishwasher in Middle Earth. Unlike the oth
er three clubs' dishwashers, which despite
being old and timeworn work perfectly fine,
the R&DE-installed Middle Earth dishwash
er immediately broke, and Housing still has
n't successfully fixed it. The symbolism is as
tonishing.
In Fall 2010, ResEd decided to assume
control of paying student hashers tradi
tionally a responsibility of individual club
managers, who would write hashers checks
directly from their eating club account. Be
fore the takeover, I remember a student
manager depositing my hashing check every
two weeks, like clockwork, in the furthest
left-hand drawer in the Avanti kitchen, be
neath the cupboard.
When ResEd took over, they failed to pay
student hashers for the next two months. Ad
ministrators only resumed payment after
students pointed out that not paying your
workers is a violation of California labor law.
"It's amazing how incompetent the so
called 'professionals' can be," grumbled a par
ticularly displeased Suites manager.
ResEd has even taken GCDS money out
right, without any warning or explanation.
According to a 2011-12 club financial manag
er, each eating club used to maintain a $4,000
"carryover account" money saved up "just
in case a chef got sick or we had to have some
big capital expenditure ... as like a buffer."
"We had that money saved up," the finan
cial manager said. "I sent out some checks at
the end of the year to pay off summer bills
and stuff like that... and then I ended up
coming back to school and getting invoices
saying I had unpaid bills from the summer,
and I found out that the checks I had sent
had bounced because the University had
swept our accounts and taken out all the
money that we had saved for carryover, and
[they] just never gave it back. It was just
gone."


MEHMET INONU/The Stanford Daily
Avanti head chef Anton "Tony" Dietz has served Suites residents for 18 years. Born in
Germany in 1946, he began an apprenticeship to a baker at age 14 and has since catered
White House functions for then-President Jimmy Carter and Hollywood premieres.
ResEd has also restrict
ed the number of hashers
who can be on GCDS's pay
roll, drastically limiting the
flexibility of students' work
schedules. Two club man
agers complained that find
ing replacement hashers
when their current one has a
midterm or an athletic event
has become much more diffi
cult since the pool of avail
able hashers is now much
smaller.
Even Res Ed's own stu
dent employees express
frustration with the appar
ent incompetence and ques
tionable work ethic of their
superiors. One current
Suites Resident Assistant
(RA) complained that
ResEd Student Affairs Offi
cer Tiffany Taylor, who is
supposed to make regular
supervisory visits to Suites,
has been conspicuously ab
sent all year.
"She's supposed to come
over," said the RA, "but she
never actually does."
If there is any misman
agement and incompetence
going on at Suites, it's not on
the part of students. It's by
ResEd and R&DE.
It is only when I began
investigating its chronic un
derperformance that ResEd
finally began to grind, slow
ly, into gear. Two days after I
sent an email to Boswell,
Buzay and Golder request
ing an interview about
Suites, all four club man
agers suddenly got an un
precedentedly friendly, but
characteristically vague,
email from ResEd adminis
trator Jo Jaffe 'O9.
"I just wanted to check in

and see how everything was
going for you all," Jaffe
wrote. "Please let me know
if there's anything you have
questions on or need help
with."
Student managers weren't
fooled.
"It was definitely related
to the takeover," said one
club manager.
And only in the last
month has Keith Santiago,
head of Governor's Corner
Housing, finally become
more responsive to student
requests for help.
"We are skeptical as to
his motives," said another
student manager.
♦ ♦♦
Prank keeps his letters in
a Macy's bag in the back of
his old blue Lincoln. There
are 66 of them. Most are
thank you cards: cards from
students, cards from em
ployers, Christmas cards
from generations of Suites
managers, cards in neatly
written Spanish I wish I
could understand. Some are
invitations to long-ago Stan
ford graduations from for
mer students who've left
Prank's beloved kitchen and
moved on.
When Frank puts the tat
tered old Macy's bag in my
hands, he does so with a care
I've never seen before. He
tells me that if I open a card, I
must make sure to put it back
in the exact same envelope, un
damaged and in order.
"Be very careful, Miles,"
he says.
I smile. "I've got it, Prank."
"No," he says, with a fierce
urgency. "These letters are
the most important things to
me."
These letters really are the
most important things to him.
And so I take great care as I
look slowly through the let
ters, kept as pristine as you

could possibly keep 66 letters
in an old Macy's bag.
Certain phrases stand out
from the flow of thanks from
Frank's former students.
"'You're like an uncle to me."
"I'm so touched beyond
words that you remembered
my birthday"
"To the man who is always
right, who gives the best ad
vice and who makes my stom
ach content."
Frank never lets his let
ters go. Next year, this Uni
versity won't be able to say
the same about Frank.
♦♦♦
"Residential Education,"
states the office's website, "is
about the people it serves...
We are concerned with the ex
perience of indvidual [sic] res
idents and how to best serve
each of them."
As I speak with Suites res
ident after Suites resident, I
can't help but think that
ResEd has forgotten that cen
tral mission. Almost unani
mously, the residents I talk to
are shocked and appalled to
discover that their four chefs'
contacts are not being re
newed a decision about
which students were not con
sulted— and that students
will no longer lead Suites' din
ing clubs next year.
"It makes me really mad,"
says one current resident, with
simple honesty.
For others, the loss of a stu
dent job at Suites threatens to
produce financial hardship.
"Without hashing," says a
student in Suites who is cur
rently on financial aid, "I would
have no income at a11... I'd be
getting deeper and deeper into
the hole with my student
loans."
(Boswell, Buzay and Golder
say that some kind of student
management will be allowed
under the new contractor —but
any student managers that re

main will work for the new com
pany, not a student-run non
profit, and there will be, accord
ing to current student man
agers, no paid student hashing
next year.)
I'm reminded that 95.97
percent of Suites residents
opposed a change about
which they were never con
sulted and only recently in
formed.
When I reach out to Suites
alumni, the reaction is, if any
thing, even more pained.
They're dismayed to learn
that the place they loved has
changed so much.
"I always thought it was
the greatest food on the plan
et," a 2005-07 resident re
members wistfully.
"The quality of the food,
and the cheapness of it, was
better than anything the Uni
versity was able to offer," a
student who lived and worked
in Suites from 2006-08, before
ResEd began its expensive
and debilitating takeover, re
calls.
I'm also reminded about
the importance of community,
and how that word means
much more than simply a
group of students. Our com
munity is made up of every
one who makes Stanford so
quintessentially Stanford
from President Hennessy
down to the last kitchen work
er, from star athletic coaches
and tenured professors to the
four chefs who, as one sad
dened survey respondent put
it, "make Suites what it is."
When I ask Golder
whether she considers it im
portant to bring Caroline,
Dennis, Frank and Tony back
next year, she says, "If it
works out, I think that's
great." She suggests that if
students wanted to help, we
should write a letter of rec
ommendation for the chefs to
the new corporate contractor.

Between Boswell, Buzay
and Golder, no one offers to
do anything at all to help the
chefs keep their jobs.
"I can't tell a vendor who
they have to hire," Golder
says.
And that was it.
That's not the spirit of the
Stanford I know. The Stan
ford I know doesn't corpora
tize student life at the ex
pense of longstanding com
munity members; it encour
ages and fosters student
leadership, student initiative
and student independence.
The Stanford I know is about
standing up for the little guy,
being accountable and doing
the best we can for every
member of our community.
As I reflect on the end of
an era, I'm deeply disturbed
by something I remember
from the beginning of my in
terview in that ResEd board
room.
"My general directive
from the president, provost
and [Vice-Provost for Stu
dent Affairs] Greg Board
man when I was brought in
four years ago was: 'Clean
up,"' Golder declared.
Suites Dining, she said,
was just "one of hundreds" of
places under ResEd consider
ation "one of hundreds" of
places "where we're looking
at ourselves and saying, 'Are
we doing the best we can by
students? Are we doing the
best we can by Stanford?"'
If firing four loyal com
munity members beloved by
their students; outsourcing
student jobs and responsibil
ity to a for-profit corporation
with a suspicious workers'
rights record and dubious
ties to the Stanford office re
sponsible for its current con
tract; and refusing to solicit
any student opinion before
making crucial decisions
about student welfare is what

"doing the best we can by
students" looks like and if
there truly are hundreds of
places left on Res Ed's omi
nous list then the end of
Suites Dining might be mere
ly the beginning of a new and
darker era in our collective
campus life.
If ResEd gets its way at
Suites, it will be a victory for
bureaucracy, for incompe
tence and probably for the
coffers of SOS, with its hun
dreds of thousands of dollars
in administrative fees. But it
will be a tremendous loss for
everyone else: for students,
for four veteran chefs who will
be forced out of the communi
ty they love and for this great
university we all call home.
It can be hard to stand up
for ourselves. We're all stu
dents; we hold down jobs;
we're athletes and scientists
and writers with tremendous
time commitments on our
hands.
ResEd knows that, and
they take full advantage of it.
As Sullivan, the former
GCDS CEO who spent an
entire exhausting year try
ing to hold off the ResEd
juggernaut, puts it, "It's an
entire office of Stanford Uni
versity against a few stu
dents who don't have the
time or the energy to fight."
ResEd and SOS move
quietly, inexorably and pa
tiently towards a shared goal
that is ultimately detrimental
and destructive to the Stan
ford community.
We cannot we must not
let them go unchallenged.
It's time to take a stand.

Miles Unterreiner 'l2 M. A
'l3 is a Suites resident and
is employed as a hasher in
Suites' dining clubs.

Contact Miles Unterreiner at
milesiil @ Stanford, edu.
Originally published on Feb. 21, 2013.

Frank Hassan has been head chef
in Suites' Bollard Eating Club for
seven years, and he specializes in
making two things: an incredible
breakfast and memories.

It's the former you'll get if you walk into
Bollard between 7:30 and 9:15 a.m. week
day mornings, where dozens of students
chatter under an enormous banner
erected by unknown admirers at some point
over the past decade featuring Frank's
beaming face and the club's informal title:
"The Bollard Empire."
But it's the memories that last, and over
the three years I've eaten and worked at
Suites, I've picked up quite a few: Frank
volunteering to wake up two hours early to
have breakfast ready for the track team by
5:30 a.m. the days we left early for out-of
state meets; Frank and I watching the
Mubarak regime fall on the Bollard TV
while he offered keen political observations
on his native Egypt; the way he enthusiasti
cally greets every male student with a heav
ily accented "my main man!" and every fe
male with a "good morning, beautiful";
Frank giving my mom a big hug when I
brought her to Bollard to visit during my
junior year.

I'll take those memories with me when I
finally leave Stanford this spring. It's hard
enough knowing I may never come back,
but this year is an especially difficult one in
which to say goodbye. That's because next
fall for the first time in eight years
Prank Hassan may not be coming back ei
ther.

♦ ♦♦
Residential Education (ResEd) has four
offices and 39 professional employees, and
the ResEd Central Office is located on the
second floor of Tresidder Union in Suite 9.

Ever since ResEd first assumed respon
sibility for paying Suites Dining's student
workers in the fall of 2010, I'd been visiting
the Central Office every few weeks to pick
up my paycheck for cleaning the kitchens. I
needed the money and I kept on coming
back, so when I walk up the spiral staircase
and through the clear glass door, I smile
and wave to Alyssa Ray, the Central Office's
friendly and familiar administrative assis


MEHMET INONU/The Stanford Daily
Bollard head chef Frank Hassan is
known among Suites residents for both
his breakfast cooking and the connections
he has forged with residents over
the seven years he has worked in Suites.
tant.
This time, however, I'm not here to pick up
a paycheck. I'm here to meet with Dean of
ResEd Deborah Golder, ResEd Associate
Dean Nate Boswell '99 M.A. 'O9 and ResEd
Director of Operations Aaron Buzay.
On Jan. 30, Boswell and Buzay sent an
email to Res Ed's Suites student email list in
forming all residents that next year for the
first time since Suites Dining was founded in
1982 students will no longer run Suites'
four eating clubs. They will be replaced, due
to what the email described as "health and
safety concerns" and "a pressing desire to
lower the board rate," with an outside corpo
ration.

Avanti, Beefeaters, Bollard and Middle
Earth have served food to Suites residents
six days a week for the past 30 years under
student management, which is currently pro
vided by the student-run 501(c)(3) nonprofit
Governor's Corner Dining Societies (GCDS).
One chef runs each eating club and is assisted
by a student CEO and CFO who oversee all
four clubs, eight student managers (two per
eating club) and a team of paid student "hash
ers" (that's me) who clean the kitchens before
and after meals.
Frank has cooked in Bollard for seven
years. Dennis has been head chef in
Beefeaters for 22. Tony has led Avanti for 18
years. And Caroline is new to Middle Earth
this year, having recently moved to the area
with her husband and two kids.
As part of the move to corporate manage
ment, the chefs' contracts are not being re
newed.
I want to know why, and it's the chefs I'm
thinking about as I shake hands and sit down
with Boswell, Buzay and Golder.
The conversation begins pleasantly
enough, although they tend to use a lot of bu
reaucratically vague sentences with the
words "moving forward," "sustainable" and
"conversation" thrown in. But something
Golder says about the selection process for
the new, non-student contractor rubs me the
wrong way.
"We always involve students in decision
making," she says.
This is news to me. In fact, the first time
ResEd notified all Suites residents that they
were considering replacing student leader
ship with a corporate contractor was when
Boswell and Buzay sent the email informing
residents that the decision had already been
made. I decide to point this out.
"How have you involved students in deci
sion-making up to this point? I mean, besides
the managers, have you gotten feedback from
students at Suites on this?"
Buzay looks confused.
"You mean have we run, like, a...a sur
vey?"
"No, I mean what have you done? I know
you haven't run a formal survey, but have you
talked to students at Suites about this
change?"
"So we sent out... we sent out the email to
the Suites community..."
"Right. So up until the point you sent the
email, though, you hadn't talked to any stu
dents in Suites besides the CEO and CFO?"
There's more talk of "moving forward"
and "sustainable business," from which I con
clude that the answer to my initial question is
"no."

Fortunately, a survey that asked Suites
residents if they approved or disapproved of
the proposed change had been sent out to the
Suites email list —just not by Res Ed. I know,
because I created it. It took me approximate
ly five minutes to draft.
149 Suites residents answered the poll,
and 143 of them —95.97 percent disap
proved of Res Ed's decision to contract food
services to an outside vendor and not to re
new the current chefs' contracts. I had made
a comments section available on the survey
form, and I'm interested to know what
Boswell, Buzay and Golder think of the stu
dent opinions they never solicited. I decide to
read a few representative student responses
aloud.
"Number one: 'I am very disappointed
with the decision from ResEd to take over
contracting and management of Suites Din
ing. I do not like that our chefs are being
treated in this manner. They have put years
of dedication and service into their jobs and
Stanford.'
"Number two: 'As far as I know, this deci
sion from ResEd was reached with no consul
tation from the general student community in
Suites, which is undemocratic, unaccountable
and unacceptable.'
"Number three: 'The students who run
Beefeaters and Dennis provide the best din
ing service found on campus. All the outside
corporations that I have seen on campus
come in sub-par to the standards at the Eat
ing Clubs, and I think this is a bureaucratic

and stupid decision.'
"What would you say to that?" I prompt
the ResEd administrators.

There's a very, very long silence.
♦ ♦♦

When I finally walk out of Tresidder Union
Suite 9 an hour later, the first thing I do is
drive home, sit down at my computer and
start writing. I separate my document into
three headings: board bill costs; health and
safety; and financial mismanagement.

Board bill costs
In more than an hour of conversation, the
trio of ResEd administrators had repeatedly
cited Suites' high board bill as a pressing rea
son to seek a less expensive corporate vendor
to provide food. But a closer inspection of
University financial records indicates that
this justification makes little sense.
To begin with, the Suites board bill is no
higher than that of the Row houses, which are
currently managed by private contractor Stu
dent Organized Services, Inc. (SOS) mak
ing it difficult to see how changing to a private
contractor will lower the board rate.

The problem, however, goes deeper: the
University, not GCDS, is itself responsible for
creating the problem it now insists upon step
ping in to fix.
Prior to 2007, the quarterly Suites board
bill was among the lowest on campus at, ac
cording to former GCDS CEO Leah Sawyer
'O7, approximately $1,200 per student per
quarter. Suites Dining also provided more
meals per week —l7 than the more ex
pensive Row houses, which typically provided
10.

In 2008, however, the University com
bined the Suites Dining Society bill which
covers food—with the University Housing
bill, which covers housing maintenance costs.
Since then, Student Housing a division
of Residential & Dining Enterprises (R&DE)
has dramatically raised its prices, forcing
up the total costs that appeal 1 on the Suites
board bill. From the 2011-12 academic year to
the 2012-13 academic year alone, Housing
raised its prices by 25 percent. Housing main
tenance now takes up just under a quarter of
Suites residents' room and board expenses at
approximately $5OO per resident per quarter.
Res Ed's attempt to fix Suites' rising board
rate made matters even worse. According to
former GCDS CEO J.T. Sullivan 'll, ResEd
responded to Housing-driven Suites board
bill inflation by setting an overall room and
board price cap of $2,000 per student per
quarter. Since ResEd has little to no power to
limit the price charged by R&DE, however,
the Housing portion of the board bill kept
climbing resulting in smaller and smaller
percentages of student money going to GCDS
for food and a budget crunch for GCDS man
agers.
The budgetary strains caused by ResEd
and R&DE were exacerbated, moreover, by
additional overhead costs imposed by the
University. In 2009 a year after the Hous
ing bill was merged with the Suites Dining
bill ResEd began auditing and regulating
GCDS financial operations. With Res Ed's
heightened involvement came two additional
categories on Suites students' board bill: "Ad
min" and "Overhead."
Prior to the beginning of Res Ed's
takeover in 2009, Suites was run entirely by
students they collected students' board
bills, paid chefs and hashers and even distrib
uted room keys. But ever since ResEd
stepped in in 2009, students have been paying
ResEd administrators to reread Suites finan
cial documents, incurring overhead costs that
further drive up the board bill total.
Those total costs were $161.57 per student
in 2011-12. Multiplied by the roughly 260 stu
dents who live in Suites, the total amount of
overhead paid last year to ResEd administra
tors to do the work student financial man
agers formerly did themselves is about
$42,000 more student money, as a 2011-12
Suites financial manager (FM) I interviewed
put it, "disappearing down the black hole that
is Residential Education."
According to Avanti chef Anton "Tony"
Dietz, who has 19 years of experience in food
services administration, any outside contrac
tor is likely to levy additional administrative
fees amounting to between eight and 11 per
cent of Suites' total budget. Suites' budget in
2011-12 totaled approximately $l.l million.
Assuming administrative charges at the typi
cal corporate rate, Suites residents next year
will be shelling out an additional $lOO,OOO in
surcharges.

Health and safety
During that interview in Suite 9, Boswell,
Buzay and Golder repeatedly advanced stu
dent health and safety as a "considerable con
cern" but failed to mention almost any specif
ic instances of health and safety violations.
The only specific evidence Golder offered was
a claim that multiple fires had recently bro
ken out at Suites.

"If we weren't fixing all the fires that
come," exclaimed Golder at one point, "they
[GCDS] wouldn't be getting by."

There was, in fact, only one fire at Suites
recently, not "all the fires that come," and it
was caused by two inexperienced Suites resi
dents — not student managers using the
Avanti kitchen to boil a large pot of hot oil on
a Saturday evening in May 2012 in a disas
trous attempt to fry empanadas for Cinco de
Mayo. Fortunately, a chef was hosting a free
movie-and-food night for residents on his day
off in a neighboring club the kind of thing
Suites chefs tend to do. He and a student
manager immediately rushed in and put out
the blaze with the club's fire extinguisher,
which GCDS had properly placed according
to fire code.
No outside contractor, short of completely
barring student access to the kitchen, could
have prevented that fire, and switching to a
corporate vendor will do nothing to prevent
the possibility of similar fires in the future.
Suites has a similar record in other areas
of health and safety. I was hashing in
Beefeaters on Jan. 15 when the Santa Clara
County public health inspector came to visit
this quarter. She left just as I finished clean
ing, having found zero health violations. The
other three clubs were also inspected that
day, with two violations found in Avanti, two
in Bollard and four in Middle Earth (one of
which was caused by Housing's failure to re
pair the salad bar). Suites' average number of
violations was two per kitchen, and none were
classified as "major."
The average number of food inspection vi
olations for Row houses —which are run by
exactly the sort of contractor that will be
moving into Suites next year —is 3.83 per
house. Ten locations on campus, including
Row houses managed by corporate contrac
tor SOS, were found responsible for "major"
violations.
Records of documented Suites health vio
lations in the past support this year's results.
After health inspectors visited Suites in the
spring of 2012, GCDS' then-CEO Sullivan
met with Boswell and Buzay to determine
who was responsible for the 26 reported vio
lations. Almost all of the violations were mi
nor among the worst appeal's to have been
some mold in an ice machine. Other violations
included a broken paper towel dispenser, the
ice scooper not being in its plastic cup and the
cleaning solution being too strong.
Boswell, Buzay and Sullivan collectively
assigned responsibility for each violation to
one of three groups: University Housing,
GCDS and ResEd and/or its student manag
er employees (ResEd now pays student man
agers, while GCDS' pay to chefs and its CEO
and CFO remains an entirely separate cate
gory). Of the 26 total violations, Housing was
found responsible for 10 including the
mold in the ice machine and ResEd and/or
its student manager employees were found to
have committed 16.
GCDS the student nonprofit that
ResEd now wants to eliminate was held
responsible for zero.
Financial mismanagement
In our interview, Golder had been espe
cially emphatic about student mismanage
ment of money. Arguing that students had
"run [Suites] into the ground" amid "years of
mismanagement," she claimed that "the only
reason they [GCDS] are getting by is because
we're supporting them, frankly. And if we
weren't, they wouldn't be getting by."
According to two financial managers who
worked in Suites prior to Res Ed's takeover in
2009, GCDS had never gone over budget or
had to borrow money from the University.
When I pressed her, Golder offered only one
piece of evidence to support her assertion.
According to Golder, ResEd had advanced
GCDS "tens of thousands of dollars" from
Res Ed's own budget that has to be paid back
at the end of the 2012-13 academic year. But
this the only evidence ResEd has provided
thus far of student financial mismanagement
is, according to student managers, flat-out
wrong.

Suites managers say ResEd allowed
GCDS advance access to money from its own
budget this year —in other words, Suites
spent some of its own money ahead of sched
ule. No money needs to be paid back to
ResEd at the end of the year. There is no
loan for students to pay off.
Boswell and Buzay also noted that, prior
to ResEd involvement, GCDS lacked a rec
ognized tax ID number and liability insur
ance. That much is true. But former GCDS
CEO Sullivan oversaw the 2011 purchase of a
liability policy valued at $2 million and incor
porated GCDS as a 501(c)(3) nonprofit, meet
ing Res Ed's requirements.
Moreover, several student managers re
ported that ResEd officials have argued that
the four Suites chefs are overpaid. But last
year's chef contract reveals that an academic
year's pay for a chef at Suites in 2011-12 was
$51,182. That's hardly a gold mine in the Bay
Area let alone Palo Alto especially since
ResEd, according to Avanti chef Tony, al
ready mandated a wage freeze for Suites
chefs three years ago, eliminating the annual
cost-of-living increase formerly granted by
GCDS.

In any case, Suites chefs deserve compen
sation appropriate for their skill level and ex
perience. Tony was born in Germany in 1946
and began his apprenticeship to a baker at age
14. Since then, he has catered White House
functions on the top floor of Washington Hos
pital Center with President Jimmy Carter in
attendance, personally overseen food produc
tion for the 1977 Hollywood release party of
the original "Star Wars," crafted all the food
for the set of "The Love Boat" and worked at
elite San Francisco hotels from the Hilton to
the Fairmont to the Stanford Court Renais
sance.

He was hired as an executive chef for the
Saga Corporation by Ernie Arbuckle '33
MBA '36 after whom the Graduate School
of Business' Arbuckle Dining Pavilion is
named and taught at the California Culi
nary Academy. He shook hands with Princess
Grace of Monaco and Charlton Heston and
catered parties for Ronald Reagan's Chair
man of the Council of Economic Advisers
Michael Boskin, who is currently a Stanford
economics professor.
That's Tony. He's been working in Avanti
for 18 years, and ResEd is not going to renew
his contract. And don't even get me started on
Caroline, Dennis and Frank.

If there's anything else that GCDS has
done wrong, ResEd wouldn't tell me. The
three administrators didn't even seem to
know how changing to corporate manage
ment would theoretically solve the nonexist
ent problems they think they've identified.
When I pressed Golder on how exactly
ResEd knows switching to an outside con
tractor will lower the board rate, improve
health and safety or enhance the quality of
management, her response was simple: "We
don't."
♦ ♦♦
When I walk in to see Frank right after
breakfast, he's already busy preparing lunch,
and I already know what he's going to say.
"Miles, my main man, how we doin'?"
As we chat, I notice that he's posted Renee
Donovan 'ls's recent Stanford Daily profile of
him to the kitchen's refrigerator door. Some
one has drawn little stars around it. During
our conversation, two students drop in to
cheerfully give Frank more copies. He adds
them to a stack he's gradually accumulating
on the table.
Frank has been told nothing by ResEd of
ficials other than that his contract will not be
renewed at the end of the year. When I ask
how he feels about the possibility of losing his
job, he abruptly stops chopping vegetables
and looks directly at me.
"Listen to this. I enjoy when I come here
in the morning and I cook for everybody. I
feel more happy than ... Listen, they are hap
py with me."
"Everybody loves you, Frank."
"And I love them more than what they love
me. Believe me. I swear to God. You know,
that's why I come so early in the morning."
Frank seems to care only about his stu
dents, and he doesn't want to talk about him
self or his problems. I have to ask several
times before he finally opens up about how
hard this will be for him.
"I'm now going to be 59 years old. How I
save money for my retirement? Do you un
derstand me?"
I did. Frank had stalled his retirement
planning a ways back, and every time I came
in for breakfast, I would ask which new place
he had in mind. Hawaii and the South Seas
were the dream, or maybe the California
coast. But on $51,182 a year, Arizona made
more sense, and it was Arizona we had talked
about the most.
"This make my life ..." He searches for
the right word. "Worried. Now they come
over here, they cut my salary, and they ask
me, 'Be smiling.' How can I be smiling when I
am worried about my rent?"
I don't know how to answer that one.
While I'm busy thinking of something to say,
Frank shuffles over to the chef's closet. "Let
me show you something, Miles."
He unfolds a single sheet of white paper
and hands it to me.
"Dear Mr. Hassan," the paper reads, "Be
cause of the increased cost of maintenance,
taxes, insurance, utilities, we must reluctant
ly inform you that your rent is being in
creased by $lOO.OO per month. Effective
01/01/2013 your new monthly rent will be
$1,800.00."
Frank shrugs. "The landlord, he wants his
money."
Overpaid. Right.
But Frank only truly begins to look wor
ried when he starts, hesitantly, to talk about
Student Organized Services.
♦ ♦♦
Student Organized Services, Inc. (SOS),
contrary to its name and friendly-looking
website, is not, and never has been, run by
students. The for-profit, privately held com
pany, headquartered in Redwood City, cur
rently operates food-related labor services
for the entire Row a job contracted to it by
Res Ed.
SOS's CEO is Nick Peters '94, who
worked for ResEd before founding SOS in
September of 1994. In 1995, Peters became
CEO of another company: Stanford Eating
Clubs (SEC), which took over management of
the old, student-run Toy on Eating Clubs
while SOS began to expand, house by house,
onto the Row.

In 2005, Zac Sargeant took the helm at
SEC as its CEO and managing director. He
was its last CEO the formerly student-run
Toyon Eating Clubs, founded in 1892, shut
down in 2009 after 107 years of continuous
operation.
In 2008 according to his resume, while
still serving as CEO of SEC Sargeant was
hired as assistant director of ResEd, where
he works to this day. His office is just down
the hallway from the boardroom in Tresidder
Union where I had my interview with
Boswell, Buzay and Golder.
For one year, Sargeant simultaneously
worked for a company that receives Universi
ty dining contracts and for the Stanford office
responsible for selecting dining contractors.
Sargeant is also Peters' brother-in-law.

According to Tony, SOS has repeatedly bid
to administer Suites Dining since 1995, the
year Peters assumed control at SEC and
Tony's first year as head chef in Avanti.
GCDS student leadership felt comfortable
running things on their own, according to
Tony and refused to contract their own jobs
out to SOS.

Sawyer, the former student manager and

Their own words
"For a long, long time, SOS and the
University were interested in taking
over Governor's Corner."
Colin Wessells 'OB,
former Avanti FM
"They were not involved. At all."
ResEd Dean Deborah Golder,
on SOS' involvement in Suites
"How can I be smiling when I am
worried about my rent?"
Bollard Chef Frank Hassan


LORENA RINCON-CRUZ/The Stanford Daily
143 of 149 Suites residents surveyed disapproved of ResEd's decision to contract management
of the formerly student-run Suites Dining to an outside corporation.
GCDS CEO who worked at Suites from 2005
to 2007, remembered Peters as a shadowy fig
ure whose precise source of authority was un
clear but who frequently attempted to wield
that authority as a bludgeon against student
independence.
"I don't even remember why Nick Peters
was an authority to us, but he was," she re
called. "Mostly he was just trying to tell us
'no.' Special dinners we were going to put on,
what we could and couldn't do with our money
... but he wasn't our boss, so I don't think we
really took him all that seriously."
According to Sawyer, Peters clearly dis
liked Suites' tradition of student freedom but
lacked the power to do anything about it.
"We just always knew him as some guy
who was clearly uncomfortable with us having
authority as students," she remembered. "But
at that time, he didn't have the authority to ac
tually tell us what to do, so we were always
just kind of annoyed by him."
Colin Wessells 'OB M.S. 'l2 Ph.D. 'l2
who said the business experience he gained as
financial manager in Avanti from 2006 to 2008
eventually helped him become CEO of his own
Silicon Valley startup has a clear memory
of Peters as a businessman who repeatedly of
fered the clubs a bad deal.
"Every year or so he would come over to
Suites and see if, now that there was new stu
dent management there, they would be inter
ested in partnering with SOS," Wessells re
called.
Student managers, however, weren't buy
ing it.
"They would look over the materials and
documents that SOS would present, and usu
ally it wouldn't be a good deal," Wessells not
ed. "Typically, the terms that [Peters] would
be offering would be, 'Okay, you guys are go
ing to keep managing the clubs, but we're go
ing to provide oversight and a fee.'"
According to Wessells, that proposed ad
ministrative fee typically amounted to be
tween $lOO and $2OO per resident per quarter
on top of the existing board bill. Multiplied by
the roughly 260 students in Suites, SOS's bid
for service, if successful, would have netted
Peters' firm between $78,000 and $156,000 in
student money every year.
"For a long, long time," Wessells conclud
ed, "SOS and the University were interested
in taking over Governor's Corner."
But a long tradition of student independ
ence, and a lack of concrete administrative
power over Suites Dining, stood in their way.
Then Peters' brother-in-law joined ResEd,
and the balance of power began to shift.

Potential conflict of interest
It was not until 2009 the year after
ResEd hired Sargeant as its assistant director
that, according to chefs and former student
managers, the threat of an SOS takeover be
came realistic.
First ResEd began regulating Suites' fi
nancial operations. Administrators then as
sumed control of paying student hashers
and began paying them less. Then ResEd cut
a managerial position from each club, reduc
ing the total number of student managers
from 12 to the current eight.
When chefs and managers, fearful of a
complete SOS takeover, finally discovered the
relationship between Sargeant and Peters in
the spring of 2011, ResEd denied the exis
tence of any conflict of interest.
But oddly for a situation in which ResEd
claimed that there was no conflict of interest,
Sargeant who had initially served as GCD-
S's primary contact in ResEd suddenly
stopped showing up to meetings with GCDS
managers, and the websites connecting
Sargeant to Peters were erased.
ResEd eventually abandoned its attempt
to replace student leadership with an outside
contractor, and Boswell admitted that Suites
managers had "worked diligently over the
course of the summer to meet all relevant, up
graded University requirements." Captained
by Sullivan, then the GCDS CEO, Suites man
agers won their right to remain independent.
Or so they thought.
In our interview, Golder denied that SOS
had ever been involved, in any capacity, with
Suites Dining during her tenure.
"They were not involved," she said em
phatically when I asked. "At all."
Opaque, overbearing and indifferent
Frank used to work for SOS. He left in
2007 when, a few weeks into the school year,
he was recruited away by then-GCDS CEO
Sawyer to work in Bollard instead.
"The students here, they came, they took
me away from them," Frank remembered
fondly. "They pay me more."
"Better benefits?"
"Better everything! You understand? I
wasn't happy with [SOS]."
Sawyer puts it more bluntly.
"Basically, he was abused," she recalled.
"He would come in, his kitchen would be a dis
aster, there would be no one for him to go to ...
he was incredibly unhappy."
"If you don't treat your employees well,"
she reflected with thinly veiled anger about
Frank's mistreatment under SOS, "they're
going to find another job."
Frank, in typical fashion, only expresses
concerns about his students, and especially
about what might happen to them after an
SOS takeover at Suites next year.
"One thing I know for sure," he said, "is
they [SOS] don't care about the students."
"Not at all?"
"At all. Just money."
Suites Dining is the largest remaining
student-run, independent eating location on
campus, with approximately 260 residents
and an annual operating budget of over $l.l
million. Whichever company wins that con
tract next year will be flush with cash cash
ResEd requires students to pay, and cash
from which any for-profit corporation will
skim significant fees.
If the past is any indication of the future,
that corporation will likely be SOS.
The entanglement between Stanford's Of
fice of Residential Education and SOS is
complex and runs deep. When I contacted
Peters to request a personal interview for
this story, he declined to speak with me and
referred me instead to Buzay in ResEd, who
handles all of SOS's media inquiries.
Boswell mentioned in our interview that
he himself was "connected" to SOS, but does
n't specify how. Sargeant, the onetime Gener

al Manager of SEC and Peters' brother-in
law, was still reluctant to talk.
"I believe that Aaron and Nate can pro
vide you with all the information requested,"
he wrote in response to my emailed request
for an interview.

When Avanti chef Tony said there's
"something insidious about this whole thing,"
these are the kind of connections that sup
port his suspicion. Wessells, the former
Avanti financial manager, speculated that
money might be changing hands somewhere.
"What it smells of to me is basically that
there are people in the University that have
their own motives," Wessells mused. "And
whether they stand to profit from taking
over the clubs ... maybe that could be the
case."
Despite Golder's assertion that a "Uni
versity-required" bidding process governs
the selection of contracted vendors for stu
dent residences, SOS did not have to compet
itively bid to manage the Row for over 15
years.

The first year for which ResEd held a bid
ding process for Row management was 2011-
12. In the year after receiving that bid ac
cording to members of the Stanford Labor
Action Coalition (SLAC), a student-led work
ers' advocacy group SOS slashed Row
workers' health benefits by half and reduced
their bonuses from $l,OOO to a maximum of
$4O.
Stanford's Living Wage Policy states
clearly that workers on campus shall have
"the right to self-organization, to form, join,
or assist labor organizations, to bargain col
lectively ... and to engage in other concerted
activities for the purpose of collective bar
gaining or other mutual aid or protection."
But when SLAC held a Worker-Student
Council meeting on Jan. 16, 2012, to provide
a "safe space" for workers seeking relief
from SOS benefit cuts advertised in both
Spanish and English Sargeant, a ResEd
employee, barged in without introducing
himself a few minutes into the meeting, ac
cused the workers of organizing a strike
(which SLAC had never discussed) and "in
timidated" the workers into silence.
"They seemed to know who he was," re
called SLAC member Laurel Fish 'l4. "His
accusations were very aggressive."
"We tried to have a conversation with [the
workers]," Fish remembered, "but it was
clear that they weren't expressing their con
cerns and didn't feel like they could talk
openly."
It remains unclear why a ResEd adminis
trator interfered in a private meeting of
workers contracted by a third-party corpora
tion and why ResEd paid so little attention to
the Living Wage Policy's protection of "the
right to self-organization."
SOS's financial operations for the Row
are almost completely opaque to house resi
dents. When I met with a Row financial man
ager to go over his house's finances, he was
surprised to learn that Suites residents have
full and transparent access to their entire
board bill. ResEd, he said, takes all the mon
ey from his residents' room and board pay
ment, gives him about $B5O per resident per
quarter to spend on either food or social dues
and doesn't tell him what they do with the
rest.
"Even as a financial manager, I don't see
where half the student money goes," he said.
I end up having to go directly to Buzay for
that information. The numbers, which Row fi
nancial managers never see, are clear.
Total board bill costs in Suites and on the
Row are almost exactly the same $5,999
per year for Suites residents and $5,992 for
residents on the Row. But there's one major
difference: Governor's Corner Dining Soci
eties deliver seven more meals per week than
Row houses at almost exactly the same price.
Row residents receive 10 meals a week,
typically lunch and dinner Monday through
Friday. Suites residents, by contrast, get 17:
everything the Row provides, including open
kitchen and snacks, plus a custom-cooked
Frank breakfast extravaganza every morn
ing and brunch and dinner on Sundays.
Suites student managers provide those
seven extra meals, moreover, on a lower food
budget. GCDS spends about $5O less per
quarter per student on food than SOS (an av
erage of $726 for GCDS and $775 for SOS).
And they provide those meals as any stu
dent who has had Dennis' lobster, Frank's
filet mignon sandwiches, Caroline's Mexican
or Tony's chocolate mousse can tell you
without compromising quality, a feat Tony
says he accomplishes by buying only "what's
seasonal and freshly available" and "minimiz
ing or eliminating waste." That's not even in
cluding the quarterly Gala Dinners and Spe
cial Dinners every Suites eating club delivers
or the spring quarter Suites-wide Special
Party, for which student managers bring in
live music, ice sculptures and entertainment.
And as a student-run nonprofit, all the
money Suites saves on food goes to better pay
for student hashers and then- chefs, rather
than the bank account of a for-profit company.
Frank made $9OO per week for 33 weeks
of work about $29,700 annually when
he first started at SOS. He makes $20,000
more than that at Suites, plus 100 percent
coverage of his (and his dependents') health
care and dental costs.
In "Hiring a Chef," the sample advertise
ment SOS CEO Peters encourages student
managers on the Row to post when searching
for new chefs, Peters suggests pay of
"$BOO/week DOE [depending on experience]
+ negotiable benefits." That's $26,400 per
year about half what Suites chefs make.
Part-time student hashers at Suites make
$l5 an hour and used to make even more be
fore Res Ed-enforced pay cuts took their toll.
Even after the ResEd pay cuts, Suites hash
ers still make more than the Stanford-man
dated living wage. Buzay, however, said that
Peters the CEO of the organization re
sponsible for food-service labor operations
for the entire Row "didn't know" that
Stanford's Living Wage Policy, enacted in
2007, "even existed" until four years after it
came into effect. In 2011, SOS was finally
forced to conform to the policy, which man
dates that all campus workers, including
those hired by third-party contractors, be
paid at least $12.40 an hour when also provid
ed with benefits.

But there's no better way to compare the
performance of SOS and GCDS than to talk

to someone who's experienced both. When I
finally sat down with a former Suites hasher
who currently lives on the Row, his answer is
clear: GCDS outperforms SOS in every area
of food service.
"The food is better, the open kitchen is
better everything is way better," he said
of Suites Dining. He thinks it's "stupid" of
ResEd to consider contracting management
of Suites to any outside company, much less
SOS.
When I told him one of Res Ed's ostensi
ble justifications for eliminating GCDS is
health and safety concerns, he laughed in dis
belief.
"We have so many health violations," he
said of the SOS-managed Row house in
which he currently lives. "The number of vi
olations we have ..." He trailed off, shaking
his head.
When I asked him to list some of the spe
cific health violations in his house, he de
murred, afraid that his kitchen staff might
lose their jobs.
For the 2011-12 bidding process for the
Row the first it had ever held ResEd
conducted a closed bid in which, according to
Buzay, four vendors submitted offers: Ara
mark, College Chefs, Sodexo and SOS.
Sodexo is a French multinational corpora
tion with 16 billion euros in annual consoli
dated revenue. It employs 413,000 people
worldwide in 80 countries and serves 50 mil
lion consumers daily. Aramark operates in 22
countries, had revenues of $12.5 billion last
year and is the 23rd-largest employer on the
Fortune 500. Both companies have come un
der intense criticism for unethical business
and labor practices. And the first hit on a
Google search for "College Chefs reviews" is
an entry in the Ripoff Report detailing the
company's practice of "profiteering from stu
dents and their parents."
When I ask Buzay which criteria ResEd
uses to select vendors, he says they choose "a
vendor that can come in and abide by the stu
dent-management model. Working closely
with students, work closely with the commu
nity ... so we're not mass producing food."
First of all, that description sounds an
awful lot like GCDS, which is entirely made
up of students from their own living commu
nity
And second, in a closed bidding process in
which SOS's only three competitors were two
multinationals that have no experience work
ing closely with students on Stanford's cam
pus and a third company with a terrible rep
utation for its work on college campuses,
SOS's selection to manage the Row was like
ly a foregone conclusion.
Boswell, Buzay and Golder claimed not to
know who will be selected as the bidders for
next year's Suites contract. But given
Res Ed's past bidding practices on the Row,
there's little reason to believe the bidding
process for Suites will go any differently.
Growing burden of ResEd oversight
When I asked her about Res Ed's height
ened oversight of GCDS since administrators
first intervened in 2009, Dean Golder insist
ed that Res Ed's involvement has been pro
ductive and beneficial.
"We've done our best to help them be suc
cessful," she declared. "And that's just factu
ally accurate."
But according to everyone who isn't a
ResEd administrator, increased ResEd in
terference has been actively detrimental to
the effective student management of Suites
Dining. Not a single manager I interviewed
could think of even one way in which in
creased ResEd oversight had made their job
easier.
The number of ways managers say it has
made their jobs harder, however, is remark
able. According to several different man
agers, all of whom wished to remain anony
mous, ResEd meddling has made club man
agement dramatically less efficient, more ex
pensive and less effective.
One of the most frustrating changes for
managers has been Res Ed's enforced sepa

ration of club expenditures into food
which student managers are allowed to pur
chase themselves using the GCDS account
and capital items like cups, plates and club
improvements, which must be either ap
proved and paid for by ResEd (using GCDS
money) or purchased using personal student
funds and submitted for reimbursement.
According to one student manager, the
most significant problem with Res Ed's new
policy before which student managers
were free to allocate funds as they saw fit
has been the delayed payment of vendors
who provide both food and capital items. Stu
dent managers will pay for the food portion
of the invoice immediately, but ResEd will
take several weeks to pay for the capital
items, leaving vendors complaining that
they've been underpaid.
Reimbursement the other Res Ed-e
nforced way for student managers to purchase
capital items has proven even more incon
venient, mostly because ResEd appears to
consistently run weeks behind schedule. One
manager purchased a new stereo for his club
in early December using personal funds and
still hasn't received a ResEd reimbursement
check. In September, ResEd administrators
forgot to pay Bollard's water bill, and Frank
had to pay the cost out of pocket. He finally
got a reimbursement check for $248.73 on
Jan. 24.
In Middle Earth, student managers keep
a running list of things R&DE to whom,
according to the board bill, Suites residents
pay total annual maintenance fees of over
$380,000 has promised to fix but hasn't.
There are currently 12 items on that list,
ranging from the salad bar to the stove tap to
the mop rack.
When multiple fix-it requests went unan
swered, managers had to resort to personal
emails and phone calls. Many of the requests
for maintenance have gone unanswered since
fall quarter. As one current Suites manager I
interviewed fumed, "Housing does absolute
ly nothing."
Last year, R&DE installed a shiny new
dishwasher in Middle Earth. Unlike the oth
er three clubs' dishwashers, which despite
being old and timeworn work perfectly fine,
the R&DE-installed Middle Earth dishwash
er immediately broke, and Housing still has
n't successfully fixed it. The symbolism is as
tonishing.
In Fall 2010, ResEd decided to assume
control of paying student hashers tradi
tionally a responsibility of individual club
managers, who would write hashers checks
directly from their eating club account. Be
fore the takeover, I remember a student
manager depositing my hashing check every
two weeks, like clockwork, in the furthest
left-hand drawer in the Avanti kitchen, be
neath the cupboard.
When ResEd took over, they failed to pay
student hashers for the next two months. Ad
ministrators only resumed payment after
students pointed out that not paying your
workers is a violation of California labor law.
"It's amazing how incompetent the so
called 'professionals' can be," grumbled a par
ticularly displeased Suites manager.
ResEd has even taken GCDS money out
right, without any warning or explanation.
According to a 2011-12 club financial manag
er, each eating club used to maintain a $4,000
"carryover account" money saved up "just
in case a chef got sick or we had to have some
big capital expenditure ... as like a buffer."
"We had that money saved up," the finan
cial manager said. "I sent out some checks at
the end of the year to pay off summer bills
and stuff like that... and then I ended up
coming back to school and getting invoices
saying I had unpaid bills from the summer,
and I found out that the checks I had sent
had bounced because the University had
swept our accounts and taken out all the
money that we had saved for carryover, and
[they] just never gave it back. It was just
gone."


MEHMET INONU/The Stanford Daily
Avanti head chef Anton "Tony" Dietz has served Suites residents for 18 years. Born in
Germany in 1946, he began an apprenticeship to a baker at age 14 and has since catered
White House functions for then-President Jimmy Carter and Hollywood premieres.
ResEd has also restrict
ed the number of hashers
who can be on GCDS's pay
roll, drastically limiting the
flexibility of students' work
schedules. Two club man
agers complained that find
ing replacement hashers
when their current one has a
midterm or an athletic event
has become much more diffi
cult since the pool of avail
able hashers is now much
smaller.
Even Res Ed's own stu
dent employees express
frustration with the appar
ent incompetence and ques
tionable work ethic of their
superiors. One current
Suites Resident Assistant
(RA) complained that
ResEd Student Affairs Offi
cer Tiffany Taylor, who is
supposed to make regular
supervisory visits to Suites,
has been conspicuously ab
sent all year.
"She's supposed to come
over," said the RA, "but she
never actually does."
If there is any misman
agement and incompetence
going on at Suites, it's not on
the part of students. It's by
ResEd and R&DE.
It is only when I began
investigating its chronic un
derperformance that ResEd
finally began to grind, slow
ly, into gear. Two days after I
sent an email to Boswell,
Buzay and Golder request
ing an interview about
Suites, all four club man
agers suddenly got an un
precedentedly friendly, but
characteristically vague,
email from ResEd adminis
trator Jo Jaffe 'O9.
"I just wanted to check in

and see how everything was
going for you all," Jaffe
wrote. "Please let me know
if there's anything you have
questions on or need help
with."
Student managers weren't
fooled.
"It was definitely related
to the takeover," said one
club manager.
And only in the last
month has Keith Santiago,
head of Governor's Corner
Housing, finally become
more responsive to student
requests for help.
"We are skeptical as to
his motives," said another
student manager.
♦ ♦♦
Prank keeps his letters in
a Macy's bag in the back of
his old blue Lincoln. There
are 66 of them. Most are
thank you cards: cards from
students, cards from em
ployers, Christmas cards
from generations of Suites
managers, cards in neatly
written Spanish I wish I
could understand. Some are
invitations to long-ago Stan
ford graduations from for
mer students who've left
Prank's beloved kitchen and
moved on.
When Frank puts the tat
tered old Macy's bag in my
hands, he does so with a care
I've never seen before. He
tells me that if I open a card, I
must make sure to put it back
in the exact same envelope, un
damaged and in order.
"Be very careful, Miles,"
he says.
I smile. "I've got it, Prank."
"No," he says, with a fierce
urgency. "These letters are
the most important things to
me."
These letters really are the
most important things to him.
And so I take great care as I
look slowly through the let
ters, kept as pristine as you

could possibly keep 66 letters
in an old Macy's bag.
Certain phrases stand out
from the flow of thanks from
Frank's former students.
"'You're like an uncle to me."
"I'm so touched beyond
words that you remembered
my birthday"
"To the man who is always
right, who gives the best ad
vice and who makes my stom
ach content."
Frank never lets his let
ters go. Next year, this Uni
versity won't be able to say
the same about Frank.
♦♦♦
"Residential Education,"
states the office's website, "is
about the people it serves...
We are concerned with the ex
perience of indvidual [sic] res
idents and how to best serve
each of them."
As I speak with Suites res
ident after Suites resident, I
can't help but think that
ResEd has forgotten that cen
tral mission. Almost unani
mously, the residents I talk to
are shocked and appalled to
discover that their four chefs'
contacts are not being re
newed a decision about
which students were not con
sulted— and that students
will no longer lead Suites' din
ing clubs next year.
"It makes me really mad,"
says one current resident, with
simple honesty.
For others, the loss of a stu
dent job at Suites threatens to
produce financial hardship.
"Without hashing," says a
student in Suites who is cur
rently on financial aid, "I would
have no income at a11... I'd be
getting deeper and deeper into
the hole with my student
loans."
(Boswell, Buzay and Golder
say that some kind of student
management will be allowed
under the new contractor —but
any student managers that re

main will work for the new com
pany, not a student-run non
profit, and there will be, accord
ing to current student man
agers, no paid student hashing
next year.)
I'm reminded that 95.97
percent of Suites residents
opposed a change about
which they were never con
sulted and only recently in
formed.
When I reach out to Suites
alumni, the reaction is, if any
thing, even more pained.
They're dismayed to learn
that the place they loved has
changed so much.
"I always thought it was
the greatest food on the plan
et," a 2005-07 resident re
members wistfully.
"The quality of the food,
and the cheapness of it, was
better than anything the Uni
versity was able to offer," a
student who lived and worked
in Suites from 2006-08, before
ResEd began its expensive
and debilitating takeover, re
calls.
I'm also reminded about
the importance of community,
and how that word means
much more than simply a
group of students. Our com
munity is made up of every
one who makes Stanford so
quintessentially Stanford
from President Hennessy
down to the last kitchen work
er, from star athletic coaches
and tenured professors to the
four chefs who, as one sad
dened survey respondent put
it, "make Suites what it is."
When I ask Golder
whether she considers it im
portant to bring Caroline,
Dennis, Frank and Tony back
next year, she says, "If it
works out, I think that's
great." She suggests that if
students wanted to help, we
should write a letter of rec
ommendation for the chefs to
the new corporate contractor.

Between Boswell, Buzay
and Golder, no one offers to
do anything at all to help the
chefs keep their jobs.
"I can't tell a vendor who
they have to hire," Golder
says.
And that was it.
That's not the spirit of the
Stanford I know. The Stan
ford I know doesn't corpora
tize student life at the ex
pense of longstanding com
munity members; it encour
ages and fosters student
leadership, student initiative
and student independence.
The Stanford I know is about
standing up for the little guy,
being accountable and doing
the best we can for every
member of our community.
As I reflect on the end of
an era, I'm deeply disturbed
by something I remember
from the beginning of my in
terview in that ResEd board
room.
"My general directive
from the president, provost
and [Vice-Provost for Stu
dent Affairs] Greg Board
man when I was brought in
four years ago was: 'Clean
up,"' Golder declared.
Suites Dining, she said,
was just "one of hundreds" of
places under ResEd consider
ation "one of hundreds" of
places "where we're looking
at ourselves and saying, 'Are
we doing the best we can by
students? Are we doing the
best we can by Stanford?"'
If firing four loyal com
munity members beloved by
their students; outsourcing
student jobs and responsibil
ity to a for-profit corporation
with a suspicious workers'
rights record and dubious
ties to the Stanford office re
sponsible for its current con
tract; and refusing to solicit
any student opinion before
making crucial decisions
about student welfare is what

"doing the best we can by
students" looks like and if
there truly are hundreds of
places left on Res Ed's omi
nous list then the end of
Suites Dining might be mere
ly the beginning of a new and
darker era in our collective
campus life.
If ResEd gets its way at
Suites, it will be a victory for
bureaucracy, for incompe
tence and probably for the
coffers of SOS, with its hun
dreds of thousands of dollars
in administrative fees. But it
will be a tremendous loss for
everyone else: for students,
for four veteran chefs who will
be forced out of the communi
ty they love and for this great
university we all call home.
It can be hard to stand up
for ourselves. We're all stu
dents; we hold down jobs;
we're athletes and scientists
and writers with tremendous
time commitments on our
hands.
ResEd knows that, and
they take full advantage of it.
As Sullivan, the former
GCDS CEO who spent an
entire exhausting year try
ing to hold off the ResEd
juggernaut, puts it, "It's an
entire office of Stanford Uni
versity against a few stu
dents who don't have the
time or the energy to fight."
ResEd and SOS move
quietly, inexorably and pa
tiently towards a shared goal
that is ultimately detrimental
and destructive to the Stan
ford community.
We cannot we must not
let them go unchallenged.
It's time to take a stand.

Miles Unterreiner 'l2 M. A
'l3 is a Suites resident and
is employed as a hasher in
Suites' dining clubs.

Contact Miles Unterreiner at
milesiil @ Stanford, edu.
Originally published on Feb. 21, 2013.

Frank Hassan has been head chef
in Suites' Bollard Eating Club for
seven years, and he specializes in
making two things: an incredible
breakfast and memories.

It's the former you'll get if you walk into
Bollard between 7:30 and 9:15 a.m. week
day mornings, where dozens of students
chatter under an enormous banner
erected by unknown admirers at some point
over the past decade featuring Frank's
beaming face and the club's informal title:
"The Bollard Empire."
But it's the memories that last, and over
the three years I've eaten and worked at
Suites, I've picked up quite a few: Frank
volunteering to wake up two hours early to
have breakfast ready for the track team by
5:30 a.m. the days we left early for out-of
state meets; Frank and I watching the
Mubarak regime fall on the Bollard TV
while he offered keen political observations
on his native Egypt; the way he enthusiasti
cally greets every male student with a heav
ily accented "my main man!" and every fe
male with a "good morning, beautiful";
Frank giving my mom a big hug when I
brought her to Bollard to visit during my
junior year.

I'll take those memories with me when I
finally leave Stanford this spring. It's hard
enough knowing I may never come back,
but this year is an especially difficult one in
which to say goodbye. That's because next
fall for the first time in eight years
Prank Hassan may not be coming back ei
ther.

♦ ♦♦
Residential Education (ResEd) has four
offices and 39 professional employees, and
the ResEd Central Office is located on the
second floor of Tresidder Union in Suite 9.

Ever since ResEd first assumed respon
sibility for paying Suites Dining's student
workers in the fall of 2010, I'd been visiting
the Central Office every few weeks to pick
up my paycheck for cleaning the kitchens. I
needed the money and I kept on coming
back, so when I walk up the spiral staircase
and through the clear glass door, I smile
and wave to Alyssa Ray, the Central Office's
friendly and familiar administrative assis


MEHMET INONU/The Stanford Daily
Bollard head chef Frank Hassan is
known among Suites residents for both
his breakfast cooking and the connections
he has forged with residents over
the seven years he has worked in Suites.
tant.
This time, however, I'm not here to pick up
a paycheck. I'm here to meet with Dean of
ResEd Deborah Golder, ResEd Associate
Dean Nate Boswell '99 M.A. 'O9 and ResEd
Director of Operations Aaron Buzay.
On Jan. 30, Boswell and Buzay sent an
email to Res Ed's Suites student email list in
forming all residents that next year for the
first time since Suites Dining was founded in
1982 students will no longer run Suites'
four eating clubs. They will be replaced, due
to what the email described as "health and
safety concerns" and "a pressing desire to
lower the board rate," with an outside corpo
ration.

Avanti, Beefeaters, Bollard and Middle
Earth have served food to Suites residents
six days a week for the past 30 years under
student management, which is currently pro
vided by the student-run 501(c)(3) nonprofit
Governor's Corner Dining Societies (GCDS).
One chef runs each eating club and is assisted
by a student CEO and CFO who oversee all
four clubs, eight student managers (two per
eating club) and a team of paid student "hash
ers" (that's me) who clean the kitchens before
and after meals.
Frank has cooked in Bollard for seven
years. Dennis has been head chef in
Beefeaters for 22. Tony has led Avanti for 18
years. And Caroline is new to Middle Earth
this year, having recently moved to the area
with her husband and two kids.
As part of the move to corporate manage
ment, the chefs' contracts are not being re
newed.
I want to know why, and it's the chefs I'm
thinking about as I shake hands and sit down
with Boswell, Buzay and Golder.
The conversation begins pleasantly
enough, although they tend to use a lot of bu
reaucratically vague sentences with the
words "moving forward," "sustainable" and
"conversation" thrown in. But something
Golder says about the selection process for
the new, non-student contractor rubs me the
wrong way.
"We always involve students in decision
making," she says.
This is news to me. In fact, the first time
ResEd notified all Suites residents that they
were considering replacing student leader
ship with a corporate contractor was when
Boswell and Buzay sent the email informing
residents that the decision had already been
made. I decide to point this out.
"How have you involved students in deci
sion-making up to this point? I mean, besides
the managers, have you gotten feedback from
students at Suites on this?"
Buzay looks confused.
"You mean have we run, like, a...a sur
vey?"
"No, I mean what have you done? I know
you haven't run a formal survey, but have you
talked to students at Suites about this
change?"
"So we sent out... we sent out the email to
the Suites community..."
"Right. So up until the point you sent the
email, though, you hadn't talked to any stu
dents in Suites besides the CEO and CFO?"
There's more talk of "moving forward"
and "sustainable business," from which I con
clude that the answer to my initial question is
"no."

Fortunately, a survey that asked Suites
residents if they approved or disapproved of
the proposed change had been sent out to the
Suites email list —just not by Res Ed. I know,
because I created it. It took me approximate
ly five minutes to draft.
149 Suites residents answered the poll,
and 143 of them —95.97 percent disap
proved of Res Ed's decision to contract food
services to an outside vendor and not to re
new the current chefs' contracts. I had made
a comments section available on the survey
form, and I'm interested to know what
Boswell, Buzay and Golder think of the stu
dent opinions they never solicited. I decide to
read a few representative student responses
aloud.
"Number one: 'I am very disappointed
with the decision from ResEd to take over
contracting and management of Suites Din
ing. I do not like that our chefs are being
treated in this manner. They have put years
of dedication and service into their jobs and
Stanford.'
"Number two: 'As far as I know, this deci
sion from ResEd was reached with no consul
tation from the general student community in
Suites, which is undemocratic, unaccountable
and unacceptable.'
"Number three: 'The students who run
Beefeaters and Dennis provide the best din
ing service found on campus. All the outside
corporations that I have seen on campus
come in sub-par to the standards at the Eat
ing Clubs, and I think this is a bureaucratic

and stupid decision.'
"What would you say to that?" I prompt
the ResEd administrators.

There's a very, very long silence.
♦ ♦♦

When I finally walk out of Tresidder Union
Suite 9 an hour later, the first thing I do is
drive home, sit down at my computer and
start writing. I separate my document into
three headings: board bill costs; health and
safety; and financial mismanagement.

Board bill costs
In more than an hour of conversation, the
trio of ResEd administrators had repeatedly
cited Suites' high board bill as a pressing rea
son to seek a less expensive corporate vendor
to provide food. But a closer inspection of
University financial records indicates that
this justification makes little sense.
To begin with, the Suites board bill is no
higher than that of the Row houses, which are
currently managed by private contractor Stu
dent Organized Services, Inc. (SOS) mak
ing it difficult to see how changing to a private
contractor will lower the board rate.

The problem, however, goes deeper: the
University, not GCDS, is itself responsible for
creating the problem it now insists upon step
ping in to fix.
Prior to 2007, the quarterly Suites board
bill was among the lowest on campus at, ac
cording to former GCDS CEO Leah Sawyer
'O7, approximately $1,200 per student per
quarter. Suites Dining also provided more
meals per week —l7 than the more ex
pensive Row houses, which typically provided
10.

In 2008, however, the University com
bined the Suites Dining Society bill which
covers food—with the University Housing
bill, which covers housing maintenance costs.
Since then, Student Housing a division
of Residential & Dining Enterprises (R&DE)
has dramatically raised its prices, forcing
up the total costs that appeal 1 on the Suites
board bill. From the 2011-12 academic year to
the 2012-13 academic year alone, Housing
raised its prices by 25 percent. Housing main
tenance now takes up just under a quarter of
Suites residents' room and board expenses at
approximately $5OO per resident per quarter.
Res Ed's attempt to fix Suites' rising board
rate made matters even worse. According to
former GCDS CEO J.T. Sullivan 'll, ResEd
responded to Housing-driven Suites board
bill inflation by setting an overall room and
board price cap of $2,000 per student per
quarter. Since ResEd has little to no power to
limit the price charged by R&DE, however,
the Housing portion of the board bill kept
climbing resulting in smaller and smaller
percentages of student money going to GCDS
for food and a budget crunch for GCDS man
agers.
The budgetary strains caused by ResEd
and R&DE were exacerbated, moreover, by
additional overhead costs imposed by the
University. In 2009 a year after the Hous
ing bill was merged with the Suites Dining
bill ResEd began auditing and regulating
GCDS financial operations. With Res Ed's
heightened involvement came two additional
categories on Suites students' board bill: "Ad
min" and "Overhead."
Prior to the beginning of Res Ed's
takeover in 2009, Suites was run entirely by
students they collected students' board
bills, paid chefs and hashers and even distrib
uted room keys. But ever since ResEd
stepped in in 2009, students have been paying
ResEd administrators to reread Suites finan
cial documents, incurring overhead costs that
further drive up the board bill total.
Those total costs were $161.57 per student
in 2011-12. Multiplied by the roughly 260 stu
dents who live in Suites, the total amount of
overhead paid last year to ResEd administra
tors to do the work student financial man
agers formerly did themselves is about
$42,000 more student money, as a 2011-12
Suites financial manager (FM) I interviewed
put it, "disappearing down the black hole that
is Residential Education."
According to Avanti chef Anton "Tony"
Dietz, who has 19 years of experience in food
services administration, any outside contrac
tor is likely to levy additional administrative
fees amounting to between eight and 11 per
cent of Suites' total budget. Suites' budget in
2011-12 totaled approximately $l.l million.
Assuming administrative charges at the typi
cal corporate rate, Suites residents next year
will be shelling out an additional $lOO,OOO in
surcharges.

Health and safety
During that interview in Suite 9, Boswell,
Buzay and Golder repeatedly advanced stu
dent health and safety as a "considerable con
cern" but failed to mention almost any specif
ic instances of health and safety violations.
The only specific evidence Golder offered was
a claim that multiple fires had recently bro
ken out at Suites.

"If we weren't fixing all the fires that
come," exclaimed Golder at one point, "they
[GCDS] wouldn't be getting by."

There was, in fact, only one fire at Suites
recently, not "all the fires that come," and it
was caused by two inexperienced Suites resi
dents — not student managers using the
Avanti kitchen to boil a large pot of hot oil on
a Saturday evening in May 2012 in a disas
trous attempt to fry empanadas for Cinco de
Mayo. Fortunately, a chef was hosting a free
movie-and-food night for residents on his day
off in a neighboring club the kind of thing
Suites chefs tend to do. He and a student
manager immediately rushed in and put out
the blaze with the club's fire extinguisher,
which GCDS had properly placed according
to fire code.
No outside contractor, short of completely
barring student access to the kitchen, could
have prevented that fire, and switching to a
corporate vendor will do nothing to prevent
the possibility of similar fires in the future.
Suites has a similar record in other areas
of health and safety. I was hashing in
Beefeaters on Jan. 15 when the Santa Clara
County public health inspector came to visit
this quarter. She left just as I finished clean
ing, having found zero health violations. The
other three clubs were also inspected that
day, with two violations found in Avanti, two
in Bollard and four in Middle Earth (one of
which was caused by Housing's failure to re
pair the salad bar). Suites' average number of
violations was two per kitchen, and none were
classified as "major."
The average number of food inspection vi
olations for Row houses —which are run by
exactly the sort of contractor that will be
moving into Suites next year —is 3.83 per
house. Ten locations on campus, including
Row houses managed by corporate contrac
tor SOS, were found responsible for "major"
violations.
Records of documented Suites health vio
lations in the past support this year's results.
After health inspectors visited Suites in the
spring of 2012, GCDS' then-CEO Sullivan
met with Boswell and Buzay to determine
who was responsible for the 26 reported vio
lations. Almost all of the violations were mi
nor among the worst appeal's to have been
some mold in an ice machine. Other violations
included a broken paper towel dispenser, the
ice scooper not being in its plastic cup and the
cleaning solution being too strong.
Boswell, Buzay and Sullivan collectively
assigned responsibility for each violation to
one of three groups: University Housing,
GCDS and ResEd and/or its student manag
er employees (ResEd now pays student man
agers, while GCDS' pay to chefs and its CEO
and CFO remains an entirely separate cate
gory). Of the 26 total violations, Housing was
found responsible for 10 including the
mold in the ice machine and ResEd and/or
its student manager employees were found to
have committed 16.
GCDS the student nonprofit that
ResEd now wants to eliminate was held
responsible for zero.
Financial mismanagement
In our interview, Golder had been espe
cially emphatic about student mismanage
ment of money. Arguing that students had
"run [Suites] into the ground" amid "years of
mismanagement," she claimed that "the only
reason they [GCDS] are getting by is because
we're supporting them, frankly. And if we
weren't, they wouldn't be getting by."
According to two financial managers who
worked in Suites prior to Res Ed's takeover in
2009, GCDS had never gone over budget or
had to borrow money from the University.
When I pressed her, Golder offered only one
piece of evidence to support her assertion.
According to Golder, ResEd had advanced
GCDS "tens of thousands of dollars" from
Res Ed's own budget that has to be paid back
at the end of the 2012-13 academic year. But
this the only evidence ResEd has provided
thus far of student financial mismanagement
is, according to student managers, flat-out
wrong.

Suites managers say ResEd allowed
GCDS advance access to money from its own
budget this year —in other words, Suites
spent some of its own money ahead of sched
ule. No money needs to be paid back to
ResEd at the end of the year. There is no
loan for students to pay off.
Boswell and Buzay also noted that, prior
to ResEd involvement, GCDS lacked a rec
ognized tax ID number and liability insur
ance. That much is true. But former GCDS
CEO Sullivan oversaw the 2011 purchase of a
liability policy valued at $2 million and incor
porated GCDS as a 501(c)(3) nonprofit, meet
ing Res Ed's requirements.
Moreover, several student managers re
ported that ResEd officials have argued that
the four Suites chefs are overpaid. But last
year's chef contract reveals that an academic
year's pay for a chef at Suites in 2011-12 was
$51,182. That's hardly a gold mine in the Bay
Area let alone Palo Alto especially since
ResEd, according to Avanti chef Tony, al
ready mandated a wage freeze for Suites
chefs three years ago, eliminating the annual
cost-of-living increase formerly granted by
GCDS.

In any case, Suites chefs deserve compen
sation appropriate for their skill level and ex
perience. Tony was born in Germany in 1946
and began his apprenticeship to a baker at age
14. Since then, he has catered White House
functions on the top floor of Washington Hos
pital Center with President Jimmy Carter in
attendance, personally overseen food produc
tion for the 1977 Hollywood release party of
the original "Star Wars," crafted all the food
for the set of "The Love Boat" and worked at
elite San Francisco hotels from the Hilton to
the Fairmont to the Stanford Court Renais
sance.

He was hired as an executive chef for the
Saga Corporation by Ernie Arbuckle '33
MBA '36 after whom the Graduate School
of Business' Arbuckle Dining Pavilion is
named and taught at the California Culi
nary Academy. He shook hands with Princess
Grace of Monaco and Charlton Heston and
catered parties for Ronald Reagan's Chair
man of the Council of Economic Advisers
Michael Boskin, who is currently a Stanford
economics professor.
That's Tony. He's been working in Avanti
for 18 years, and ResEd is not going to renew
his contract. And don't even get me started on
Caroline, Dennis and Frank.

If there's anything else that GCDS has
done wrong, ResEd wouldn't tell me. The
three administrators didn't even seem to
know how changing to corporate manage
ment would theoretically solve the nonexist
ent problems they think they've identified.
When I pressed Golder on how exactly
ResEd knows switching to an outside con
tractor will lower the board rate, improve
health and safety or enhance the quality of
management, her response was simple: "We
don't."
♦ ♦♦
When I walk in to see Frank right after
breakfast, he's already busy preparing lunch,
and I already know what he's going to say.
"Miles, my main man, how we doin'?"
As we chat, I notice that he's posted Renee
Donovan 'ls's recent Stanford Daily profile of
him to the kitchen's refrigerator door. Some
one has drawn little stars around it. During
our conversation, two students drop in to
cheerfully give Frank more copies. He adds
them to a stack he's gradually accumulating
on the table.
Frank has been told nothing by ResEd of
ficials other than that his contract will not be
renewed at the end of the year. When I ask
how he feels about the possibility of losing his
job, he abruptly stops chopping vegetables
and looks directly at me.
"Listen to this. I enjoy when I come here
in the morning and I cook for everybody. I
feel more happy than ... Listen, they are hap
py with me."
"Everybody loves you, Frank."
"And I love them more than what they love
me. Believe me. I swear to God. You know,
that's why I come so early in the morning."
Frank seems to care only about his stu
dents, and he doesn't want to talk about him
self or his problems. I have to ask several
times before he finally opens up about how
hard this will be for him.
"I'm now going to be 59 years old. How I
save money for my retirement? Do you un
derstand me?"
I did. Frank had stalled his retirement
planning a ways back, and every time I came
in for breakfast, I would ask which new place
he had in mind. Hawaii and the South Seas
were the dream, or maybe the California
coast. But on $51,182 a year, Arizona made
more sense, and it was Arizona we had talked
about the most.
"This make my life ..." He searches for
the right word. "Worried. Now they come
over here, they cut my salary, and they ask
me, 'Be smiling.' How can I be smiling when I
am worried about my rent?"
I don't know how to answer that one.
While I'm busy thinking of something to say,
Frank shuffles over to the chef's closet. "Let
me show you something, Miles."
He unfolds a single sheet of white paper
and hands it to me.
"Dear Mr. Hassan," the paper reads, "Be
cause of the increased cost of maintenance,
taxes, insurance, utilities, we must reluctant
ly inform you that your rent is being in
creased by $lOO.OO per month. Effective
01/01/2013 your new monthly rent will be
$1,800.00."
Frank shrugs. "The landlord, he wants his
money."
Overpaid. Right.
But Frank only truly begins to look wor
ried when he starts, hesitantly, to talk about
Student Organized Services.
♦ ♦♦
Student Organized Services, Inc. (SOS),
contrary to its name and friendly-looking
website, is not, and never has been, run by
students. The for-profit, privately held com
pany, headquartered in Redwood City, cur
rently operates food-related labor services
for the entire Row a job contracted to it by
Res Ed.
SOS's CEO is Nick Peters '94, who
worked for ResEd before founding SOS in
September of 1994. In 1995, Peters became
CEO of another company: Stanford Eating
Clubs (SEC), which took over management of
the old, student-run Toy on Eating Clubs
while SOS began to expand, house by house,
onto the Row.

In 2005, Zac Sargeant took the helm at
SEC as its CEO and managing director. He
was its last CEO the formerly student-run
Toyon Eating Clubs, founded in 1892, shut
down in 2009 after 107 years of continuous
operation.
In 2008 according to his resume, while
still serving as CEO of SEC Sargeant was
hired as assistant director of ResEd, where
he works to this day. His office is just down
the hallway from the boardroom in Tresidder
Union where I had my interview with
Boswell, Buzay and Golder.
For one year, Sargeant simultaneously
worked for a company that receives Universi
ty dining contracts and for the Stanford office
responsible for selecting dining contractors.
Sargeant is also Peters' brother-in-law.

According to Tony, SOS has repeatedly bid
to administer Suites Dining since 1995, the
year Peters assumed control at SEC and
Tony's first year as head chef in Avanti.
GCDS student leadership felt comfortable
running things on their own, according to
Tony and refused to contract their own jobs
out to SOS.

Sawyer, the former student manager and

Their own words
"For a long, long time, SOS and the
University were interested in taking
over Governor's Corner."
Colin Wessells 'OB,
former Avanti FM
"They were not involved. At all."
ResEd Dean Deborah Golder,
on SOS' involvement in Suites
"How can I be smiling when I am
worried about my rent?"
Bollard Chef Frank Hassan


LORENA RINCON-CRUZ/The Stanford Daily
143 of 149 Suites residents surveyed disapproved of ResEd's decision to contract management
of the formerly student-run Suites Dining to an outside corporation.
GCDS CEO who worked at Suites from 2005
to 2007, remembered Peters as a shadowy fig
ure whose precise source of authority was un
clear but who frequently attempted to wield
that authority as a bludgeon against student
independence.
"I don't even remember why Nick Peters
was an authority to us, but he was," she re
called. "Mostly he was just trying to tell us
'no.' Special dinners we were going to put on,
what we could and couldn't do with our money
... but he wasn't our boss, so I don't think we
really took him all that seriously."
According to Sawyer, Peters clearly dis
liked Suites' tradition of student freedom but
lacked the power to do anything about it.
"We just always knew him as some guy
who was clearly uncomfortable with us having
authority as students," she remembered. "But
at that time, he didn't have the authority to ac
tually tell us what to do, so we were always
just kind of annoyed by him."
Colin Wessells 'OB M.S. 'l2 Ph.D. 'l2
who said the business experience he gained as
financial manager in Avanti from 2006 to 2008
eventually helped him become CEO of his own
Silicon Valley startup has a clear memory
of Peters as a businessman who repeatedly of
fered the clubs a bad deal.
"Every year or so he would come over to
Suites and see if, now that there was new stu
dent management there, they would be inter
ested in partnering with SOS," Wessells re
called.
Student managers, however, weren't buy
ing it.
"They would look over the materials and
documents that SOS would present, and usu
ally it wouldn't be a good deal," Wessells not
ed. "Typically, the terms that [Peters] would
be offering would be, 'Okay, you guys are go
ing to keep managing the clubs, but we're go
ing to provide oversight and a fee.'"
According to Wessells, that proposed ad
ministrative fee typically amounted to be
tween $lOO and $2OO per resident per quarter
on top of the existing board bill. Multiplied by
the roughly 260 students in Suites, SOS's bid
for service, if successful, would have netted
Peters' firm between $78,000 and $156,000 in
student money every year.
"For a long, long time," Wessells conclud
ed, "SOS and the University were interested
in taking over Governor's Corner."
But a long tradition of student independ
ence, and a lack of concrete administrative
power over Suites Dining, stood in their way.
Then Peters' brother-in-law joined ResEd,
and the balance of power began to shift.

Potential conflict of interest
It was not until 2009 the year after
ResEd hired Sargeant as its assistant director
that, according to chefs and former student
managers, the threat of an SOS takeover be
came realistic.
First ResEd began regulating Suites' fi
nancial operations. Administrators then as
sumed control of paying student hashers
and began paying them less. Then ResEd cut
a managerial position from each club, reduc
ing the total number of student managers
from 12 to the current eight.
When chefs and managers, fearful of a
complete SOS takeover, finally discovered the
relationship between Sargeant and Peters in
the spring of 2011, ResEd denied the exis
tence of any conflict of interest.
But oddly for a situation in which ResEd
claimed that there was no conflict of interest,
Sargeant who had initially served as GCD-
S's primary contact in ResEd suddenly
stopped showing up to meetings with GCDS
managers, and the websites connecting
Sargeant to Peters were erased.
ResEd eventually abandoned its attempt
to replace student leadership with an outside
contractor, and Boswell admitted that Suites
managers had "worked diligently over the
course of the summer to meet all relevant, up
graded University requirements." Captained
by Sullivan, then the GCDS CEO, Suites man
agers won their right to remain independent.
Or so they thought.
In our interview, Golder denied that SOS
had ever been involved, in any capacity, with
Suites Dining during her tenure.
"They were not involved," she said em
phatically when I asked. "At all."
Opaque, overbearing and indifferent
Frank used to work for SOS. He left in
2007 when, a few weeks into the school year,
he was recruited away by then-GCDS CEO
Sawyer to work in Bollard instead.
"The students here, they came, they took
me away from them," Frank remembered
fondly. "They pay me more."
"Better benefits?"
"Better everything! You understand? I
wasn't happy with [SOS]."
Sawyer puts it more bluntly.
"Basically, he was abused," she recalled.
"He would come in, his kitchen would be a dis
aster, there would be no one for him to go to ...
he was incredibly unhappy."
"If you don't treat your employees well,"
she reflected with thinly veiled anger about
Frank's mistreatment under SOS, "they're
going to find another job."
Frank, in typical fashion, only expresses
concerns about his students, and especially
about what might happen to them after an
SOS takeover at Suites next year.
"One thing I know for sure," he said, "is
they [SOS] don't care about the students."
"Not at all?"
"At all. Just money."
Suites Dining is the largest remaining
student-run, independent eating location on
campus, with approximately 260 residents
and an annual operating budget of over $l.l
million. Whichever company wins that con
tract next year will be flush with cash cash
ResEd requires students to pay, and cash
from which any for-profit corporation will
skim significant fees.
If the past is any indication of the future,
that corporation will likely be SOS.
The entanglement between Stanford's Of
fice of Residential Education and SOS is
complex and runs deep. When I contacted
Peters to request a personal interview for
this story, he declined to speak with me and
referred me instead to Buzay in ResEd, who
handles all of SOS's media inquiries.
Boswell mentioned in our interview that
he himself was "connected" to SOS, but does
n't specify how. Sargeant, the onetime Gener

al Manager of SEC and Peters' brother-in
law, was still reluctant to talk.
"I believe that Aaron and Nate can pro
vide you with all the information requested,"
he wrote in response to my emailed request
for an interview.

When Avanti chef Tony said there's
"something insidious about this whole thing,"
these are the kind of connections that sup
port his suspicion. Wessells, the former
Avanti financial manager, speculated that
money might be changing hands somewhere.
"What it smells of to me is basically that
there are people in the University that have
their own motives," Wessells mused. "And
whether they stand to profit from taking
over the clubs ... maybe that could be the
case."
Despite Golder's assertion that a "Uni
versity-required" bidding process governs
the selection of contracted vendors for stu
dent residences, SOS did not have to compet
itively bid to manage the Row for over 15
years.

The first year for which ResEd held a bid
ding process for Row management was 2011-
12. In the year after receiving that bid ac
cording to members of the Stanford Labor
Action Coalition (SLAC), a student-led work
ers' advocacy group SOS slashed Row
workers' health benefits by half and reduced
their bonuses from $l,OOO to a maximum of
$4O.
Stanford's Living Wage Policy states
clearly that workers on campus shall have
"the right to self-organization, to form, join,
or assist labor organizations, to bargain col
lectively ... and to engage in other concerted
activities for the purpose of collective bar
gaining or other mutual aid or protection."
But when SLAC held a Worker-Student
Council meeting on Jan. 16, 2012, to provide
a "safe space" for workers seeking relief
from SOS benefit cuts advertised in both
Spanish and English Sargeant, a ResEd
employee, barged in without introducing
himself a few minutes into the meeting, ac
cused the workers of organizing a strike
(which SLAC had never discussed) and "in
timidated" the workers into silence.
"They seemed to know who he was," re
called SLAC member Laurel Fish 'l4. "His
accusations were very aggressive."
"We tried to have a conversation with [the
workers]," Fish remembered, "but it was
clear that they weren't expressing their con
cerns and didn't feel like they could talk
openly."
It remains unclear why a ResEd adminis
trator interfered in a private meeting of
workers contracted by a third-party corpora
tion and why ResEd paid so little attention to
the Living Wage Policy's protection of "the
right to self-organization."
SOS's financial operations for the Row
are almost completely opaque to house resi
dents. When I met with a Row financial man
ager to go over his house's finances, he was
surprised to learn that Suites residents have
full and transparent access to their entire
board bill. ResEd, he said, takes all the mon
ey from his residents' room and board pay
ment, gives him about $B5O per resident per
quarter to spend on either food or social dues
and doesn't tell him what they do with the
rest.
"Even as a financial manager, I don't see
where half the student money goes," he said.
I end up having to go directly to Buzay for
that information. The numbers, which Row fi
nancial managers never see, are clear.
Total board bill costs in Suites and on the
Row are almost exactly the same $5,999
per year for Suites residents and $5,992 for
residents on the Row. But there's one major
difference: Governor's Corner Dining Soci
eties deliver seven more meals per week than
Row houses at almost exactly the same price.
Row residents receive 10 meals a week,
typically lunch and dinner Monday through
Friday. Suites residents, by contrast, get 17:
everything the Row provides, including open
kitchen and snacks, plus a custom-cooked
Frank breakfast extravaganza every morn
ing and brunch and dinner on Sundays.
Suites student managers provide those
seven extra meals, moreover, on a lower food
budget. GCDS spends about $5O less per
quarter per student on food than SOS (an av
erage of $726 for GCDS and $775 for SOS).
And they provide those meals as any stu
dent who has had Dennis' lobster, Frank's
filet mignon sandwiches, Caroline's Mexican
or Tony's chocolate mousse can tell you
without compromising quality, a feat Tony
says he accomplishes by buying only "what's
seasonal and freshly available" and "minimiz
ing or eliminating waste." That's not even in
cluding the quarterly Gala Dinners and Spe
cial Dinners every Suites eating club delivers
or the spring quarter Suites-wide Special
Party, for which student managers bring in
live music, ice sculptures and entertainment.
And as a student-run nonprofit, all the
money Suites saves on food goes to better pay
for student hashers and then- chefs, rather
than the bank account of a for-profit company.
Frank made $9OO per week for 33 weeks
of work about $29,700 annually when
he first started at SOS. He makes $20,000
more than that at Suites, plus 100 percent
coverage of his (and his dependents') health
care and dental costs.
In "Hiring a Chef," the sample advertise
ment SOS CEO Peters encourages student
managers on the Row to post when searching
for new chefs, Peters suggests pay of
"$BOO/week DOE [depending on experience]
+ negotiable benefits." That's $26,400 per
year about half what Suites chefs make.
Part-time student hashers at Suites make
$l5 an hour and used to make even more be
fore Res Ed-enforced pay cuts took their toll.
Even after the ResEd pay cuts, Suites hash
ers still make more than the Stanford-man
dated living wage. Buzay, however, said that
Peters the CEO of the organization re
sponsible for food-service labor operations
for the entire Row "didn't know" that
Stanford's Living Wage Policy, enacted in
2007, "even existed" until four years after it
came into effect. In 2011, SOS was finally
forced to conform to the policy, which man
dates that all campus workers, including
those hired by third-party contractors, be
paid at least $12.40 an hour when also provid
ed with benefits.

But there's no better way to compare the
performance of SOS and GCDS than to talk

to someone who's experienced both. When I
finally sat down with a former Suites hasher
who currently lives on the Row, his answer is
clear: GCDS outperforms SOS in every area
of food service.
"The food is better, the open kitchen is
better everything is way better," he said
of Suites Dining. He thinks it's "stupid" of
ResEd to consider contracting management
of Suites to any outside company, much less
SOS.
When I told him one of Res Ed's ostensi
ble justifications for eliminating GCDS is
health and safety concerns, he laughed in dis
belief.
"We have so many health violations," he
said of the SOS-managed Row house in
which he currently lives. "The number of vi
olations we have ..." He trailed off, shaking
his head.
When I asked him to list some of the spe
cific health violations in his house, he de
murred, afraid that his kitchen staff might
lose their jobs.
For the 2011-12 bidding process for the
Row the first it had ever held ResEd
conducted a closed bid in which, according to
Buzay, four vendors submitted offers: Ara
mark, College Chefs, Sodexo and SOS.
Sodexo is a French multinational corpora
tion with 16 billion euros in annual consoli
dated revenue. It employs 413,000 people
worldwide in 80 countries and serves 50 mil
lion consumers daily. Aramark operates in 22
countries, had revenues of $12.5 billion last
year and is the 23rd-largest employer on the
Fortune 500. Both companies have come un
der intense criticism for unethical business
and labor practices. And the first hit on a
Google search for "College Chefs reviews" is
an entry in the Ripoff Report detailing the
company's practice of "profiteering from stu
dents and their parents."
When I ask Buzay which criteria ResEd
uses to select vendors, he says they choose "a
vendor that can come in and abide by the stu
dent-management model. Working closely
with students, work closely with the commu
nity ... so we're not mass producing food."
First of all, that description sounds an
awful lot like GCDS, which is entirely made
up of students from their own living commu
nity
And second, in a closed bidding process in
which SOS's only three competitors were two
multinationals that have no experience work
ing closely with students on Stanford's cam
pus and a third company with a terrible rep
utation for its work on college campuses,
SOS's selection to manage the Row was like
ly a foregone conclusion.
Boswell, Buzay and Golder claimed not to
know who will be selected as the bidders for
next year's Suites contract. But given
Res Ed's past bidding practices on the Row,
there's little reason to believe the bidding
process for Suites will go any differently.
Growing burden of ResEd oversight
When I asked her about Res Ed's height
ened oversight of GCDS since administrators
first intervened in 2009, Dean Golder insist
ed that Res Ed's involvement has been pro
ductive and beneficial.
"We've done our best to help them be suc
cessful," she declared. "And that's just factu
ally accurate."
But according to everyone who isn't a
ResEd administrator, increased ResEd in
terference has been actively detrimental to
the effective student management of Suites
Dining. Not a single manager I interviewed
could think of even one way in which in
creased ResEd oversight had made their job
easier.
The number of ways managers say it has
made their jobs harder, however, is remark
able. According to several different man
agers, all of whom wished to remain anony
mous, ResEd meddling has made club man
agement dramatically less efficient, more ex
pensive and less effective.
One of the most frustrating changes for
managers has been Res Ed's enforced sepa

ration of club expenditures into food
which student managers are allowed to pur
chase themselves using the GCDS account
and capital items like cups, plates and club
improvements, which must be either ap
proved and paid for by ResEd (using GCDS
money) or purchased using personal student
funds and submitted for reimbursement.
According to one student manager, the
most significant problem with Res Ed's new
policy before which student managers
were free to allocate funds as they saw fit
has been the delayed payment of vendors
who provide both food and capital items. Stu
dent managers will pay for the food portion
of the invoice immediately, but ResEd will
take several weeks to pay for the capital
items, leaving vendors complaining that
they've been underpaid.
Reimbursement the other Res Ed-e
nforced way for student managers to purchase
capital items has proven even more incon
venient, mostly because ResEd appears to
consistently run weeks behind schedule. One
manager purchased a new stereo for his club
in early December using personal funds and
still hasn't received a ResEd reimbursement
check. In September, ResEd administrators
forgot to pay Bollard's water bill, and Frank
had to pay the cost out of pocket. He finally
got a reimbursement check for $248.73 on
Jan. 24.
In Middle Earth, student managers keep
a running list of things R&DE to whom,
according to the board bill, Suites residents
pay total annual maintenance fees of over
$380,000 has promised to fix but hasn't.
There are currently 12 items on that list,
ranging from the salad bar to the stove tap to
the mop rack.
When multiple fix-it requests went unan
swered, managers had to resort to personal
emails and phone calls. Many of the requests
for maintenance have gone unanswered since
fall quarter. As one current Suites manager I
interviewed fumed, "Housing does absolute
ly nothing."
Last year, R&DE installed a shiny new
dishwasher in Middle Earth. Unlike the oth
er three clubs' dishwashers, which despite
being old and timeworn work perfectly fine,
the R&DE-installed Middle Earth dishwash
er immediately broke, and Housing still has
n't successfully fixed it. The symbolism is as
tonishing.
In Fall 2010, ResEd decided to assume
control of paying student hashers tradi
tionally a responsibility of individual club
managers, who would write hashers checks
directly from their eating club account. Be
fore the takeover, I remember a student
manager depositing my hashing check every
two weeks, like clockwork, in the furthest
left-hand drawer in the Avanti kitchen, be
neath the cupboard.
When ResEd took over, they failed to pay
student hashers for the next two months. Ad
ministrators only resumed payment after
students pointed out that not paying your
workers is a violation of California labor law.
"It's amazing how incompetent the so
called 'professionals' can be," grumbled a par
ticularly displeased Suites manager.
ResEd has even taken GCDS money out
right, without any warning or explanation.
According to a 2011-12 club financial manag
er, each eating club used to maintain a $4,000
"carryover account" money saved up "just
in case a chef got sick or we had to have some
big capital expenditure ... as like a buffer."
"We had that money saved up," the finan
cial manager said. "I sent out some checks at
the end of the year to pay off summer bills
and stuff like that... and then I ended up
coming back to school and getting invoices
saying I had unpaid bills from the summer,
and I found out that the checks I had sent
had bounced because the University had
swept our accounts and taken out all the
money that we had saved for carryover, and
[they] just never gave it back. It was just
gone."


MEHMET INONU/The Stanford Daily
Avanti head chef Anton "Tony" Dietz has served Suites residents for 18 years. Born in
Germany in 1946, he began an apprenticeship to a baker at age 14 and has since catered
White House functions for then-President Jimmy Carter and Hollywood premieres.
ResEd has also restrict
ed the number of hashers
who can be on GCDS's pay
roll, drastically limiting the
flexibility of students' work
schedules. Two club man
agers complained that find
ing replacement hashers
when their current one has a
midterm or an athletic event
has become much more diffi
cult since the pool of avail
able hashers is now much
smaller.
Even Res Ed's own stu
dent employees express
frustration with the appar
ent incompetence and ques
tionable work ethic of their
superiors. One current
Suites Resident Assistant
(RA) complained that
ResEd Student Affairs Offi
cer Tiffany Taylor, who is
supposed to make regular
supervisory visits to Suites,
has been conspicuously ab
sent all year.
"She's supposed to come
over," said the RA, "but she
never actually does."
If there is any misman
agement and incompetence
going on at Suites, it's not on
the part of students. It's by
ResEd and R&DE.
It is only when I began
investigating its chronic un
derperformance that ResEd
finally began to grind, slow
ly, into gear. Two days after I
sent an email to Boswell,
Buzay and Golder request
ing an interview about
Suites, all four club man
agers suddenly got an un
precedentedly friendly, but
characteristically vague,
email from ResEd adminis
trator Jo Jaffe 'O9.
"I just wanted to check in

and see how everything was
going for you all," Jaffe
wrote. "Please let me know
if there's anything you have
questions on or need help
with."
Student managers weren't
fooled.
"It was definitely related
to the takeover," said one
club manager.
And only in the last
month has Keith Santiago,
head of Governor's Corner
Housing, finally become
more responsive to student
requests for help.
"We are skeptical as to
his motives," said another
student manager.
♦ ♦♦
Prank keeps his letters in
a Macy's bag in the back of
his old blue Lincoln. There
are 66 of them. Most are
thank you cards: cards from
students, cards from em
ployers, Christmas cards
from generations of Suites
managers, cards in neatly
written Spanish I wish I
could understand. Some are
invitations to long-ago Stan
ford graduations from for
mer students who've left
Prank's beloved kitchen and
moved on.
When Frank puts the tat
tered old Macy's bag in my
hands, he does so with a care
I've never seen before. He
tells me that if I open a card, I
must make sure to put it back
in the exact same envelope, un
damaged and in order.
"Be very careful, Miles,"
he says.
I smile. "I've got it, Prank."
"No," he says, with a fierce
urgency. "These letters are
the most important things to
me."
These letters really are the
most important things to him.
And so I take great care as I
look slowly through the let
ters, kept as pristine as you

could possibly keep 66 letters
in an old Macy's bag.
Certain phrases stand out
from the flow of thanks from
Frank's former students.
"'You're like an uncle to me."
"I'm so touched beyond
words that you remembered
my birthday"
"To the man who is always
right, who gives the best ad
vice and who makes my stom
ach content."
Frank never lets his let
ters go. Next year, this Uni
versity won't be able to say
the same about Frank.
♦♦♦
"Residential Education,"
states the office's website, "is
about the people it serves...
We are concerned with the ex
perience of indvidual [sic] res
idents and how to best serve
each of them."
As I speak with Suites res
ident after Suites resident, I
can't help but think that
ResEd has forgotten that cen
tral mission. Almost unani
mously, the residents I talk to
are shocked and appalled to
discover that their four chefs'
contacts are not being re
newed a decision about
which students were not con
sulted— and that students
will no longer lead Suites' din
ing clubs next year.
"It makes me really mad,"
says one current resident, with
simple honesty.
For others, the loss of a stu
dent job at Suites threatens to
produce financial hardship.
"Without hashing," says a
student in Suites who is cur
rently on financial aid, "I would
have no income at a11... I'd be
getting deeper and deeper into
the hole with my student
loans."
(Boswell, Buzay and Golder
say that some kind of student
management will be allowed
under the new contractor —but
any student managers that re

main will work for the new com
pany, not a student-run non
profit, and there will be, accord
ing to current student man
agers, no paid student hashing
next year.)
I'm reminded that 95.97
percent of Suites residents
opposed a change about
which they were never con
sulted and only recently in
formed.
When I reach out to Suites
alumni, the reaction is, if any
thing, even more pained.
They're dismayed to learn
that the place they loved has
changed so much.
"I always thought it was
the greatest food on the plan
et," a 2005-07 resident re
members wistfully.
"The quality of the food,
and the cheapness of it, was
better than anything the Uni
versity was able to offer," a
student who lived and worked
in Suites from 2006-08, before
ResEd began its expensive
and debilitating takeover, re
calls.
I'm also reminded about
the importance of community,
and how that word means
much more than simply a
group of students. Our com
munity is made up of every
one who makes Stanford so
quintessentially Stanford
from President Hennessy
down to the last kitchen work
er, from star athletic coaches
and tenured professors to the
four chefs who, as one sad
dened survey respondent put
it, "make Suites what it is."
When I ask Golder
whether she considers it im
portant to bring Caroline,
Dennis, Frank and Tony back
next year, she says, "If it
works out, I think that's
great." She suggests that if
students wanted to help, we
should write a letter of rec
ommendation for the chefs to
the new corporate contractor.

Between Boswell, Buzay
and Golder, no one offers to
do anything at all to help the
chefs keep their jobs.
"I can't tell a vendor who
they have to hire," Golder
says.
And that was it.
That's not the spirit of the
Stanford I know. The Stan
ford I know doesn't corpora
tize student life at the ex
pense of longstanding com
munity members; it encour
ages and fosters student
leadership, student initiative
and student independence.
The Stanford I know is about
standing up for the little guy,
being accountable and doing
the best we can for every
member of our community.
As I reflect on the end of
an era, I'm deeply disturbed
by something I remember
from the beginning of my in
terview in that ResEd board
room.
"My general directive
from the president, provost
and [Vice-Provost for Stu
dent Affairs] Greg Board
man when I was brought in
four years ago was: 'Clean
up,"' Golder declared.
Suites Dining, she said,
was just "one of hundreds" of
places under ResEd consider
ation "one of hundreds" of
places "where we're looking
at ourselves and saying, 'Are
we doing the best we can by
students? Are we doing the
best we can by Stanford?"'
If firing four loyal com
munity members beloved by
their students; outsourcing
student jobs and responsibil
ity to a for-profit corporation
with a suspicious workers'
rights record and dubious
ties to the Stanford office re
sponsible for its current con
tract; and refusing to solicit
any student opinion before
making crucial decisions
about student welfare is what

"doing the best we can by
students" looks like and if
there truly are hundreds of
places left on Res Ed's omi
nous list then the end of
Suites Dining might be mere
ly the beginning of a new and
darker era in our collective
campus life.
If ResEd gets its way at
Suites, it will be a victory for
bureaucracy, for incompe
tence and probably for the
coffers of SOS, with its hun
dreds of thousands of dollars
in administrative fees. But it
will be a tremendous loss for
everyone else: for students,
for four veteran chefs who will
be forced out of the communi
ty they love and for this great
university we all call home.
It can be hard to stand up
for ourselves. We're all stu
dents; we hold down jobs;
we're athletes and scientists
and writers with tremendous
time commitments on our
hands.
ResEd knows that, and
they take full advantage of it.
As Sullivan, the former
GCDS CEO who spent an
entire exhausting year try
ing to hold off the ResEd
juggernaut, puts it, "It's an
entire office of Stanford Uni
versity against a few stu
dents who don't have the
time or the energy to fight."
ResEd and SOS move
quietly, inexorably and pa
tiently towards a shared goal
that is ultimately detrimental
and destructive to the Stan
ford community.
We cannot we must not
let them go unchallenged.
It's time to take a stand.

Miles Unterreiner 'l2 M. A
'l3 is a Suites resident and
is employed as a hasher in
Suites' dining clubs.

Contact Miles Unterreiner at
milesiil @ Stanford, edu.
Originally published on Feb. 21, 2013.

Frank Hassan has been head chef
in Suites' Bollard Eating Club for
seven years, and he specializes in
making two things: an incredible
breakfast and memories.

It's the former you'll get if you walk into
Bollard between 7:30 and 9:15 a.m. week
day mornings, where dozens of students
chatter under an enormous banner
erected by unknown admirers at some point
over the past decade featuring Frank's
beaming face and the club's informal title:
"The Bollard Empire."
But it's the memories that last, and over
the three years I've eaten and worked at
Suites, I've picked up quite a few: Frank
volunteering to wake up two hours early to
have breakfast ready for the track team by
5:30 a.m. the days we left early for out-of
state meets; Frank and I watching the
Mubarak regime fall on the Bollard TV
while he offered keen political observations
on his native Egypt; the way he enthusiasti
cally greets every male student with a heav
ily accented "my main man!" and every fe
male with a "good morning, beautiful";
Frank giving my mom a big hug when I
brought her to Bollard to visit during my
junior year.

I'll take those memories with me when I
finally leave Stanford this spring. It's hard
enough knowing I may never come back,
but this year is an especially difficult one in
which to say goodbye. That's because next
fall for the first time in eight years
Prank Hassan may not be coming back ei
ther.

♦ ♦♦
Residential Education (ResEd) has four
offices and 39 professional employees, and
the ResEd Central Office is located on the
second floor of Tresidder Union in Suite 9.

Ever since ResEd first assumed respon
sibility for paying Suites Dining's student
workers in the fall of 2010, I'd been visiting
the Central Office every few weeks to pick
up my paycheck for cleaning the kitchens. I
needed the money and I kept on coming
back, so when I walk up the spiral staircase
and through the clear glass door, I smile
and wave to Alyssa Ray, the Central Office's
friendly and familiar administrative assis


MEHMET INONU/The Stanford Daily
Bollard head chef Frank Hassan is
known among Suites residents for both
his breakfast cooking and the connections
he has forged with residents over
the seven years he has worked in Suites.
tant.
This time, however, I'm not here to pick up
a paycheck. I'm here to meet with Dean of
ResEd Deborah Golder, ResEd Associate
Dean Nate Boswell '99 M.A. 'O9 and ResEd
Director of Operations Aaron Buzay.
On Jan. 30, Boswell and Buzay sent an
email to Res Ed's Suites student email list in
forming all residents that next year for the
first time since Suites Dining was founded in
1982 students will no longer run Suites'
four eating clubs. They will be replaced, due
to what the email described as "health and
safety concerns" and "a pressing desire to
lower the board rate," with an outside corpo
ration.

Avanti, Beefeaters, Bollard and Middle
Earth have served food to Suites residents
six days a week for the past 30 years under
student management, which is currently pro
vided by the student-run 501(c)(3) nonprofit
Governor's Corner Dining Societies (GCDS).
One chef runs each eating club and is assisted
by a student CEO and CFO who oversee all
four clubs, eight student managers (two per
eating club) and a team of paid student "hash
ers" (that's me) who clean the kitchens before
and after meals.
Frank has cooked in Bollard for seven
years. Dennis has been head chef in
Beefeaters for 22. Tony has led Avanti for 18
years. And Caroline is new to Middle Earth
this year, having recently moved to the area
with her husband and two kids.
As part of the move to corporate manage
ment, the chefs' contracts are not being re
newed.
I want to know why, and it's the chefs I'm
thinking about as I shake hands and sit down
with Boswell, Buzay and Golder.
The conversation begins pleasantly
enough, although they tend to use a lot of bu
reaucratically vague sentences with the
words "moving forward," "sustainable" and
"conversation" thrown in. But something
Golder says about the selection process for
the new, non-student contractor rubs me the
wrong way.
"We always involve students in decision
making," she says.
This is news to me. In fact, the first time
ResEd notified all Suites residents that they
were considering replacing student leader
ship with a corporate contractor was when
Boswell and Buzay sent the email informing
residents that the decision had already been
made. I decide to point this out.
"How have you involved students in deci
sion-making up to this point? I mean, besides
the managers, have you gotten feedback from
students at Suites on this?"
Buzay looks confused.
"You mean have we run, like, a...a sur
vey?"
"No, I mean what have you done? I know
you haven't run a formal survey, but have you
talked to students at Suites about this
change?"
"So we sent out... we sent out the email to
the Suites community..."
"Right. So up until the point you sent the
email, though, you hadn't talked to any stu
dents in Suites besides the CEO and CFO?"
There's more talk of "moving forward"
and "sustainable business," from which I con
clude that the answer to my initial question is
"no."

Fortunately, a survey that asked Suites
residents if they approved or disapproved of
the proposed change had been sent out to the
Suites email list —just not by Res Ed. I know,
because I created it. It took me approximate
ly five minutes to draft.
149 Suites residents answered the poll,
and 143 of them —95.97 percent disap
proved of Res Ed's decision to contract food
services to an outside vendor and not to re
new the current chefs' contracts. I had made
a comments section available on the survey
form, and I'm interested to know what
Boswell, Buzay and Golder think of the stu
dent opinions they never solicited. I decide to
read a few representative student responses
aloud.
"Number one: 'I am very disappointed
with the decision from ResEd to take over
contracting and management of Suites Din
ing. I do not like that our chefs are being
treated in this manner. They have put years
of dedication and service into their jobs and
Stanford.'
"Number two: 'As far as I know, this deci
sion from ResEd was reached with no consul
tation from the general student community in
Suites, which is undemocratic, unaccountable
and unacceptable.'
"Number three: 'The students who run
Beefeaters and Dennis provide the best din
ing service found on campus. All the outside
corporations that I have seen on campus
come in sub-par to the standards at the Eat
ing Clubs, and I think this is a bureaucratic

and stupid decision.'
"What would you say to that?" I prompt
the ResEd administrators.

There's a very, very long silence.
♦ ♦♦

When I finally walk out of Tresidder Union
Suite 9 an hour later, the first thing I do is
drive home, sit down at my computer and
start writing. I separate my document into
three headings: board bill costs; health and
safety; and financial mismanagement.

Board bill costs
In more than an hour of conversation, the
trio of ResEd administrators had repeatedly
cited Suites' high board bill as a pressing rea
son to seek a less expensive corporate vendor
to provide food. But a closer inspection of
University financial records indicates that
this justification makes little sense.
To begin with, the Suites board bill is no
higher than that of the Row houses, which are
currently managed by private contractor Stu
dent Organized Services, Inc. (SOS) mak
ing it difficult to see how changing to a private
contractor will lower the board rate.

The problem, however, goes deeper: the
University, not GCDS, is itself responsible for
creating the problem it now insists upon step
ping in to fix.
Prior to 2007, the quarterly Suites board
bill was among the lowest on campus at, ac
cording to former GCDS CEO Leah Sawyer
'O7, approximately $1,200 per student per
quarter. Suites Dining also provided more
meals per week —l7 than the more ex
pensive Row houses, which typically provided
10.

In 2008, however, the University com
bined the Suites Dining Society bill which
covers food—with the University Housing
bill, which covers housing maintenance costs.
Since then, Student Housing a division
of Residential & Dining Enterprises (R&DE)
has dramatically raised its prices, forcing
up the total costs that appeal 1 on the Suites
board bill. From the 2011-12 academic year to
the 2012-13 academic year alone, Housing
raised its prices by 25 percent. Housing main
tenance now takes up just under a quarter of
Suites residents' room and board expenses at
approximately $5OO per resident per quarter.
Res Ed's attempt to fix Suites' rising board
rate made matters even worse. According to
former GCDS CEO J.T. Sullivan 'll, ResEd
responded to Housing-driven Suites board
bill inflation by setting an overall room and
board price cap of $2,000 per student per
quarter. Since ResEd has little to no power to
limit the price charged by R&DE, however,
the Housing portion of the board bill kept
climbing resulting in smaller and smaller
percentages of student money going to GCDS
for food and a budget crunch for GCDS man
agers.
The budgetary strains caused by ResEd
and R&DE were exacerbated, moreover, by
additional overhead costs imposed by the
University. In 2009 a year after the Hous
ing bill was merged with the Suites Dining
bill ResEd began auditing and regulating
GCDS financial operations. With Res Ed's
heightened involvement came two additional
categories on Suites students' board bill: "Ad
min" and "Overhead."
Prior to the beginning of Res Ed's
takeover in 2009, Suites was run entirely by
students they collected students' board
bills, paid chefs and hashers and even distrib
uted room keys. But ever since ResEd
stepped in in 2009, students have been paying
ResEd administrators to reread Suites finan
cial documents, incurring overhead costs that
further drive up the board bill total.
Those total costs were $161.57 per student
in 2011-12. Multiplied by the roughly 260 stu
dents who live in Suites, the total amount of
overhead paid last year to ResEd administra
tors to do the work student financial man
agers formerly did themselves is about
$42,000 more student money, as a 2011-12
Suites financial manager (FM) I interviewed
put it, "disappearing down the black hole that
is Residential Education."
According to Avanti chef Anton "Tony"
Dietz, who has 19 years of experience in food
services administration, any outside contrac
tor is likely to levy additional administrative
fees amounting to between eight and 11 per
cent of Suites' total budget. Suites' budget in
2011-12 totaled approximately $l.l million.
Assuming administrative charges at the typi
cal corporate rate, Suites residents next year
will be shelling out an additional $lOO,OOO in
surcharges.

Health and safety
During that interview in Suite 9, Boswell,
Buzay and Golder repeatedly advanced stu
dent health and safety as a "considerable con
cern" but failed to mention almost any specif
ic instances of health and safety violations.
The only specific evidence Golder offered was
a claim that multiple fires had recently bro
ken out at Suites.

"If we weren't fixing all the fires that
come," exclaimed Golder at one point, "they
[GCDS] wouldn't be getting by."

There was, in fact, only one fire at Suites
recently, not "all the fires that come," and it
was caused by two inexperienced Suites resi
dents — not student managers using the
Avanti kitchen to boil a large pot of hot oil on
a Saturday evening in May 2012 in a disas
trous attempt to fry empanadas for Cinco de
Mayo. Fortunately, a chef was hosting a free
movie-and-food night for residents on his day
off in a neighboring club the kind of thing
Suites chefs tend to do. He and a student
manager immediately rushed in and put out
the blaze with the club's fire extinguisher,
which GCDS had properly placed according
to fire code.
No outside contractor, short of completely
barring student access to the kitchen, could
have prevented that fire, and switching to a
corporate vendor will do nothing to prevent
the possibility of similar fires in the future.
Suites has a similar record in other areas
of health and safety. I was hashing in
Beefeaters on Jan. 15 when the Santa Clara
County public health inspector came to visit
this quarter. She left just as I finished clean
ing, having found zero health violations. The
other three clubs were also inspected that
day, with two violations found in Avanti, two
in Bollard and four in Middle Earth (one of
which was caused by Housing's failure to re
pair the salad bar). Suites' average number of
violations was two per kitchen, and none were
classified as "major."
The average number of food inspection vi
olations for Row houses —which are run by
exactly the sort of contractor that will be
moving into Suites next year —is 3.83 per
house. Ten locations on campus, including
Row houses managed by corporate contrac
tor SOS, were found responsible for "major"
violations.
Records of documented Suites health vio
lations in the past support this year's results.
After health inspectors visited Suites in the
spring of 2012, GCDS' then-CEO Sullivan
met with Boswell and Buzay to determine
who was responsible for the 26 reported vio
lations. Almost all of the violations were mi
nor among the worst appeal's to have been
some mold in an ice machine. Other violations
included a broken paper towel dispenser, the
ice scooper not being in its plastic cup and the
cleaning solution being too strong.
Boswell, Buzay and Sullivan collectively
assigned responsibility for each violation to
one of three groups: University Housing,
GCDS and ResEd and/or its student manag
er employees (ResEd now pays student man
agers, while GCDS' pay to chefs and its CEO
and CFO remains an entirely separate cate
gory). Of the 26 total violations, Housing was
found responsible for 10 including the
mold in the ice machine and ResEd and/or
its student manager employees were found to
have committed 16.
GCDS the student nonprofit that
ResEd now wants to eliminate was held
responsible for zero.
Financial mismanagement
In our interview, Golder had been espe
cially emphatic about student mismanage
ment of money. Arguing that students had
"run [Suites] into the ground" amid "years of
mismanagement," she claimed that "the only
reason they [GCDS] are getting by is because
we're supporting them, frankly. And if we
weren't, they wouldn't be getting by."
According to two financial managers who
worked in Suites prior to Res Ed's takeover in
2009, GCDS had never gone over budget or
had to borrow money from the University.
When I pressed her, Golder offered only one
piece of evidence to support her assertion.
According to Golder, ResEd had advanced
GCDS "tens of thousands of dollars" from
Res Ed's own budget that has to be paid back
at the end of the 2012-13 academic year. But
this the only evidence ResEd has provided
thus far of student financial mismanagement
is, according to student managers, flat-out
wrong.

Suites managers say ResEd allowed
GCDS advance access to money from its own
budget this year —in other words, Suites
spent some of its own money ahead of sched
ule. No money needs to be paid back to
ResEd at the end of the year. There is no
loan for students to pay off.
Boswell and Buzay also noted that, prior
to ResEd involvement, GCDS lacked a rec
ognized tax ID number and liability insur
ance. That much is true. But former GCDS
CEO Sullivan oversaw the 2011 purchase of a
liability policy valued at $2 million and incor
porated GCDS as a 501(c)(3) nonprofit, meet
ing Res Ed's requirements.
Moreover, several student managers re
ported that ResEd officials have argued that
the four Suites chefs are overpaid. But last
year's chef contract reveals that an academic
year's pay for a chef at Suites in 2011-12 was
$51,182. That's hardly a gold mine in the Bay
Area let alone Palo Alto especially since
ResEd, according to Avanti chef Tony, al
ready mandated a wage freeze for Suites
chefs three years ago, eliminating the annual
cost-of-living increase formerly granted by
GCDS.

In any case, Suites chefs deserve compen
sation appropriate for their skill level and ex
perience. Tony was born in Germany in 1946
and began his apprenticeship to a baker at age
14. Since then, he has catered White House
functions on the top floor of Washington Hos
pital Center with President Jimmy Carter in
attendance, personally overseen food produc
tion for the 1977 Hollywood release party of
the original "Star Wars," crafted all the food
for the set of "The Love Boat" and worked at
elite San Francisco hotels from the Hilton to
the Fairmont to the Stanford Court Renais
sance.

He was hired as an executive chef for the
Saga Corporation by Ernie Arbuckle '33
MBA '36 after whom the Graduate School
of Business' Arbuckle Dining Pavilion is
named and taught at the California Culi
nary Academy. He shook hands with Princess
Grace of Monaco and Charlton Heston and
catered parties for Ronald Reagan's Chair
man of the Council of Economic Advisers
Michael Boskin, who is currently a Stanford
economics professor.
That's Tony. He's been working in Avanti
for 18 years, and ResEd is not going to renew
his contract. And don't even get me started on
Caroline, Dennis and Frank.

If there's anything else that GCDS has
done wrong, ResEd wouldn't tell me. The
three administrators didn't even seem to
know how changing to corporate manage
ment would theoretically solve the nonexist
ent problems they think they've identified.
When I pressed Golder on how exactly
ResEd knows switching to an outside con
tractor will lower the board rate, improve
health and safety or enhance the quality of
management, her response was simple: "We
don't."
♦ ♦♦
When I walk in to see Frank right after
breakfast, he's already busy preparing lunch,
and I already know what he's going to say.
"Miles, my main man, how we doin'?"
As we chat, I notice that he's posted Renee
Donovan 'ls's recent Stanford Daily profile of
him to the kitchen's refrigerator door. Some
one has drawn little stars around it. During
our conversation, two students drop in to
cheerfully give Frank more copies. He adds
them to a stack he's gradually accumulating
on the table.
Frank has been told nothing by ResEd of
ficials other than that his contract will not be
renewed at the end of the year. When I ask
how he feels about the possibility of losing his
job, he abruptly stops chopping vegetables
and looks directly at me.
"Listen to this. I enjoy when I come here
in the morning and I cook for everybody. I
feel more happy than ... Listen, they are hap
py with me."
"Everybody loves you, Frank."
"And I love them more than what they love
me. Believe me. I swear to God. You know,
that's why I come so early in the morning."
Frank seems to care only about his stu
dents, and he doesn't want to talk about him
self or his problems. I have to ask several
times before he finally opens up about how
hard this will be for him.
"I'm now going to be 59 years old. How I
save money for my retirement? Do you un
derstand me?"
I did. Frank had stalled his retirement
planning a ways back, and every time I came
in for breakfast, I would ask which new place
he had in mind. Hawaii and the South Seas
were the dream, or maybe the California
coast. But on $51,182 a year, Arizona made
more sense, and it was Arizona we had talked
about the most.
"This make my life ..." He searches for
the right word. "Worried. Now they come
over here, they cut my salary, and they ask
me, 'Be smiling.' How can I be smiling when I
am worried about my rent?"
I don't know how to answer that one.
While I'm busy thinking of something to say,
Frank shuffles over to the chef's closet. "Let
me show you something, Miles."
He unfolds a single sheet of white paper
and hands it to me.
"Dear Mr. Hassan," the paper reads, "Be
cause of the increased cost of maintenance,
taxes, insurance, utilities, we must reluctant
ly inform you that your rent is being in
creased by $lOO.OO per month. Effective
01/01/2013 your new monthly rent will be
$1,800.00."
Frank shrugs. "The landlord, he wants his
money."
Overpaid. Right.
But Frank only truly begins to look wor
ried when he starts, hesitantly, to talk about
Student Organized Services.
♦ ♦♦
Student Organized Services, Inc. (SOS),
contrary to its name and friendly-looking
website, is not, and never has been, run by
students. The for-profit, privately held com
pany, headquartered in Redwood City, cur
rently operates food-related labor services
for the entire Row a job contracted to it by
Res Ed.
SOS's CEO is Nick Peters '94, who
worked for ResEd before founding SOS in
September of 1994. In 1995, Peters became
CEO of another company: Stanford Eating
Clubs (SEC), which took over management of
the old, student-run Toy on Eating Clubs
while SOS began to expand, house by house,
onto the Row.

In 2005, Zac Sargeant took the helm at
SEC as its CEO and managing director. He
was its last CEO the formerly student-run
Toyon Eating Clubs, founded in 1892, shut
down in 2009 after 107 years of continuous
operation.
In 2008 according to his resume, while
still serving as CEO of SEC Sargeant was
hired as assistant director of ResEd, where
he works to this day. His office is just down
the hallway from the boardroom in Tresidder
Union where I had my interview with
Boswell, Buzay and Golder.
For one year, Sargeant simultaneously
worked for a company that receives Universi
ty dining contracts and for the Stanford office
responsible for selecting dining contractors.
Sargeant is also Peters' brother-in-law.

According to Tony, SOS has repeatedly bid
to administer Suites Dining since 1995, the
year Peters assumed control at SEC and
Tony's first year as head chef in Avanti.
GCDS student leadership felt comfortable
running things on their own, according to
Tony and refused to contract their own jobs
out to SOS.

Sawyer, the former student manager and

Their own words
"For a long, long time, SOS and the
University were interested in taking
over Governor's Corner."
Colin Wessells 'OB,
former Avanti FM
"They were not involved. At all."
ResEd Dean Deborah Golder,
on SOS' involvement in Suites
"How can I be smiling when I am
worried about my rent?"
Bollard Chef Frank Hassan


LORENA RINCON-CRUZ/The Stanford Daily
143 of 149 Suites residents surveyed disapproved of ResEd's decision to contract management
of the formerly student-run Suites Dining to an outside corporation.
GCDS CEO who worked at Suites from 2005
to 2007, remembered Peters as a shadowy fig
ure whose precise source of authority was un
clear but who frequently attempted to wield
that authority as a bludgeon against student
independence.
"I don't even remember why Nick Peters
was an authority to us, but he was," she re
called. "Mostly he was just trying to tell us
'no.' Special dinners we were going to put on,
what we could and couldn't do with our money
... but he wasn't our boss, so I don't think we
really took him all that seriously."
According to Sawyer, Peters clearly dis
liked Suites' tradition of student freedom but
lacked the power to do anything about it.
"We just always knew him as some guy
who was clearly uncomfortable with us having
authority as students," she remembered. "But
at that time, he didn't have the authority to ac
tually tell us what to do, so we were always
just kind of annoyed by him."
Colin Wessells 'OB M.S. 'l2 Ph.D. 'l2
who said the business experience he gained as
financial manager in Avanti from 2006 to 2008
eventually helped him become CEO of his own
Silicon Valley startup has a clear memory
of Peters as a businessman who repeatedly of
fered the clubs a bad deal.
"Every year or so he would come over to
Suites and see if, now that there was new stu
dent management there, they would be inter
ested in partnering with SOS," Wessells re
called.
Student managers, however, weren't buy
ing it.
"They would look over the materials and
documents that SOS would present, and usu
ally it wouldn't be a good deal," Wessells not
ed. "Typically, the terms that [Peters] would
be offering would be, 'Okay, you guys are go
ing to keep managing the clubs, but we're go
ing to provide oversight and a fee.'"
According to Wessells, that proposed ad
ministrative fee typically amounted to be
tween $lOO and $2OO per resident per quarter
on top of the existing board bill. Multiplied by
the roughly 260 students in Suites, SOS's bid
for service, if successful, would have netted
Peters' firm between $78,000 and $156,000 in
student money every year.
"For a long, long time," Wessells conclud
ed, "SOS and the University were interested
in taking over Governor's Corner."
But a long tradition of student independ
ence, and a lack of concrete administrative
power over Suites Dining, stood in their way.
Then Peters' brother-in-law joined ResEd,
and the balance of power began to shift.

Potential conflict of interest
It was not until 2009 the year after
ResEd hired Sargeant as its assistant director
that, according to chefs and former student
managers, the threat of an SOS takeover be
came realistic.
First ResEd began regulating Suites' fi
nancial operations. Administrators then as
sumed control of paying student hashers
and began paying them less. Then ResEd cut
a managerial position from each club, reduc
ing the total number of student managers
from 12 to the current eight.
When chefs and managers, fearful of a
complete SOS takeover, finally discovered the
relationship between Sargeant and Peters in
the spring of 2011, ResEd denied the exis
tence of any conflict of interest.
But oddly for a situation in which ResEd
claimed that there was no conflict of interest,
Sargeant who had initially served as GCD-
S's primary contact in ResEd suddenly
stopped showing up to meetings with GCDS
managers, and the websites connecting
Sargeant to Peters were erased.
ResEd eventually abandoned its attempt
to replace student leadership with an outside
contractor, and Boswell admitted that Suites
managers had "worked diligently over the
course of the summer to meet all relevant, up
graded University requirements." Captained
by Sullivan, then the GCDS CEO, Suites man
agers won their right to remain independent.
Or so they thought.
In our interview, Golder denied that SOS
had ever been involved, in any capacity, with
Suites Dining during her tenure.
"They were not involved," she said em
phatically when I asked. "At all."
Opaque, overbearing and indifferent
Frank used to work for SOS. He left in
2007 when, a few weeks into the school year,
he was recruited away by then-GCDS CEO
Sawyer to work in Bollard instead.
"The students here, they came, they took
me away from them," Frank remembered
fondly. "They pay me more."
"Better benefits?"
"Better everything! You understand? I
wasn't happy with [SOS]."
Sawyer puts it more bluntly.
"Basically, he was abused," she recalled.
"He would come in, his kitchen would be a dis
aster, there would be no one for him to go to ...
he was incredibly unhappy."
"If you don't treat your employees well,"
she reflected with thinly veiled anger about
Frank's mistreatment under SOS, "they're
going to find another job."
Frank, in typical fashion, only expresses
concerns about his students, and especially
about what might happen to them after an
SOS takeover at Suites next year.
"One thing I know for sure," he said, "is
they [SOS] don't care about the students."
"Not at all?"
"At all. Just money."
Suites Dining is the largest remaining
student-run, independent eating location on
campus, with approximately 260 residents
and an annual operating budget of over $l.l
million. Whichever company wins that con
tract next year will be flush with cash cash
ResEd requires students to pay, and cash
from which any for-profit corporation will
skim significant fees.
If the past is any indication of the future,
that corporation will likely be SOS.
The entanglement between Stanford's Of
fice of Residential Education and SOS is
complex and runs deep. When I contacted
Peters to request a personal interview for
this story, he declined to speak with me and
referred me instead to Buzay in ResEd, who
handles all of SOS's media inquiries.
Boswell mentioned in our interview that
he himself was "connected" to SOS, but does
n't specify how. Sargeant, the onetime Gener

al Manager of SEC and Peters' brother-in
law, was still reluctant to talk.
"I believe that Aaron and Nate can pro
vide you with all the information requested,"
he wrote in response to my emailed request
for an interview.

When Avanti chef Tony said there's
"something insidious about this whole thing,"
these are the kind of connections that sup
port his suspicion. Wessells, the former
Avanti financial manager, speculated that
money might be changing hands somewhere.
"What it smells of to me is basically that
there are people in the University that have
their own motives," Wessells mused. "And
whether they stand to profit from taking
over the clubs ... maybe that could be the
case."
Despite Golder's assertion that a "Uni
versity-required" bidding process governs
the selection of contracted vendors for stu
dent residences, SOS did not have to compet
itively bid to manage the Row for over 15
years.

The first year for which ResEd held a bid
ding process for Row management was 2011-
12. In the year after receiving that bid ac
cording to members of the Stanford Labor
Action Coalition (SLAC), a student-led work
ers' advocacy group SOS slashed Row
workers' health benefits by half and reduced
their bonuses from $l,OOO to a maximum of
$4O.
Stanford's Living Wage Policy states
clearly that workers on campus shall have
"the right to self-organization, to form, join,
or assist labor organizations, to bargain col
lectively ... and to engage in other concerted
activities for the purpose of collective bar
gaining or other mutual aid or protection."
But when SLAC held a Worker-Student
Council meeting on Jan. 16, 2012, to provide
a "safe space" for workers seeking relief
from SOS benefit cuts advertised in both
Spanish and English Sargeant, a ResEd
employee, barged in without introducing
himself a few minutes into the meeting, ac
cused the workers of organizing a strike
(which SLAC had never discussed) and "in
timidated" the workers into silence.
"They seemed to know who he was," re
called SLAC member Laurel Fish 'l4. "His
accusations were very aggressive."
"We tried to have a conversation with [the
workers]," Fish remembered, "but it was
clear that they weren't expressing their con
cerns and didn't feel like they could talk
openly."
It remains unclear why a ResEd adminis
trator interfered in a private meeting of
workers contracted by a third-party corpora
tion and why ResEd paid so little attention to
the Living Wage Policy's protection of "the
right to self-organization."
SOS's financial operations for the Row
are almost completely opaque to house resi
dents. When I met with a Row financial man
ager to go over his house's finances, he was
surprised to learn that Suites residents have
full and transparent access to their entire
board bill. ResEd, he said, takes all the mon
ey from his residents' room and board pay
ment, gives him about $B5O per resident per
quarter to spend on either food or social dues
and doesn't tell him what they do with the
rest.
"Even as a financial manager, I don't see
where half the student money goes," he said.
I end up having to go directly to Buzay for
that information. The numbers, which Row fi
nancial managers never see, are clear.
Total board bill costs in Suites and on the
Row are almost exactly the same $5,999
per year for Suites residents and $5,992 for
residents on the Row. But there's one major
difference: Governor's Corner Dining Soci
eties deliver seven more meals per week than
Row houses at almost exactly the same price.
Row residents receive 10 meals a week,
typically lunch and dinner Monday through
Friday. Suites residents, by contrast, get 17:
everything the Row provides, including open
kitchen and snacks, plus a custom-cooked
Frank breakfast extravaganza every morn
ing and brunch and dinner on Sundays.
Suites student managers provide those
seven extra meals, moreover, on a lower food
budget. GCDS spends about $5O less per
quarter per student on food than SOS (an av
erage of $726 for GCDS and $775 for SOS).
And they provide those meals as any stu
dent who has had Dennis' lobster, Frank's
filet mignon sandwiches, Caroline's Mexican
or Tony's chocolate mousse can tell you
without compromising quality, a feat Tony
says he accomplishes by buying only "what's
seasonal and freshly available" and "minimiz
ing or eliminating waste." That's not even in
cluding the quarterly Gala Dinners and Spe
cial Dinners every Suites eating club delivers
or the spring quarter Suites-wide Special
Party, for which student managers bring in
live music, ice sculptures and entertainment.
And as a student-run nonprofit, all the
money Suites saves on food goes to better pay
for student hashers and then- chefs, rather
than the bank account of a for-profit company.
Frank made $9OO per week for 33 weeks
of work about $29,700 annually when
he first started at SOS. He makes $20,000
more than that at Suites, plus 100 percent
coverage of his (and his dependents') health
care and dental costs.
In "Hiring a Chef," the sample advertise
ment SOS CEO Peters encourages student
managers on the Row to post when searching
for new chefs, Peters suggests pay of
"$BOO/week DOE [depending on experience]
+ negotiable benefits." That's $26,400 per
year about half what Suites chefs make.
Part-time student hashers at Suites make
$l5 an hour and used to make even more be
fore Res Ed-enforced pay cuts took their toll.
Even after the ResEd pay cuts, Suites hash
ers still make more than the Stanford-man
dated living wage. Buzay, however, said that
Peters the CEO of the organization re
sponsible for food-service labor operations
for the entire Row "didn't know" that
Stanford's Living Wage Policy, enacted in
2007, "even existed" until four years after it
came into effect. In 2011, SOS was finally
forced to conform to the policy, which man
dates that all campus workers, including
those hired by third-party contractors, be
paid at least $12.40 an hour when also provid
ed with benefits.

But there's no better way to compare the
performance of SOS and GCDS than to talk

to someone who's experienced both. When I
finally sat down with a former Suites hasher
who currently lives on the Row, his answer is
clear: GCDS outperforms SOS in every area
of food service.
"The food is better, the open kitchen is
better everything is way better," he said
of Suites Dining. He thinks it's "stupid" of
ResEd to consider contracting management
of Suites to any outside company, much less
SOS.
When I told him one of Res Ed's ostensi
ble justifications for eliminating GCDS is
health and safety concerns, he laughed in dis
belief.
"We have so many health violations," he
said of the SOS-managed Row house in
which he currently lives. "The number of vi
olations we have ..." He trailed off, shaking
his head.
When I asked him to list some of the spe
cific health violations in his house, he de
murred, afraid that his kitchen staff might
lose their jobs.
For the 2011-12 bidding process for the
Row the first it had ever held ResEd
conducted a closed bid in which, according to
Buzay, four vendors submitted offers: Ara
mark, College Chefs, Sodexo and SOS.
Sodexo is a French multinational corpora
tion with 16 billion euros in annual consoli
dated revenue. It employs 413,000 people
worldwide in 80 countries and serves 50 mil
lion consumers daily. Aramark operates in 22
countries, had revenues of $12.5 billion last
year and is the 23rd-largest employer on the
Fortune 500. Both companies have come un
der intense criticism for unethical business
and labor practices. And the first hit on a
Google search for "College Chefs reviews" is
an entry in the Ripoff Report detailing the
company's practice of "profiteering from stu
dents and their parents."
When I ask Buzay which criteria ResEd
uses to select vendors, he says they choose "a
vendor that can come in and abide by the stu
dent-management model. Working closely
with students, work closely with the commu
nity ... so we're not mass producing food."
First of all, that description sounds an
awful lot like GCDS, which is entirely made
up of students from their own living commu
nity
And second, in a closed bidding process in
which SOS's only three competitors were two
multinationals that have no experience work
ing closely with students on Stanford's cam
pus and a third company with a terrible rep
utation for its work on college campuses,
SOS's selection to manage the Row was like
ly a foregone conclusion.
Boswell, Buzay and Golder claimed not to
know who will be selected as the bidders for
next year's Suites contract. But given
Res Ed's past bidding practices on the Row,
there's little reason to believe the bidding
process for Suites will go any differently.
Growing burden of ResEd oversight
When I asked her about Res Ed's height
ened oversight of GCDS since administrators
first intervened in 2009, Dean Golder insist
ed that Res Ed's involvement has been pro
ductive and beneficial.
"We've done our best to help them be suc
cessful," she declared. "And that's just factu
ally accurate."
But according to everyone who isn't a
ResEd administrator, increased ResEd in
terference has been actively detrimental to
the effective student management of Suites
Dining. Not a single manager I interviewed
could think of even one way in which in
creased ResEd oversight had made their job
easier.
The number of ways managers say it has
made their jobs harder, however, is remark
able. According to several different man
agers, all of whom wished to remain anony
mous, ResEd meddling has made club man
agement dramatically less efficient, more ex
pensive and less effective.
One of the most frustrating changes for
managers has been Res Ed's enforced sepa

ration of club expenditures into food
which student managers are allowed to pur
chase themselves using the GCDS account
and capital items like cups, plates and club
improvements, which must be either ap
proved and paid for by ResEd (using GCDS
money) or purchased using personal student
funds and submitted for reimbursement.
According to one student manager, the
most significant problem with Res Ed's new
policy before which student managers
were free to allocate funds as they saw fit
has been the delayed payment of vendors
who provide both food and capital items. Stu
dent managers will pay for the food portion
of the invoice immediately, but ResEd will
take several weeks to pay for the capital
items, leaving vendors complaining that
they've been underpaid.
Reimbursement the other Res Ed-e
nforced way for student managers to purchase
capital items has proven even more incon
venient, mostly because ResEd appears to
consistently run weeks behind schedule. One
manager purchased a new stereo for his club
in early December using personal funds and
still hasn't received a ResEd reimbursement
check. In September, ResEd administrators
forgot to pay Bollard's water bill, and Frank
had to pay the cost out of pocket. He finally
got a reimbursement check for $248.73 on
Jan. 24.
In Middle Earth, student managers keep
a running list of things R&DE to whom,
according to the board bill, Suites residents
pay total annual maintenance fees of over
$380,000 has promised to fix but hasn't.
There are currently 12 items on that list,
ranging from the salad bar to the stove tap to
the mop rack.
When multiple fix-it requests went unan
swered, managers had to resort to personal
emails and phone calls. Many of the requests
for maintenance have gone unanswered since
fall quarter. As one current Suites manager I
interviewed fumed, "Housing does absolute
ly nothing."
Last year, R&DE installed a shiny new
dishwasher in Middle Earth. Unlike the oth
er three clubs' dishwashers, which despite
being old and timeworn work perfectly fine,
the R&DE-installed Middle Earth dishwash
er immediately broke, and Housing still has
n't successfully fixed it. The symbolism is as
tonishing.
In Fall 2010, ResEd decided to assume
control of paying student hashers tradi
tionally a responsibility of individual club
managers, who would write hashers checks
directly from their eating club account. Be
fore the takeover, I remember a student
manager depositing my hashing check every
two weeks, like clockwork, in the furthest
left-hand drawer in the Avanti kitchen, be
neath the cupboard.
When ResEd took over, they failed to pay
student hashers for the next two months. Ad
ministrators only resumed payment after
students pointed out that not paying your
workers is a violation of California labor law.
"It's amazing how incompetent the so
called 'professionals' can be," grumbled a par
ticularly displeased Suites manager.
ResEd has even taken GCDS money out
right, without any warning or explanation.
According to a 2011-12 club financial manag
er, each eating club used to maintain a $4,000
"carryover account" money saved up "just
in case a chef got sick or we had to have some
big capital expenditure ... as like a buffer."
"We had that money saved up," the finan
cial manager said. "I sent out some checks at
the end of the year to pay off summer bills
and stuff like that... and then I ended up
coming back to school and getting invoices
saying I had unpaid bills from the summer,
and I found out that the checks I had sent
had bounced because the University had
swept our accounts and taken out all the
money that we had saved for carryover, and
[they] just never gave it back. It was just
gone."


MEHMET INONU/The Stanford Daily
Avanti head chef Anton "Tony" Dietz has served Suites residents for 18 years. Born in
Germany in 1946, he began an apprenticeship to a baker at age 14 and has since catered
White House functions for then-President Jimmy Carter and Hollywood premieres.
ResEd has also restrict
ed the number of hashers
who can be on GCDS's pay
roll, drastically limiting the
flexibility of students' work
schedules. Two club man
agers complained that find
ing replacement hashers
when their current one has a
midterm or an athletic event
has become much more diffi
cult since the pool of avail
able hashers is now much
smaller.
Even Res Ed's own stu
dent employees express
frustration with the appar
ent incompetence and ques
tionable work ethic of their
superiors. One current
Suites Resident Assistant
(RA) complained that
ResEd Student Affairs Offi
cer Tiffany Taylor, who is
supposed to make regular
supervisory visits to Suites,
has been conspicuously ab
sent all year.
"She's supposed to come
over," said the RA, "but she
never actually does."
If there is any misman
agement and incompetence
going on at Suites, it's not on
the part of students. It's by
ResEd and R&DE.
It is only when I began
investigating its chronic un
derperformance that ResEd
finally began to grind, slow
ly, into gear. Two days after I
sent an email to Boswell,
Buzay and Golder request
ing an interview about
Suites, all four club man
agers suddenly got an un
precedentedly friendly, but
characteristically vague,
email from ResEd adminis
trator Jo Jaffe 'O9.
"I just wanted to check in

and see how everything was
going for you all," Jaffe
wrote. "Please let me know
if there's anything you have
questions on or need help
with."
Student managers weren't
fooled.
"It was definitely related
to the takeover," said one
club manager.
And only in the last
month has Keith Santiago,
head of Governor's Corner
Housing, finally become
more responsive to student
requests for help.
"We are skeptical as to
his motives," said another
student manager.
♦ ♦♦
Prank keeps his letters in
a Macy's bag in the back of
his old blue Lincoln. There
are 66 of them. Most are
thank you cards: cards from
students, cards from em
ployers, Christmas cards
from generations of Suites
managers, cards in neatly
written Spanish I wish I
could understand. Some are
invitations to long-ago Stan
ford graduations from for
mer students who've left
Prank's beloved kitchen and
moved on.
When Frank puts the tat
tered old Macy's bag in my
hands, he does so with a care
I've never seen before. He
tells me that if I open a card, I
must make sure to put it back
in the exact same envelope, un
damaged and in order.
"Be very careful, Miles,"
he says.
I smile. "I've got it, Prank."
"No," he says, with a fierce
urgency. "These letters are
the most important things to
me."
These letters really are the
most important things to him.
And so I take great care as I
look slowly through the let
ters, kept as pristine as you

could possibly keep 66 letters
in an old Macy's bag.
Certain phrases stand out
from the flow of thanks from
Frank's former students.
"'You're like an uncle to me."
"I'm so touched beyond
words that you remembered
my birthday"
"To the man who is always
right, who gives the best ad
vice and who makes my stom
ach content."
Frank never lets his let
ters go. Next year, this Uni
versity won't be able to say
the same about Frank.
♦♦♦
"Residential Education,"
states the office's website, "is
about the people it serves...
We are concerned with the ex
perience of indvidual [sic] res
idents and how to best serve
each of them."
As I speak with Suites res
ident after Suites resident, I
can't help but think that
ResEd has forgotten that cen
tral mission. Almost unani
mously, the residents I talk to
are shocked and appalled to
discover that their four chefs'
contacts are not being re
newed a decision about
which students were not con
sulted— and that students
will no longer lead Suites' din
ing clubs next year.
"It makes me really mad,"
says one current resident, with
simple honesty.
For others, the loss of a stu
dent job at Suites threatens to
produce financial hardship.
"Without hashing," says a
student in Suites who is cur
rently on financial aid, "I would
have no income at a11... I'd be
getting deeper and deeper into
the hole with my student
loans."
(Boswell, Buzay and Golder
say that some kind of student
management will be allowed
under the new contractor —but
any student managers that re

main will work for the new com
pany, not a student-run non
profit, and there will be, accord
ing to current student man
agers, no paid student hashing
next year.)
I'm reminded that 95.97
percent of Suites residents
opposed a change about
which they were never con
sulted and only recently in
formed.
When I reach out to Suites
alumni, the reaction is, if any
thing, even more pained.
They're dismayed to learn
that the place they loved has
changed so much.
"I always thought it was
the greatest food on the plan
et," a 2005-07 resident re
members wistfully.
"The quality of the food,
and the cheapness of it, was
better than anything the Uni
versity was able to offer," a
student who lived and worked
in Suites from 2006-08, before
ResEd began its expensive
and debilitating takeover, re
calls.
I'm also reminded about
the importance of community,
and how that word means
much more than simply a
group of students. Our com
munity is made up of every
one who makes Stanford so
quintessentially Stanford
from President Hennessy
down to the last kitchen work
er, from star athletic coaches
and tenured professors to the
four chefs who, as one sad
dened survey respondent put
it, "make Suites what it is."
When I ask Golder
whether she considers it im
portant to bring Caroline,
Dennis, Frank and Tony back
next year, she says, "If it
works out, I think that's
great." She suggests that if
students wanted to help, we
should write a letter of rec
ommendation for the chefs to
the new corporate contractor.

Between Boswell, Buzay
and Golder, no one offers to
do anything at all to help the
chefs keep their jobs.
"I can't tell a vendor who
they have to hire," Golder
says.
And that was it.
That's not the spirit of the
Stanford I know. The Stan
ford I know doesn't corpora
tize student life at the ex
pense of longstanding com
munity members; it encour
ages and fosters student
leadership, student initiative
and student independence.
The Stanford I know is about
standing up for the little guy,
being accountable and doing
the best we can for every
member of our community.
As I reflect on the end of
an era, I'm deeply disturbed
by something I remember
from the beginning of my in
terview in that ResEd board
room.
"My general directive
from the president, provost
and [Vice-Provost for Stu
dent Affairs] Greg Board
man when I was brought in
four years ago was: 'Clean
up,"' Golder declared.
Suites Dining, she said,
was just "one of hundreds" of
places under ResEd consider
ation "one of hundreds" of
places "where we're looking
at ourselves and saying, 'Are
we doing the best we can by
students? Are we doing the
best we can by Stanford?"'
If firing four loyal com
munity members beloved by
their students; outsourcing
student jobs and responsibil
ity to a for-profit corporation
with a suspicious workers'
rights record and dubious
ties to the Stanford office re
sponsible for its current con
tract; and refusing to solicit
any student opinion before
making crucial decisions
about student welfare is what

"doing the best we can by
students" looks like and if
there truly are hundreds of
places left on Res Ed's omi
nous list then the end of
Suites Dining might be mere
ly the beginning of a new and
darker era in our collective
campus life.
If ResEd gets its way at
Suites, it will be a victory for
bureaucracy, for incompe
tence and probably for the
coffers of SOS, with its hun
dreds of thousands of dollars
in administrative fees. But it
will be a tremendous loss for
everyone else: for students,
for four veteran chefs who will
be forced out of the communi
ty they love and for this great
university we all call home.
It can be hard to stand up
for ourselves. We're all stu
dents; we hold down jobs;
we're athletes and scientists
and writers with tremendous
time commitments on our
hands.
ResEd knows that, and
they take full advantage of it.
As Sullivan, the former
GCDS CEO who spent an
entire exhausting year try
ing to hold off the ResEd
juggernaut, puts it, "It's an
entire office of Stanford Uni
versity against a few stu
dents who don't have the
time or the energy to fight."
ResEd and SOS move
quietly, inexorably and pa
tiently towards a shared goal
that is ultimately detrimental
and destructive to the Stan
ford community.
We cannot we must not
let them go unchallenged.
It's time to take a stand.

Miles Unterreiner 'l2 M. A
'l3 is a Suites resident and
is employed as a hasher in
Suites' dining clubs.

Contact Miles Unterreiner at
milesiil @ Stanford, edu.
Originally published on Feb. 21, 2013.

Frank Hassan has been head chef
in Suites' Bollard Eating Club for
seven years, and he specializes in
making two things: an incredible
breakfast and memories.

It's the former you'll get if you walk into
Bollard between 7:30 and 9:15 a.m. week
day mornings, where dozens of students
chatter under an enormous banner
erected by unknown admirers at some point
over the past decade featuring Frank's
beaming face and the club's informal title:
"The Bollard Empire."
But it's the memories that last, and over
the three years I've eaten and worked at
Suites, I've picked up quite a few: Frank
volunteering to wake up two hours early to
have breakfast ready for the track team by
5:30 a.m. the days we left early for out-of
state meets; Frank and I watching the
Mubarak regime fall on the Bollard TV
while he offered keen political observations
on his native Egypt; the way he enthusiasti
cally greets every male student with a heav
ily accented "my main man!" and every fe
male with a "good morning, beautiful";
Frank giving my mom a big hug when I
brought her to Bollard to visit during my
junior year.

I'll take those memories with me when I
finally leave Stanford this spring. It's hard
enough knowing I may never come back,
but this year is an especially difficult one in
which to say goodbye. That's because next
fall for the first time in eight years
Prank Hassan may not be coming back ei
ther.

♦ ♦♦
Residential Education (ResEd) has four
offices and 39 professional employees, and
the ResEd Central Office is located on the
second floor of Tresidder Union in Suite 9.

Ever since ResEd first assumed respon
sibility for paying Suites Dining's student
workers in the fall of 2010, I'd been visiting
the Central Office every few weeks to pick
up my paycheck for cleaning the kitchens. I
needed the money and I kept on coming
back, so when I walk up the spiral staircase
and through the clear glass door, I smile
and wave to Alyssa Ray, the Central Office's
friendly and familiar administrative assis


MEHMET INONU/The Stanford Daily
Bollard head chef Frank Hassan is
known among Suites residents for both
his breakfast cooking and the connections
he has forged with residents over
the seven years he has worked in Suites.
tant.
This time, however, I'm not here to pick up
a paycheck. I'm here to meet with Dean of
ResEd Deborah Golder, ResEd Associate
Dean Nate Boswell '99 M.A. 'O9 and ResEd
Director of Operations Aaron Buzay.
On Jan. 30, Boswell and Buzay sent an
email to Res Ed's Suites student email list in
forming all residents that next year for the
first time since Suites Dining was founded in
1982 students will no longer run Suites'
four eating clubs. They will be replaced, due
to what the email described as "health and
safety concerns" and "a pressing desire to
lower the board rate," with an outside corpo
ration.

Avanti, Beefeaters, Bollard and Middle
Earth have served food to Suites residents
six days a week for the past 30 years under
student management, which is currently pro
vided by the student-run 501(c)(3) nonprofit
Governor's Corner Dining Societies (GCDS).
One chef runs each eating club and is assisted
by a student CEO and CFO who oversee all
four clubs, eight student managers (two per
eating club) and a team of paid student "hash
ers" (that's me) who clean the kitchens before
and after meals.
Frank has cooked in Bollard for seven
years. Dennis has been head chef in
Beefeaters for 22. Tony has led Avanti for 18
years. And Caroline is new to Middle Earth
this year, having recently moved to the area
with her husband and two kids.
As part of the move to corporate manage
ment, the chefs' contracts are not being re
newed.
I want to know why, and it's the chefs I'm
thinking about as I shake hands and sit down
with Boswell, Buzay and Golder.
The conversation begins pleasantly
enough, although they tend to use a lot of bu
reaucratically vague sentences with the
words "moving forward," "sustainable" and
"conversation" thrown in. But something
Golder says about the selection process for
the new, non-student contractor rubs me the
wrong way.
"We always involve students in decision
making," she says.
This is news to me. In fact, the first time
ResEd notified all Suites residents that they
were considering replacing student leader
ship with a corporate contractor was when
Boswell and Buzay sent the email informing
residents that the decision had already been
made. I decide to point this out.
"How have you involved students in deci
sion-making up to this point? I mean, besides
the managers, have you gotten feedback from
students at Suites on this?"
Buzay looks confused.
"You mean have we run, like, a...a sur
vey?"
"No, I mean what have you done? I know
you haven't run a formal survey, but have you
talked to students at Suites about this
change?"
"So we sent out... we sent out the email to
the Suites community..."
"Right. So up until the point you sent the
email, though, you hadn't talked to any stu
dents in Suites besides the CEO and CFO?"
There's more talk of "moving forward"
and "sustainable business," from which I con
clude that the answer to my initial question is
"no."

Fortunately, a survey that asked Suites
residents if they approved or disapproved of
the proposed change had been sent out to the
Suites email list —just not by Res Ed. I know,
because I created it. It took me approximate
ly five minutes to draft.
149 Suites residents answered the poll,
and 143 of them —95.97 percent disap
proved of Res Ed's decision to contract food
services to an outside vendor and not to re
new the current chefs' contracts. I had made
a comments section available on the survey
form, and I'm interested to know what
Boswell, Buzay and Golder think of the stu
dent opinions they never solicited. I decide to
read a few representative student responses
aloud.
"Number one: 'I am very disappointed
with the decision from ResEd to take over
contracting and management of Suites Din
ing. I do not like that our chefs are being
treated in this manner. They have put years
of dedication and service into their jobs and
Stanford.'
"Number two: 'As far as I know, this deci
sion from ResEd was reached with no consul
tation from the general student community in
Suites, which is undemocratic, unaccountable
and unacceptable.'
"Number three: 'The students who run
Beefeaters and Dennis provide the best din
ing service found on campus. All the outside
corporations that I have seen on campus
come in sub-par to the standards at the Eat
ing Clubs, and I think this is a bureaucratic

and stupid decision.'
"What would you say to that?" I prompt
the ResEd administrators.

There's a very, very long silence.
♦ ♦♦

When I finally walk out of Tresidder Union
Suite 9 an hour later, the first thing I do is
drive home, sit down at my computer and
start writing. I separate my document into
three headings: board bill costs; health and
safety; and financial mismanagement.

Board bill costs
In more than an hour of conversation, the
trio of ResEd administrators had repeatedly
cited Suites' high board bill as a pressing rea
son to seek a less expensive corporate vendor
to provide food. But a closer inspection of
University financial records indicates that
this justification makes little sense.
To begin with, the Suites board bill is no
higher than that of the Row houses, which are
currently managed by private contractor Stu
dent Organized Services, Inc. (SOS) mak
ing it difficult to see how changing to a private
contractor will lower the board rate.

The problem, however, goes deeper: the
University, not GCDS, is itself responsible for
creating the problem it now insists upon step
ping in to fix.
Prior to 2007, the quarterly Suites board
bill was among the lowest on campus at, ac
cording to former GCDS CEO Leah Sawyer
'O7, approximately $1,200 per student per
quarter. Suites Dining also provided more
meals per week —l7 than the more ex
pensive Row houses, which typically provided
10.

In 2008, however, the University com
bined the Suites Dining Society bill which
covers food—with the University Housing
bill, which covers housing maintenance costs.
Since then, Student Housing a division
of Residential & Dining Enterprises (R&DE)
has dramatically raised its prices, forcing
up the total costs that appeal 1 on the Suites
board bill. From the 2011-12 academic year to
the 2012-13 academic year alone, Housing
raised its prices by 25 percent. Housing main
tenance now takes up just under a quarter of
Suites residents' room and board expenses at
approximately $5OO per resident per quarter.
Res Ed's attempt to fix Suites' rising board
rate made matters even worse. According to
former GCDS CEO J.T. Sullivan 'll, ResEd
responded to Housing-driven Suites board
bill inflation by setting an overall room and
board price cap of $2,000 per student per
quarter. Since ResEd has little to no power to
limit the price charged by R&DE, however,
the Housing portion of the board bill kept
climbing resulting in smaller and smaller
percentages of student money going to GCDS
for food and a budget crunch for GCDS man
agers.
The budgetary strains caused by ResEd
and R&DE were exacerbated, moreover, by
additional overhead costs imposed by the
University. In 2009 a year after the Hous
ing bill was merged with the Suites Dining
bill ResEd began auditing and regulating
GCDS financial operations. With Res Ed's
heightened involvement came two additional
categories on Suites students' board bill: "Ad
min" and "Overhead."
Prior to the beginning of Res Ed's
takeover in 2009, Suites was run entirely by
students they collected students' board
bills, paid chefs and hashers and even distrib
uted room keys. But ever since ResEd
stepped in in 2009, students have been paying
ResEd administrators to reread Suites finan
cial documents, incurring overhead costs that
further drive up the board bill total.
Those total costs were $161.57 per student
in 2011-12. Multiplied by the roughly 260 stu
dents who live in Suites, the total amount of
overhead paid last year to ResEd administra
tors to do the work student financial man
agers formerly did themselves is about
$42,000 more student money, as a 2011-12
Suites financial manager (FM) I interviewed
put it, "disappearing down the black hole that
is Residential Education."
According to Avanti chef Anton "Tony"
Dietz, who has 19 years of experience in food
services administration, any outside contrac
tor is likely to levy additional administrative
fees amounting to between eight and 11 per
cent of Suites' total budget. Suites' budget in
2011-12 totaled approximately $l.l million.
Assuming administrative charges at the typi
cal corporate rate, Suites residents next year
will be shelling out an additional $lOO,OOO in
surcharges.

Health and safety
During that interview in Suite 9, Boswell,
Buzay and Golder repeatedly advanced stu
dent health and safety as a "considerable con
cern" but failed to mention almost any specif
ic instances of health and safety violations.
The only specific evidence Golder offered was
a claim that multiple fires had recently bro
ken out at Suites.

"If we weren't fixing all the fires that
come," exclaimed Golder at one point, "they
[GCDS] wouldn't be getting by."

There was, in fact, only one fire at Suites
recently, not "all the fires that come," and it
was caused by two inexperienced Suites resi
dents — not student managers using the
Avanti kitchen to boil a large pot of hot oil on
a Saturday evening in May 2012 in a disas
trous attempt to fry empanadas for Cinco de
Mayo. Fortunately, a chef was hosting a free
movie-and-food night for residents on his day
off in a neighboring club the kind of thing
Suites chefs tend to do. He and a student
manager immediately rushed in and put out
the blaze with the club's fire extinguisher,
which GCDS had properly placed according
to fire code.
No outside contractor, short of completely
barring student access to the kitchen, could
have prevented that fire, and switching to a
corporate vendor will do nothing to prevent
the possibility of similar fires in the future.
Suites has a similar record in other areas
of health and safety. I was hashing in
Beefeaters on Jan. 15 when the Santa Clara
County public health inspector came to visit
this quarter. She left just as I finished clean
ing, having found zero health violations. The
other three clubs were also inspected that
day, with two violations found in Avanti, two
in Bollard and four in Middle Earth (one of
which was caused by Housing's failure to re
pair the salad bar). Suites' average number of
violations was two per kitchen, and none were
classified as "major."
The average number of food inspection vi
olations for Row houses —which are run by
exactly the sort of contractor that will be
moving into Suites next year —is 3.83 per
house. Ten locations on campus, including
Row houses managed by corporate contrac
tor SOS, were found responsible for "major"
violations.
Records of documented Suites health vio
lations in the past support this year's results.
After health inspectors visited Suites in the
spring of 2012, GCDS' then-CEO Sullivan
met with Boswell and Buzay to determine
who was responsible for the 26 reported vio
lations. Almost all of the violations were mi
nor among the worst appeal's to have been
some mold in an ice machine. Other violations
included a broken paper towel dispenser, the
ice scooper not being in its plastic cup and the
cleaning solution being too strong.
Boswell, Buzay and Sullivan collectively
assigned responsibility for each violation to
one of three groups: University Housing,
GCDS and ResEd and/or its student manag
er employees (ResEd now pays student man
agers, while GCDS' pay to chefs and its CEO
and CFO remains an entirely separate cate
gory). Of the 26 total violations, Housing was
found responsible for 10 including the
mold in the ice machine and ResEd and/or
its student manager employees were found to
have committed 16.
GCDS the student nonprofit that
ResEd now wants to eliminate was held
responsible for zero.
Financial mismanagement
In our interview, Golder had been espe
cially emphatic about student mismanage
ment of money. Arguing that students had
"run [Suites] into the ground" amid "years of
mismanagement," she claimed that "the only
reason they [GCDS] are getting by is because
we're supporting them, frankly. And if we
weren't, they wouldn't be getting by."
According to two financial managers who
worked in Suites prior to Res Ed's takeover in
2009, GCDS had never gone over budget or
had to borrow money from the University.
When I pressed her, Golder offered only one
piece of evidence to support her assertion.
According to Golder, ResEd had advanced
GCDS "tens of thousands of dollars" from
Res Ed's own budget that has to be paid back
at the end of the 2012-13 academic year. But
this the only evidence ResEd has provided
thus far of student financial mismanagement
is, according to student managers, flat-out
wrong.

Suites managers say ResEd allowed
GCDS advance access to money from its own
budget this year —in other words, Suites
spent some of its own money ahead of sched
ule. No money needs to be paid back to
ResEd at the end of the year. There is no
loan for students to pay off.
Boswell and Buzay also noted that, prior
to ResEd involvement, GCDS lacked a rec
ognized tax ID number and liability insur
ance. That much is true. But former GCDS
CEO Sullivan oversaw the 2011 purchase of a
liability policy valued at $2 million and incor
porated GCDS as a 501(c)(3) nonprofit, meet
ing Res Ed's requirements.
Moreover, several student managers re
ported that ResEd officials have argued that
the four Suites chefs are overpaid. But last
year's chef contract reveals that an academic
year's pay for a chef at Suites in 2011-12 was
$51,182. That's hardly a gold mine in the Bay
Area let alone Palo Alto especially since
ResEd, according to Avanti chef Tony, al
ready mandated a wage freeze for Suites
chefs three years ago, eliminating the annual
cost-of-living increase formerly granted by
GCDS.

In any case, Suites chefs deserve compen
sation appropriate for their skill level and ex
perience. Tony was born in Germany in 1946
and began his apprenticeship to a baker at age
14. Since then, he has catered White House
functions on the top floor of Washington Hos
pital Center with President Jimmy Carter in
attendance, personally overseen food produc
tion for the 1977 Hollywood release party of
the original "Star Wars," crafted all the food
for the set of "The Love Boat" and worked at
elite San Francisco hotels from the Hilton to
the Fairmont to the Stanford Court Renais
sance.

He was hired as an executive chef for the
Saga Corporation by Ernie Arbuckle '33
MBA '36 after whom the Graduate School
of Business' Arbuckle Dining Pavilion is
named and taught at the California Culi
nary Academy. He shook hands with Princess
Grace of Monaco and Charlton Heston and
catered parties for Ronald Reagan's Chair
man of the Council of Economic Advisers
Michael Boskin, who is currently a Stanford
economics professor.
That's Tony. He's been working in Avanti
for 18 years, and ResEd is not going to renew
his contract. And don't even get me started on
Caroline, Dennis and Frank.

If there's anything else that GCDS has
done wrong, ResEd wouldn't tell me. The
three administrators didn't even seem to
know how changing to corporate manage
ment would theoretically solve the nonexist
ent problems they think they've identified.
When I pressed Golder on how exactly
ResEd knows switching to an outside con
tractor will lower the board rate, improve
health and safety or enhance the quality of
management, her response was simple: "We
don't."
♦ ♦♦
When I walk in to see Frank right after
breakfast, he's already busy preparing lunch,
and I already know what he's going to say.
"Miles, my main man, how we doin'?"
As we chat, I notice that he's posted Renee
Donovan 'ls's recent Stanford Daily profile of
him to the kitchen's refrigerator door. Some
one has drawn little stars around it. During
our conversation, two students drop in to
cheerfully give Frank more copies. He adds
them to a stack he's gradually accumulating
on the table.
Frank has been told nothing by ResEd of
ficials other than that his contract will not be
renewed at the end of the year. When I ask
how he feels about the possibility of losing his
job, he abruptly stops chopping vegetables
and looks directly at me.
"Listen to this. I enjoy when I come here
in the morning and I cook for everybody. I
feel more happy than ... Listen, they are hap
py with me."
"Everybody loves you, Frank."
"And I love them more than what they love
me. Believe me. I swear to God. You know,
that's why I come so early in the morning."
Frank seems to care only about his stu
dents, and he doesn't want to talk about him
self or his problems. I have to ask several
times before he finally opens up about how
hard this will be for him.
"I'm now going to be 59 years old. How I
save money for my retirement? Do you un
derstand me?"
I did. Frank had stalled his retirement
planning a ways back, and every time I came
in for breakfast, I would ask which new place
he had in mind. Hawaii and the South Seas
were the dream, or maybe the California
coast. But on $51,182 a year, Arizona made
more sense, and it was Arizona we had talked
about the most.
"This make my life ..." He searches for
the right word. "Worried. Now they come
over here, they cut my salary, and they ask
me, 'Be smiling.' How can I be smiling when I
am worried about my rent?"
I don't know how to answer that one.
While I'm busy thinking of something to say,
Frank shuffles over to the chef's closet. "Let
me show you something, Miles."
He unfolds a single sheet of white paper
and hands it to me.
"Dear Mr. Hassan," the paper reads, "Be
cause of the increased cost of maintenance,
taxes, insurance, utilities, we must reluctant
ly inform you that your rent is being in
creased by $lOO.OO per month. Effective
01/01/2013 your new monthly rent will be
$1,800.00."
Frank shrugs. "The landlord, he wants his
money."
Overpaid. Right.
But Frank only truly begins to look wor
ried when he starts, hesitantly, to talk about
Student Organized Services.
♦ ♦♦
Student Organized Services, Inc. (SOS),
contrary to its name and friendly-looking
website, is not, and never has been, run by
students. The for-profit, privately held com
pany, headquartered in Redwood City, cur
rently operates food-related labor services
for the entire Row a job contracted to it by
Res Ed.
SOS's CEO is Nick Peters '94, who
worked for ResEd before founding SOS in
September of 1994. In 1995, Peters became
CEO of another company: Stanford Eating
Clubs (SEC), which took over management of
the old, student-run Toy on Eating Clubs
while SOS began to expand, house by house,
onto the Row.

In 2005, Zac Sargeant took the helm at
SEC as its CEO and managing director. He
was its last CEO the formerly student-run
Toyon Eating Clubs, founded in 1892, shut
down in 2009 after 107 years of continuous
operation.
In 2008 according to his resume, while
still serving as CEO of SEC Sargeant was
hired as assistant director of ResEd, where
he works to this day. His office is just down
the hallway from the boardroom in Tresidder
Union where I had my interview with
Boswell, Buzay and Golder.
For one year, Sargeant simultaneously
worked for a company that receives Universi
ty dining contracts and for the Stanford office
responsible for selecting dining contractors.
Sargeant is also Peters' brother-in-law.

According to Tony, SOS has repeatedly bid
to administer Suites Dining since 1995, the
year Peters assumed control at SEC and
Tony's first year as head chef in Avanti.
GCDS student leadership felt comfortable
running things on their own, according to
Tony and refused to contract their own jobs
out to SOS.

Sawyer, the former student manager and

Their own words
"For a long, long time, SOS and the
University were interested in taking
over Governor's Corner."
Colin Wessells 'OB,
former Avanti FM
"They were not involved. At all."
ResEd Dean Deborah Golder,
on SOS' involvement in Suites
"How can I be smiling when I am
worried about my rent?"
Bollard Chef Frank Hassan


LORENA RINCON-CRUZ/The Stanford Daily
143 of 149 Suites residents surveyed disapproved of ResEd's decision to contract management
of the formerly student-run Suites Dining to an outside corporation.
GCDS CEO who worked at Suites from 2005
to 2007, remembered Peters as a shadowy fig
ure whose precise source of authority was un
clear but who frequently attempted to wield
that authority as a bludgeon against student
independence.
"I don't even remember why Nick Peters
was an authority to us, but he was," she re
called. "Mostly he was just trying to tell us
'no.' Special dinners we were going to put on,
what we could and couldn't do with our money
... but he wasn't our boss, so I don't think we
really took him all that seriously."
According to Sawyer, Peters clearly dis
liked Suites' tradition of student freedom but
lacked the power to do anything about it.
"We just always knew him as some guy
who was clearly uncomfortable with us having
authority as students," she remembered. "But
at that time, he didn't have the authority to ac
tually tell us what to do, so we were always
just kind of annoyed by him."
Colin Wessells 'OB M.S. 'l2 Ph.D. 'l2
who said the business experience he gained as
financial manager in Avanti from 2006 to 2008
eventually helped him become CEO of his own
Silicon Valley startup has a clear memory
of Peters as a businessman who repeatedly of
fered the clubs a bad deal.
"Every year or so he would come over to
Suites and see if, now that there was new stu
dent management there, they would be inter
ested in partnering with SOS," Wessells re
called.
Student managers, however, weren't buy
ing it.
"They would look over the materials and
documents that SOS would present, and usu
ally it wouldn't be a good deal," Wessells not
ed. "Typically, the terms that [Peters] would
be offering would be, 'Okay, you guys are go
ing to keep managing the clubs, but we're go
ing to provide oversight and a fee.'"
According to Wessells, that proposed ad
ministrative fee typically amounted to be
tween $lOO and $2OO per resident per quarter
on top of the existing board bill. Multiplied by
the roughly 260 students in Suites, SOS's bid
for service, if successful, would have netted
Peters' firm between $78,000 and $156,000 in
student money every year.
"For a long, long time," Wessells conclud
ed, "SOS and the University were interested
in taking over Governor's Corner."
But a long tradition of student independ
ence, and a lack of concrete administrative
power over Suites Dining, stood in their way.
Then Peters' brother-in-law joined ResEd,
and the balance of power began to shift.

Potential conflict of interest
It was not until 2009 the year after
ResEd hired Sargeant as its assistant director
that, according to chefs and former student
managers, the threat of an SOS takeover be
came realistic.
First ResEd began regulating Suites' fi
nancial operations. Administrators then as
sumed control of paying student hashers
and began paying them less. Then ResEd cut
a managerial position from each club, reduc
ing the total number of student managers
from 12 to the current eight.
When chefs and managers, fearful of a
complete SOS takeover, finally discovered the
relationship between Sargeant and Peters in
the spring of 2011, ResEd denied the exis
tence of any conflict of interest.
But oddly for a situation in which ResEd
claimed that there was no conflict of interest,
Sargeant who had initially served as GCD-
S's primary contact in ResEd suddenly
stopped showing up to meetings with GCDS
managers, and the websites connecting
Sargeant to Peters were erased.
ResEd eventually abandoned its attempt
to replace student leadership with an outside
contractor, and Boswell admitted that Suites
managers had "worked diligently over the
course of the summer to meet all relevant, up
graded University requirements." Captained
by Sullivan, then the GCDS CEO, Suites man
agers won their right to remain independent.
Or so they thought.
In our interview, Golder denied that SOS
had ever been involved, in any capacity, with
Suites Dining during her tenure.
"They were not involved," she said em
phatically when I asked. "At all."
Opaque, overbearing and indifferent
Frank used to work for SOS. He left in
2007 when, a few weeks into the school year,
he was recruited away by then-GCDS CEO
Sawyer to work in Bollard instead.
"The students here, they came, they took
me away from them," Frank remembered
fondly. "They pay me more."
"Better benefits?"
"Better everything! You understand? I
wasn't happy with [SOS]."
Sawyer puts it more bluntly.
"Basically, he was abused," she recalled.
"He would come in, his kitchen would be a dis
aster, there would be no one for him to go to ...
he was incredibly unhappy."
"If you don't treat your employees well,"
she reflected with thinly veiled anger about
Frank's mistreatment under SOS, "they're
going to find another job."
Frank, in typical fashion, only expresses
concerns about his students, and especially
about what might happen to them after an
SOS takeover at Suites next year.
"One thing I know for sure," he said, "is
they [SOS] don't care about the students."
"Not at all?"
"At all. Just money."
Suites Dining is the largest remaining
student-run, independent eating location on
campus, with approximately 260 residents
and an annual operating budget of over $l.l
million. Whichever company wins that con
tract next year will be flush with cash cash
ResEd requires students to pay, and cash
from which any for-profit corporation will
skim significant fees.
If the past is any indication of the future,
that corporation will likely be SOS.
The entanglement between Stanford's Of
fice of Residential Education and SOS is
complex and runs deep. When I contacted
Peters to request a personal interview for
this story, he declined to speak with me and
referred me instead to Buzay in ResEd, who
handles all of SOS's media inquiries.
Boswell mentioned in our interview that
he himself was "connected" to SOS, but does
n't specify how. Sargeant, the onetime Gener

al Manager of SEC and Peters' brother-in
law, was still reluctant to talk.
"I believe that Aaron and Nate can pro
vide you with all the information requested,"
he wrote in response to my emailed request
for an interview.

When Avanti chef Tony said there's
"something insidious about this whole thing,"
these are the kind of connections that sup
port his suspicion. Wessells, the former
Avanti financial manager, speculated that
money might be changing hands somewhere.
"What it smells of to me is basically that
there are people in the University that have
their own motives," Wessells mused. "And
whether they stand to profit from taking
over the clubs ... maybe that could be the
case."
Despite Golder's assertion that a "Uni
versity-required" bidding process governs
the selection of contracted vendors for stu
dent residences, SOS did not have to compet
itively bid to manage the Row for over 15
years.

The first year for which ResEd held a bid
ding process for Row management was 2011-
12. In the year after receiving that bid ac
cording to members of the Stanford Labor
Action Coalition (SLAC), a student-led work
ers' advocacy group SOS slashed Row
workers' health benefits by half and reduced
their bonuses from $l,OOO to a maximum of
$4O.
Stanford's Living Wage Policy states
clearly that workers on campus shall have
"the right to self-organization, to form, join,
or assist labor organizations, to bargain col
lectively ... and to engage in other concerted
activities for the purpose of collective bar
gaining or other mutual aid or protection."
But when SLAC held a Worker-Student
Council meeting on Jan. 16, 2012, to provide
a "safe space" for workers seeking relief
from SOS benefit cuts advertised in both
Spanish and English Sargeant, a ResEd
employee, barged in without introducing
himself a few minutes into the meeting, ac
cused the workers of organizing a strike
(which SLAC had never discussed) and "in
timidated" the workers into silence.
"They seemed to know who he was," re
called SLAC member Laurel Fish 'l4. "His
accusations were very aggressive."
"We tried to have a conversation with [the
workers]," Fish remembered, "but it was
clear that they weren't expressing their con
cerns and didn't feel like they could talk
openly."
It remains unclear why a ResEd adminis
trator interfered in a private meeting of
workers contracted by a third-party corpora
tion and why ResEd paid so little attention to
the Living Wage Policy's protection of "the
right to self-organization."
SOS's financial operations for the Row
are almost completely opaque to house resi
dents. When I met with a Row financial man
ager to go over his house's finances, he was
surprised to learn that Suites residents have
full and transparent access to their entire
board bill. ResEd, he said, takes all the mon
ey from his residents' room and board pay
ment, gives him about $B5O per resident per
quarter to spend on either food or social dues
and doesn't tell him what they do with the
rest.
"Even as a financial manager, I don't see
where half the student money goes," he said.
I end up having to go directly to Buzay for
that information. The numbers, which Row fi
nancial managers never see, are clear.
Total board bill costs in Suites and on the
Row are almost exactly the same $5,999
per year for Suites residents and $5,992 for
residents on the Row. But there's one major
difference: Governor's Corner Dining Soci
eties deliver seven more meals per week than
Row houses at almost exactly the same price.
Row residents receive 10 meals a week,
typically lunch and dinner Monday through
Friday. Suites residents, by contrast, get 17:
everything the Row provides, including open
kitchen and snacks, plus a custom-cooked
Frank breakfast extravaganza every morn
ing and brunch and dinner on Sundays.
Suites student managers provide those
seven extra meals, moreover, on a lower food
budget. GCDS spends about $5O less per
quarter per student on food than SOS (an av
erage of $726 for GCDS and $775 for SOS).
And they provide those meals as any stu
dent who has had Dennis' lobster, Frank's
filet mignon sandwiches, Caroline's Mexican
or Tony's chocolate mousse can tell you
without compromising quality, a feat Tony
says he accomplishes by buying only "what's
seasonal and freshly available" and "minimiz
ing or eliminating waste." That's not even in
cluding the quarterly Gala Dinners and Spe
cial Dinners every Suites eating club delivers
or the spring quarter Suites-wide Special
Party, for which student managers bring in
live music, ice sculptures and entertainment.
And as a student-run nonprofit, all the
money Suites saves on food goes to better pay
for student hashers and then- chefs, rather
than the bank account of a for-profit company.
Frank made $9OO per week for 33 weeks
of work about $29,700 annually when
he first started at SOS. He makes $20,000
more than that at Suites, plus 100 percent
coverage of his (and his dependents') health
care and dental costs.
In "Hiring a Chef," the sample advertise
ment SOS CEO Peters encourages student
managers on the Row to post when searching
for new chefs, Peters suggests pay of
"$BOO/week DOE [depending on experience]
+ negotiable benefits." That's $26,400 per
year about half what Suites chefs make.
Part-time student hashers at Suites make
$l5 an hour and used to make even more be
fore Res Ed-enforced pay cuts took their toll.
Even after the ResEd pay cuts, Suites hash
ers still make more than the Stanford-man
dated living wage. Buzay, however, said that
Peters the CEO of the organization re
sponsible for food-service labor operations
for the entire Row "didn't know" that
Stanford's Living Wage Policy, enacted in
2007, "even existed" until four years after it
came into effect. In 2011, SOS was finally
forced to conform to the policy, which man
dates that all campus workers, including
those hired by third-party contractors, be
paid at least $12.40 an hour when also provid
ed with benefits.

But there's no better way to compare the
performance of SOS and GCDS than to talk

to someone who's experienced both. When I
finally sat down with a former Suites hasher
who currently lives on the Row, his answer is
clear: GCDS outperforms SOS in every area
of food service.
"The food is better, the open kitchen is
better everything is way better," he said
of Suites Dining. He thinks it's "stupid" of
ResEd to consider contracting management
of Suites to any outside company, much less
SOS.
When I told him one of Res Ed's ostensi
ble justifications for eliminating GCDS is
health and safety concerns, he laughed in dis
belief.
"We have so many health violations," he
said of the SOS-managed Row house in
which he currently lives. "The number of vi
olations we have ..." He trailed off, shaking
his head.
When I asked him to list some of the spe
cific health violations in his house, he de
murred, afraid that his kitchen staff might
lose their jobs.
For the 2011-12 bidding process for the
Row the first it had ever held ResEd
conducted a closed bid in which, according to
Buzay, four vendors submitted offers: Ara
mark, College Chefs, Sodexo and SOS.
Sodexo is a French multinational corpora
tion with 16 billion euros in annual consoli
dated revenue. It employs 413,000 people
worldwide in 80 countries and serves 50 mil
lion consumers daily. Aramark operates in 22
countries, had revenues of $12.5 billion last
year and is the 23rd-largest employer on the
Fortune 500. Both companies have come un
der intense criticism for unethical business
and labor practices. And the first hit on a
Google search for "College Chefs reviews" is
an entry in the Ripoff Report detailing the
company's practice of "profiteering from stu
dents and their parents."
When I ask Buzay which criteria ResEd
uses to select vendors, he says they choose "a
vendor that can come in and abide by the stu
dent-management model. Working closely
with students, work closely with the commu
nity ... so we're not mass producing food."
First of all, that description sounds an
awful lot like GCDS, which is entirely made
up of students from their own living commu
nity
And second, in a closed bidding process in
which SOS's only three competitors were two
multinationals that have no experience work
ing closely with students on Stanford's cam
pus and a third company with a terrible rep
utation for its work on college campuses,
SOS's selection to manage the Row was like
ly a foregone conclusion.
Boswell, Buzay and Golder claimed not to
know who will be selected as the bidders for
next year's Suites contract. But given
Res Ed's past bidding practices on the Row,
there's little reason to believe the bidding
process for Suites will go any differently.
Growing burden of ResEd oversight
When I asked her about Res Ed's height
ened oversight of GCDS since administrators
first intervened in 2009, Dean Golder insist
ed that Res Ed's involvement has been pro
ductive and beneficial.
"We've done our best to help them be suc
cessful," she declared. "And that's just factu
ally accurate."
But according to everyone who isn't a
ResEd administrator, increased ResEd in
terference has been actively detrimental to
the effective student management of Suites
Dining. Not a single manager I interviewed
could think of even one way in which in
creased ResEd oversight had made their job
easier.
The number of ways managers say it has
made their jobs harder, however, is remark
able. According to several different man
agers, all of whom wished to remain anony
mous, ResEd meddling has made club man
agement dramatically less efficient, more ex
pensive and less effective.
One of the most frustrating changes for
managers has been Res Ed's enforced sepa

ration of club expenditures into food
which student managers are allowed to pur
chase themselves using the GCDS account
and capital items like cups, plates and club
improvements, which must be either ap
proved and paid for by ResEd (using GCDS
money) or purchased using personal student
funds and submitted for reimbursement.
According to one student manager, the
most significant problem with Res Ed's new
policy before which student managers
were free to allocate funds as they saw fit
has been the delayed payment of vendors
who provide both food and capital items. Stu
dent managers will pay for the food portion
of the invoice immediately, but ResEd will
take several weeks to pay for the capital
items, leaving vendors complaining that
they've been underpaid.
Reimbursement the other Res Ed-e
nforced way for student managers to purchase
capital items has proven even more incon
venient, mostly because ResEd appears to
consistently run weeks behind schedule. One
manager purchased a new stereo for his club
in early December using personal funds and
still hasn't received a ResEd reimbursement
check. In September, ResEd administrators
forgot to pay Bollard's water bill, and Frank
had to pay the cost out of pocket. He finally
got a reimbursement check for $248.73 on
Jan. 24.
In Middle Earth, student managers keep
a running list of things R&DE to whom,
according to the board bill, Suites residents
pay total annual maintenance fees of over
$380,000 has promised to fix but hasn't.
There are currently 12 items on that list,
ranging from the salad bar to the stove tap to
the mop rack.
When multiple fix-it requests went unan
swered, managers had to resort to personal
emails and phone calls. Many of the requests
for maintenance have gone unanswered since
fall quarter. As one current Suites manager I
interviewed fumed, "Housing does absolute
ly nothing."
Last year, R&DE installed a shiny new
dishwasher in Middle Earth. Unlike the oth
er three clubs' dishwashers, which despite
being old and timeworn work perfectly fine,
the R&DE-installed Middle Earth dishwash
er immediately broke, and Housing still has
n't successfully fixed it. The symbolism is as
tonishing.
In Fall 2010, ResEd decided to assume
control of paying student hashers tradi
tionally a responsibility of individual club
managers, who would write hashers checks
directly from their eating club account. Be
fore the takeover, I remember a student
manager depositing my hashing check every
two weeks, like clockwork, in the furthest
left-hand drawer in the Avanti kitchen, be
neath the cupboard.
When ResEd took over, they failed to pay
student hashers for the next two months. Ad
ministrators only resumed payment after
students pointed out that not paying your
workers is a violation of California labor law.
"It's amazing how incompetent the so
called 'professionals' can be," grumbled a par
ticularly displeased Suites manager.
ResEd has even taken GCDS money out
right, without any warning or explanation.
According to a 2011-12 club financial manag
er, each eating club used to maintain a $4,000
"carryover account" money saved up "just
in case a chef got sick or we had to have some
big capital expenditure ... as like a buffer."
"We had that money saved up," the finan
cial manager said. "I sent out some checks at
the end of the year to pay off summer bills
and stuff like that... and then I ended up
coming back to school and getting invoices
saying I had unpaid bills from the summer,
and I found out that the checks I had sent
had bounced because the University had
swept our accounts and taken out all the
money that we had saved for carryover, and
[they] just never gave it back. It was just
gone."


MEHMET INONU/The Stanford Daily
Avanti head chef Anton "Tony" Dietz has served Suites residents for 18 years. Born in
Germany in 1946, he began an apprenticeship to a baker at age 14 and has since catered
White House functions for then-President Jimmy Carter and Hollywood premieres.
ResEd has also restrict
ed the number of hashers
who can be on GCDS's pay
roll, drastically limiting the
flexibility of students' work
schedules. Two club man
agers complained that find
ing replacement hashers
when their current one has a
midterm or an athletic event
has become much more diffi
cult since the pool of avail
able hashers is now much
smaller.
Even Res Ed's own stu
dent employees express
frustration with the appar
ent incompetence and ques
tionable work ethic of their
superiors. One current
Suites Resident Assistant
(RA) complained that
ResEd Student Affairs Offi
cer Tiffany Taylor, who is
supposed to make regular
supervisory visits to Suites,
has been conspicuously ab
sent all year.
"She's supposed to come
over," said the RA, "but she
never actually does."
If there is any misman
agement and incompetence
going on at Suites, it's not on
the part of students. It's by
ResEd and R&DE.
It is only when I began
investigating its chronic un
derperformance that ResEd
finally began to grind, slow
ly, into gear. Two days after I
sent an email to Boswell,
Buzay and Golder request
ing an interview about
Suites, all four club man
agers suddenly got an un
precedentedly friendly, but
characteristically vague,
email from ResEd adminis
trator Jo Jaffe 'O9.
"I just wanted to check in

and see how everything was
going for you all," Jaffe
wrote. "Please let me know
if there's anything you have
questions on or need help
with."
Student managers weren't
fooled.
"It was definitely related
to the takeover," said one
club manager.
And only in the last
month has Keith Santiago,
head of Governor's Corner
Housing, finally become
more responsive to student
requests for help.
"We are skeptical as to
his motives," said another
student manager.
♦ ♦♦
Prank keeps his letters in
a Macy's bag in the back of
his old blue Lincoln. There
are 66 of them. Most are
thank you cards: cards from
students, cards from em
ployers, Christmas cards
from generations of Suites
managers, cards in neatly
written Spanish I wish I
could understand. Some are
invitations to long-ago Stan
ford graduations from for
mer students who've left
Prank's beloved kitchen and
moved on.
When Frank puts the tat
tered old Macy's bag in my
hands, he does so with a care
I've never seen before. He
tells me that if I open a card, I
must make sure to put it back
in the exact same envelope, un
damaged and in order.
"Be very careful, Miles,"
he says.
I smile. "I've got it, Prank."
"No," he says, with a fierce
urgency. "These letters are
the most important things to
me."
These letters really are the
most important things to him.
And so I take great care as I
look slowly through the let
ters, kept as pristine as you

could possibly keep 66 letters
in an old Macy's bag.
Certain phrases stand out
from the flow of thanks from
Frank's former students.
"'You're like an uncle to me."
"I'm so touched beyond
words that you remembered
my birthday"
"To the man who is always
right, who gives the best ad
vice and who makes my stom
ach content."
Frank never lets his let
ters go. Next year, this Uni
versity won't be able to say
the same about Frank.
♦♦♦
"Residential Education,"
states the office's website, "is
about the people it serves...
We are concerned with the ex
perience of indvidual [sic] res
idents and how to best serve
each of them."
As I speak with Suites res
ident after Suites resident, I
can't help but think that
ResEd has forgotten that cen
tral mission. Almost unani
mously, the residents I talk to
are shocked and appalled to
discover that their four chefs'
contacts are not being re
newed a decision about
which students were not con
sulted— and that students
will no longer lead Suites' din
ing clubs next year.
"It makes me really mad,"
says one current resident, with
simple honesty.
For others, the loss of a stu
dent job at Suites threatens to
produce financial hardship.
"Without hashing," says a
student in Suites who is cur
rently on financial aid, "I would
have no income at a11... I'd be
getting deeper and deeper into
the hole with my student
loans."
(Boswell, Buzay and Golder
say that some kind of student
management will be allowed
under the new contractor —but
any student managers that re

main will work for the new com
pany, not a student-run non
profit, and there will be, accord
ing to current student man
agers, no paid student hashing
next year.)
I'm reminded that 95.97
percent of Suites residents
opposed a change about
which they were never con
sulted and only recently in
formed.
When I reach out to Suites
alumni, the reaction is, if any
thing, even more pained.
They're dismayed to learn
that the place they loved has
changed so much.
"I always thought it was
the greatest food on the plan
et," a 2005-07 resident re
members wistfully.
"The quality of the food,
and the cheapness of it, was
better than anything the Uni
versity was able to offer," a
student who lived and worked
in Suites from 2006-08, before
ResEd began its expensive
and debilitating takeover, re
calls.
I'm also reminded about
the importance of community,
and how that word means
much more than simply a
group of students. Our com
munity is made up of every
one who makes Stanford so
quintessentially Stanford
from President Hennessy
down to the last kitchen work
er, from star athletic coaches
and tenured professors to the
four chefs who, as one sad
dened survey respondent put
it, "make Suites what it is."
When I ask Golder
whether she considers it im
portant to bring Caroline,
Dennis, Frank and Tony back
next year, she says, "If it
works out, I think that's
great." She suggests that if
students wanted to help, we
should write a letter of rec
ommendation for the chefs to
the new corporate contractor.

Between Boswell, Buzay
and Golder, no one offers to
do anything at all to help the
chefs keep their jobs.
"I can't tell a vendor who
they have to hire," Golder
says.
And that was it.
That's not the spirit of the
Stanford I know. The Stan
ford I know doesn't corpora
tize student life at the ex
pense of longstanding com
munity members; it encour
ages and fosters student
leadership, student initiative
and student independence.
The Stanford I know is about
standing up for the little guy,
being accountable and doing
the best we can for every
member of our community.
As I reflect on the end of
an era, I'm deeply disturbed
by something I remember
from the beginning of my in
terview in that ResEd board
room.
"My general directive
from the president, provost
and [Vice-Provost for Stu
dent Affairs] Greg Board
man when I was brought in
four years ago was: 'Clean
up,"' Golder declared.
Suites Dining, she said,
was just "one of hundreds" of
places under ResEd consider
ation "one of hundreds" of
places "where we're looking
at ourselves and saying, 'Are
we doing the best we can by
students? Are we doing the
best we can by Stanford?"'
If firing four loyal com
munity members beloved by
their students; outsourcing
student jobs and responsibil
ity to a for-profit corporation
with a suspicious workers'
rights record and dubious
ties to the Stanford office re
sponsible for its current con
tract; and refusing to solicit
any student opinion before
making crucial decisions
about student welfare is what

"doing the best we can by
students" looks like and if
there truly are hundreds of
places left on Res Ed's omi
nous list then the end of
Suites Dining might be mere
ly the beginning of a new and
darker era in our collective
campus life.
If ResEd gets its way at
Suites, it will be a victory for
bureaucracy, for incompe
tence and probably for the
coffers of SOS, with its hun
dreds of thousands of dollars
in administrative fees. But it
will be a tremendous loss for
everyone else: for students,
for four veteran chefs who will
be forced out of the communi
ty they love and for this great
university we all call home.
It can be hard to stand up
for ourselves. We're all stu
dents; we hold down jobs;
we're athletes and scientists
and writers with tremendous
time commitments on our
hands.
ResEd knows that, and
they take full advantage of it.
As Sullivan, the former
GCDS CEO who spent an
entire exhausting year try
ing to hold off the ResEd
juggernaut, puts it, "It's an
entire office of Stanford Uni
versity against a few stu
dents who don't have the
time or the energy to fight."
ResEd and SOS move
quietly, inexorably and pa
tiently towards a shared goal
that is ultimately detrimental
and destructive to the Stan
ford community.
We cannot we must not
let them go unchallenged.
It's time to take a stand.

Miles Unterreiner 'l2 M. A
'l3 is a Suites resident and
is employed as a hasher in
Suites' dining clubs.

Contact Miles Unterreiner at
milesiil @ Stanford, edu.
Originally published on Feb. 21, 2013.

Frank Hassan has been head chef
in Suites' Bollard Eating Club for
seven years, and he specializes in
making two things: an incredible
breakfast and memories.

It's the former you'll get if you walk into
Bollard between 7:30 and 9:15 a.m. week
day mornings, where dozens of students
chatter under an enormous banner
erected by unknown admirers at some point
over the past decade featuring Frank's
beaming face and the club's informal title:
"The Bollard Empire."
But it's the memories that last, and over
the three years I've eaten and worked at
Suites, I've picked up quite a few: Frank
volunteering to wake up two hours early to
have breakfast ready for the track team by
5:30 a.m. the days we left early for out-of
state meets; Frank and I watching the
Mubarak regime fall on the Bollard TV
while he offered keen political observations
on his native Egypt; the way he enthusiasti
cally greets every male student with a heav
ily accented "my main man!" and every fe
male with a "good morning, beautiful";
Frank giving my mom a big hug when I
brought her to Bollard to visit during my
junior year.

I'll take those memories with me when I
finally leave Stanford this spring. It's hard
enough knowing I may never come back,
but this year is an especially difficult one in
which to say goodbye. That's because next
fall for the first time in eight years
Prank Hassan may not be coming back ei
ther.

♦ ♦♦
Residential Education (ResEd) has four
offices and 39 professional employees, and
the ResEd Central Office is located on the
second floor of Tresidder Union in Suite 9.

Ever since ResEd first assumed respon
sibility for paying Suites Dining's student
workers in the fall of 2010, I'd been visiting
the Central Office every few weeks to pick
up my paycheck for cleaning the kitchens. I
needed the money and I kept on coming
back, so when I walk up the spiral staircase
and through the clear glass door, I smile
and wave to Alyssa Ray, the Central Office's
friendly and familiar administrative assis


MEHMET INONU/The Stanford Daily
Bollard head chef Frank Hassan is
known among Suites residents for both
his breakfast cooking and the connections
he has forged with residents over
the seven years he has worked in Suites.
tant.
This time, however, I'm not here to pick up
a paycheck. I'm here to meet with Dean of
ResEd Deborah Golder, ResEd Associate
Dean Nate Boswell '99 M.A. 'O9 and ResEd
Director of Operations Aaron Buzay.
On Jan. 30, Boswell and Buzay sent an
email to Res Ed's Suites student email list in
forming all residents that next year for the
first time since Suites Dining was founded in
1982 students will no longer run Suites'
four eating clubs. They will be replaced, due
to what the email described as "health and
safety concerns" and "a pressing desire to
lower the board rate," with an outside corpo
ration.

Avanti, Beefeaters, Bollard and Middle
Earth have served food to Suites residents
six days a week for the past 30 years under
student management, which is currently pro
vided by the student-run 501(c)(3) nonprofit
Governor's Corner Dining Societies (GCDS).
One chef runs each eating club and is assisted
by a student CEO and CFO who oversee all
four clubs, eight student managers (two per
eating club) and a team of paid student "hash
ers" (that's me) who clean the kitchens before
and after meals.
Frank has cooked in Bollard for seven
years. Dennis has been head chef in
Beefeaters for 22. Tony has led Avanti for 18
years. And Caroline is new to Middle Earth
this year, having recently moved to the area
with her husband and two kids.
As part of the move to corporate manage
ment, the chefs' contracts are not being re
newed.
I want to know why, and it's the chefs I'm
thinking about as I shake hands and sit down
with Boswell, Buzay and Golder.
The conversation begins pleasantly
enough, although they tend to use a lot of bu
reaucratically vague sentences with the
words "moving forward," "sustainable" and
"conversation" thrown in. But something
Golder says about the selection process for
the new, non-student contractor rubs me the
wrong way.
"We always involve students in decision
making," she says.
This is news to me. In fact, the first time
ResEd notified all Suites residents that they
were considering replacing student leader
ship with a corporate contractor was when
Boswell and Buzay sent the email informing
residents that the decision had already been
made. I decide to point this out.
"How have you involved students in deci
sion-making up to this point? I mean, besides
the managers, have you gotten feedback from
students at Suites on this?"
Buzay looks confused.
"You mean have we run, like, a...a sur
vey?"
"No, I mean what have you done? I know
you haven't run a formal survey, but have you
talked to students at Suites about this
change?"
"So we sent out... we sent out the email to
the Suites community..."
"Right. So up until the point you sent the
email, though, you hadn't talked to any stu
dents in Suites besides the CEO and CFO?"
There's more talk of "moving forward"
and "sustainable business," from which I con
clude that the answer to my initial question is
"no."

Fortunately, a survey that asked Suites
residents if they approved or disapproved of
the proposed change had been sent out to the
Suites email list —just not by Res Ed. I know,
because I created it. It took me approximate
ly five minutes to draft.
149 Suites residents answered the poll,
and 143 of them —95.97 percent disap
proved of Res Ed's decision to contract food
services to an outside vendor and not to re
new the current chefs' contracts. I had made
a comments section available on the survey
form, and I'm interested to know what
Boswell, Buzay and Golder think of the stu
dent opinions they never solicited. I decide to
read a few representative student responses
aloud.
"Number one: 'I am very disappointed
with the decision from ResEd to take over
contracting and management of Suites Din
ing. I do not like that our chefs are being
treated in this manner. They have put years
of dedication and service into their jobs and
Stanford.'
"Number two: 'As far as I know, this deci
sion from ResEd was reached with no consul
tation from the general student community in
Suites, which is undemocratic, unaccountable
and unacceptable.'
"Number three: 'The students who run
Beefeaters and Dennis provide the best din
ing service found on campus. All the outside
corporations that I have seen on campus
come in sub-par to the standards at the Eat
ing Clubs, and I think this is a bureaucratic

and stupid decision.'
"What would you say to that?" I prompt
the ResEd administrators.

There's a very, very long silence.
♦ ♦♦

When I finally walk out of Tresidder Union
Suite 9 an hour later, the first thing I do is
drive home, sit down at my computer and
start writing. I separate my document into
three headings: board bill costs; health and
safety; and financial mismanagement.

Board bill costs
In more than an hour of conversation, the
trio of ResEd administrators had repeatedly
cited Suites' high board bill as a pressing rea
son to seek a less expensive corporate vendor
to provide food. But a closer inspection of
University financial records indicates that
this justification makes little sense.
To begin with, the Suites board bill is no
higher than that of the Row houses, which are
currently managed by private contractor Stu
dent Organized Services, Inc. (SOS) mak
ing it difficult to see how changing to a private
contractor will lower the board rate.

The problem, however, goes deeper: the
University, not GCDS, is itself responsible for
creating the problem it now insists upon step
ping in to fix.
Prior to 2007, the quarterly Suites board
bill was among the lowest on campus at, ac
cording to former GCDS CEO Leah Sawyer
'O7, approximately $1,200 per student per
quarter. Suites Dining also provided more
meals per week —l7 than the more ex
pensive Row houses, which typically provided
10.

In 2008, however, the University com
bined the Suites Dining Society bill which
covers food—with the University Housing
bill, which covers housing maintenance costs.
Since then, Student Housing a division
of Residential & Dining Enterprises (R&DE)
has dramatically raised its prices, forcing
up the total costs that appeal 1 on the Suites
board bill. From the 2011-12 academic year to
the 2012-13 academic year alone, Housing
raised its prices by 25 percent. Housing main
tenance now takes up just under a quarter of
Suites residents' room and board expenses at
approximately $5OO per resident per quarter.
Res Ed's attempt to fix Suites' rising board
rate made matters even worse. According to
former GCDS CEO J.T. Sullivan 'll, ResEd
responded to Housing-driven Suites board
bill inflation by setting an overall room and
board price cap of $2,000 per student per
quarter. Since ResEd has little to no power to
limit the price charged by R&DE, however,
the Housing portion of the board bill kept
climbing resulting in smaller and smaller
percentages of student money going to GCDS
for food and a budget crunch for GCDS man
agers.
The budgetary strains caused by ResEd
and R&DE were exacerbated, moreover, by
additional overhead costs imposed by the
University. In 2009 a year after the Hous
ing bill was merged with the Suites Dining
bill ResEd began auditing and regulating
GCDS financial operations. With Res Ed's
heightened involvement came two additional
categories on Suites students' board bill: "Ad
min" and "Overhead."
Prior to the beginning of Res Ed's
takeover in 2009, Suites was run entirely by
students they collected students' board
bills, paid chefs and hashers and even distrib
uted room keys. But ever since ResEd
stepped in in 2009, students have been paying
ResEd administrators to reread Suites finan
cial documents, incurring overhead costs that
further drive up the board bill total.
Those total costs were $161.57 per student
in 2011-12. Multiplied by the roughly 260 stu
dents who live in Suites, the total amount of
overhead paid last year to ResEd administra
tors to do the work student financial man
agers formerly did themselves is about
$42,000 more student money, as a 2011-12
Suites financial manager (FM) I interviewed
put it, "disappearing down the black hole that
is Residential Education."
According to Avanti chef Anton "Tony"
Dietz, who has 19 years of experience in food
services administration, any outside contrac
tor is likely to levy additional administrative
fees amounting to between eight and 11 per
cent of Suites' total budget. Suites' budget in
2011-12 totaled approximately $l.l million.
Assuming administrative charges at the typi
cal corporate rate, Suites residents next year
will be shelling out an additional $lOO,OOO in
surcharges.

Health and safety
During that interview in Suite 9, Boswell,
Buzay and Golder repeatedly advanced stu
dent health and safety as a "considerable con
cern" but failed to mention almost any specif
ic instances of health and safety violations.
The only specific evidence Golder offered was
a claim that multiple fires had recently bro
ken out at Suites.

"If we weren't fixing all the fires that
come," exclaimed Golder at one point, "they
[GCDS] wouldn't be getting by."

There was, in fact, only one fire at Suites
recently, not "all the fires that come," and it
was caused by two inexperienced Suites resi
dents — not student managers using the
Avanti kitchen to boil a large pot of hot oil on
a Saturday evening in May 2012 in a disas
trous attempt to fry empanadas for Cinco de
Mayo. Fortunately, a chef was hosting a free
movie-and-food night for residents on his day
off in a neighboring club the kind of thing
Suites chefs tend to do. He and a student
manager immediately rushed in and put out
the blaze with the club's fire extinguisher,
which GCDS had properly placed according
to fire code.
No outside contractor, short of completely
barring student access to the kitchen, could
have prevented that fire, and switching to a
corporate vendor will do nothing to prevent
the possibility of similar fires in the future.
Suites has a similar record in other areas
of health and safety. I was hashing in
Beefeaters on Jan. 15 when the Santa Clara
County public health inspector came to visit
this quarter. She left just as I finished clean
ing, having found zero health violations. The
other three clubs were also inspected that
day, with two violations found in Avanti, two
in Bollard and four in Middle Earth (one of
which was caused by Housing's failure to re
pair the salad bar). Suites' average number of
violations was two per kitchen, and none were
classified as "major."
The average number of food inspection vi
olations for Row houses —which are run by
exactly the sort of contractor that will be
moving into Suites next year —is 3.83 per
house. Ten locations on campus, including
Row houses managed by corporate contrac
tor SOS, were found responsible for "major"
violations.
Records of documented Suites health vio
lations in the past support this year's results.
After health inspectors visited Suites in the
spring of 2012, GCDS' then-CEO Sullivan
met with Boswell and Buzay to determine
who was responsible for the 26 reported vio
lations. Almost all of the violations were mi
nor among the worst appeal's to have been
some mold in an ice machine. Other violations
included a broken paper towel dispenser, the
ice scooper not being in its plastic cup and the
cleaning solution being too strong.
Boswell, Buzay and Sullivan collectively
assigned responsibility for each violation to
one of three groups: University Housing,
GCDS and ResEd and/or its student manag
er employees (ResEd now pays student man
agers, while GCDS' pay to chefs and its CEO
and CFO remains an entirely separate cate
gory). Of the 26 total violations, Housing was
found responsible for 10 including the
mold in the ice machine and ResEd and/or
its student manager employees were found to
have committed 16.
GCDS the student nonprofit that
ResEd now wants to eliminate was held
responsible for zero.
Financial mismanagement
In our interview, Golder had been espe
cially emphatic about student mismanage
ment of money. Arguing that students had
"run [Suites] into the ground" amid "years of
mismanagement," she claimed that "the only
reason they [GCDS] are getting by is because
we're supporting them, frankly. And if we
weren't, they wouldn't be getting by."
According to two financial managers who
worked in Suites prior to Res Ed's takeover in
2009, GCDS had never gone over budget or
had to borrow money from the University.
When I pressed her, Golder offered only one
piece of evidence to support her assertion.
According to Golder, ResEd had advanced
GCDS "tens of thousands of dollars" from
Res Ed's own budget that has to be paid back
at the end of the 2012-13 academic year. But
this the only evidence ResEd has provided
thus far of student financial mismanagement
is, according to student managers, flat-out
wrong.

Suites managers say ResEd allowed
GCDS advance access to money from its own
budget this year —in other words, Suites
spent some of its own money ahead of sched
ule. No money needs to be paid back to
ResEd at the end of the year. There is no
loan for students to pay off.
Boswell and Buzay also noted that, prior
to ResEd involvement, GCDS lacked a rec
ognized tax ID number and liability insur
ance. That much is true. But former GCDS
CEO Sullivan oversaw the 2011 purchase of a
liability policy valued at $2 million and incor
porated GCDS as a 501(c)(3) nonprofit, meet
ing Res Ed's requirements.
Moreover, several student managers re
ported that ResEd officials have argued that
the four Suites chefs are overpaid. But last
year's chef contract reveals that an academic
year's pay for a chef at Suites in 2011-12 was
$51,182. That's hardly a gold mine in the Bay
Area let alone Palo Alto especially since
ResEd, according to Avanti chef Tony, al
ready mandated a wage freeze for Suites
chefs three years ago, eliminating the annual
cost-of-living increase formerly granted by
GCDS.

In any case, Suites chefs deserve compen
sation appropriate for their skill level and ex
perience. Tony was born in Germany in 1946
and began his apprenticeship to a baker at age
14. Since then, he has catered White House
functions on the top floor of Washington Hos
pital Center with President Jimmy Carter in
attendance, personally overseen food produc
tion for the 1977 Hollywood release party of
the original "Star Wars," crafted all the food
for the set of "The Love Boat" and worked at
elite San Francisco hotels from the Hilton to
the Fairmont to the Stanford Court Renais
sance.

He was hired as an executive chef for the
Saga Corporation by Ernie Arbuckle '33
MBA '36 after whom the Graduate School
of Business' Arbuckle Dining Pavilion is
named and taught at the California Culi
nary Academy. He shook hands with Princess
Grace of Monaco and Charlton Heston and
catered parties for Ronald Reagan's Chair
man of the Council of Economic Advisers
Michael Boskin, who is currently a Stanford
economics professor.
That's Tony. He's been working in Avanti
for 18 years, and ResEd is not going to renew
his contract. And don't even get me started on
Caroline, Dennis and Frank.

If there's anything else that GCDS has
done wrong, ResEd wouldn't tell me. The
three administrators didn't even seem to
know how changing to corporate manage
ment would theoretically solve the nonexist
ent problems they think they've identified.
When I pressed Golder on how exactly
ResEd knows switching to an outside con
tractor will lower the board rate, improve
health and safety or enhance the quality of
management, her response was simple: "We
don't."
♦ ♦♦
When I walk in to see Frank right after
breakfast, he's already busy preparing lunch,
and I already know what he's going to say.
"Miles, my main man, how we doin'?"
As we chat, I notice that he's posted Renee
Donovan 'ls's recent Stanford Daily profile of
him to the kitchen's refrigerator door. Some
one has drawn little stars around it. During
our conversation, two students drop in to
cheerfully give Frank more copies. He adds
them to a stack he's gradually accumulating
on the table.
Frank has been told nothing by ResEd of
ficials other than that his contract will not be
renewed at the end of the year. When I ask
how he feels about the possibility of losing his
job, he abruptly stops chopping vegetables
and looks directly at me.
"Listen to this. I enjoy when I come here
in the morning and I cook for everybody. I
feel more happy than ... Listen, they are hap
py with me."
"Everybody loves you, Frank."
"And I love them more than what they love
me. Believe me. I swear to God. You know,
that's why I come so early in the morning."
Frank seems to care only about his stu
dents, and he doesn't want to talk about him
self or his problems. I have to ask several
times before he finally opens up about how
hard this will be for him.
"I'm now going to be 59 years old. How I
save money for my retirement? Do you un
derstand me?"
I did. Frank had stalled his retirement
planning a ways back, and every time I came
in for breakfast, I would ask which new place
he had in mind. Hawaii and the South Seas
were the dream, or maybe the California
coast. But on $51,182 a year, Arizona made
more sense, and it was Arizona we had talked
about the most.
"This make my life ..." He searches for
the right word. "Worried. Now they come
over here, they cut my salary, and they ask
me, 'Be smiling.' How can I be smiling when I
am worried about my rent?"
I don't know how to answer that one.
While I'm busy thinking of something to say,
Frank shuffles over to the chef's closet. "Let
me show you something, Miles."
He unfolds a single sheet of white paper
and hands it to me.
"Dear Mr. Hassan," the paper reads, "Be
cause of the increased cost of maintenance,
taxes, insurance, utilities, we must reluctant
ly inform you that your rent is being in
creased by $lOO.OO per month. Effective
01/01/2013 your new monthly rent will be
$1,800.00."
Frank shrugs. "The landlord, he wants his
money."
Overpaid. Right.
But Frank only truly begins to look wor
ried when he starts, hesitantly, to talk about
Student Organized Services.
♦ ♦♦
Student Organized Services, Inc. (SOS),
contrary to its name and friendly-looking
website, is not, and never has been, run by
students. The for-profit, privately held com
pany, headquartered in Redwood City, cur
rently operates food-related labor services
for the entire Row a job contracted to it by
Res Ed.
SOS's CEO is Nick Peters '94, who
worked for ResEd before founding SOS in
September of 1994. In 1995, Peters became
CEO of another company: Stanford Eating
Clubs (SEC), which took over management of
the old, student-run Toy on Eating Clubs
while SOS began to expand, house by house,
onto the Row.

In 2005, Zac Sargeant took the helm at
SEC as its CEO and managing director. He
was its last CEO the formerly student-run
Toyon Eating Clubs, founded in 1892, shut
down in 2009 after 107 years of continuous
operation.
In 2008 according to his resume, while
still serving as CEO of SEC Sargeant was
hired as assistant director of ResEd, where
he works to this day. His office is just down
the hallway from the boardroom in Tresidder
Union where I had my interview with
Boswell, Buzay and Golder.
For one year, Sargeant simultaneously
worked for a company that receives Universi
ty dining contracts and for the Stanford office
responsible for selecting dining contractors.
Sargeant is also Peters' brother-in-law.

According to Tony, SOS has repeatedly bid
to administer Suites Dining since 1995, the
year Peters assumed control at SEC and
Tony's first year as head chef in Avanti.
GCDS student leadership felt comfortable
running things on their own, according to
Tony and refused to contract their own jobs
out to SOS.

Sawyer, the former student manager and

Their own words
"For a long, long time, SOS and the
University were interested in taking
over Governor's Corner."
Colin Wessells 'OB,
former Avanti FM
"They were not involved. At all."
ResEd Dean Deborah Golder,
on SOS' involvement in Suites
"How can I be smiling when I am
worried about my rent?"
Bollard Chef Frank Hassan


LORENA RINCON-CRUZ/The Stanford Daily
143 of 149 Suites residents surveyed disapproved of ResEd's decision to contract management
of the formerly student-run Suites Dining to an outside corporation.
GCDS CEO who worked at Suites from 2005
to 2007, remembered Peters as a shadowy fig
ure whose precise source of authority was un
clear but who frequently attempted to wield
that authority as a bludgeon against student
independence.
"I don't even remember why Nick Peters
was an authority to us, but he was," she re
called. "Mostly he was just trying to tell us
'no.' Special dinners we were going to put on,
what we could and couldn't do with our money
... but he wasn't our boss, so I don't think we
really took him all that seriously."
According to Sawyer, Peters clearly dis
liked Suites' tradition of student freedom but
lacked the power to do anything about it.
"We just always knew him as some guy
who was clearly uncomfortable with us having
authority as students," she remembered. "But
at that time, he didn't have the authority to ac
tually tell us what to do, so we were always
just kind of annoyed by him."
Colin Wessells 'OB M.S. 'l2 Ph.D. 'l2
who said the business experience he gained as
financial manager in Avanti from 2006 to 2008
eventually helped him become CEO of his own
Silicon Valley startup has a clear memory
of Peters as a businessman who repeatedly of
fered the clubs a bad deal.
"Every year or so he would come over to
Suites and see if, now that there was new stu
dent management there, they would be inter
ested in partnering with SOS," Wessells re
called.
Student managers, however, weren't buy
ing it.
"They would look over the materials and
documents that SOS would present, and usu
ally it wouldn't be a good deal," Wessells not
ed. "Typically, the terms that [Peters] would
be offering would be, 'Okay, you guys are go
ing to keep managing the clubs, but we're go
ing to provide oversight and a fee.'"
According to Wessells, that proposed ad
ministrative fee typically amounted to be
tween $lOO and $2OO per resident per quarter
on top of the existing board bill. Multiplied by
the roughly 260 students in Suites, SOS's bid
for service, if successful, would have netted
Peters' firm between $78,000 and $156,000 in
student money every year.
"For a long, long time," Wessells conclud
ed, "SOS and the University were interested
in taking over Governor's Corner."
But a long tradition of student independ
ence, and a lack of concrete administrative
power over Suites Dining, stood in their way.
Then Peters' brother-in-law joined ResEd,
and the balance of power began to shift.

Potential conflict of interest
It was not until 2009 the year after
ResEd hired Sargeant as its assistant director
that, according to chefs and former student
managers, the threat of an SOS takeover be
came realistic.
First ResEd began regulating Suites' fi
nancial operations. Administrators then as
sumed control of paying student hashers
and began paying them less. Then ResEd cut
a managerial position from each club, reduc
ing the total number of student managers
from 12 to the current eight.
When chefs and managers, fearful of a
complete SOS takeover, finally discovered the
relationship between Sargeant and Peters in
the spring of 2011, ResEd denied the exis
tence of any conflict of interest.
But oddly for a situation in which ResEd
claimed that there was no conflict of interest,
Sargeant who had initially served as GCD-
S's primary contact in ResEd suddenly
stopped showing up to meetings with GCDS
managers, and the websites connecting
Sargeant to Peters were erased.
ResEd eventually abandoned its attempt
to replace student leadership with an outside
contractor, and Boswell admitted that Suites
managers had "worked diligently over the
course of the summer to meet all relevant, up
graded University requirements." Captained
by Sullivan, then the GCDS CEO, Suites man
agers won their right to remain independent.
Or so they thought.
In our interview, Golder denied that SOS
had ever been involved, in any capacity, with
Suites Dining during her tenure.
"They were not involved," she said em
phatically when I asked. "At all."
Opaque, overbearing and indifferent
Frank used to work for SOS. He left in
2007 when, a few weeks into the school year,
he was recruited away by then-GCDS CEO
Sawyer to work in Bollard instead.
"The students here, they came, they took
me away from them," Frank remembered
fondly. "They pay me more."
"Better benefits?"
"Better everything! You understand? I
wasn't happy with [SOS]."
Sawyer puts it more bluntly.
"Basically, he was abused," she recalled.
"He would come in, his kitchen would be a dis
aster, there would be no one for him to go to ...
he was incredibly unhappy."
"If you don't treat your employees well,"
she reflected with thinly veiled anger about
Frank's mistreatment under SOS, "they're
going to find another job."
Frank, in typical fashion, only expresses
concerns about his students, and especially
about what might happen to them after an
SOS takeover at Suites next year.
"One thing I know for sure," he said, "is
they [SOS] don't care about the students."
"Not at all?"
"At all. Just money."
Suites Dining is the largest remaining
student-run, independent eating location on
campus, with approximately 260 residents
and an annual operating budget of over $l.l
million. Whichever company wins that con
tract next year will be flush with cash cash
ResEd requires students to pay, and cash
from which any for-profit corporation will
skim significant fees.
If the past is any indication of the future,
that corporation will likely be SOS.
The entanglement between Stanford's Of
fice of Residential Education and SOS is
complex and runs deep. When I contacted
Peters to request a personal interview for
this story, he declined to speak with me and
referred me instead to Buzay in ResEd, who
handles all of SOS's media inquiries.
Boswell mentioned in our interview that
he himself was "connected" to SOS, but does
n't specify how. Sargeant, the onetime Gener

al Manager of SEC and Peters' brother-in
law, was still reluctant to talk.
"I believe that Aaron and Nate can pro
vide you with all the information requested,"
he wrote in response to my emailed request
for an interview.

When Avanti chef Tony said there's
"something insidious about this whole thing,"
these are the kind of connections that sup
port his suspicion. Wessells, the former
Avanti financial manager, speculated that
money might be changing hands somewhere.
"What it smells of to me is basically that
there are people in the University that have
their own motives," Wessells mused. "And
whether they stand to profit from taking
over the clubs ... maybe that could be the
case."
Despite Golder's assertion that a "Uni
versity-required" bidding process governs
the selection of contracted vendors for stu
dent residences, SOS did not have to compet
itively bid to manage the Row for over 15
years.

The first year for which ResEd held a bid
ding process for Row management was 2011-
12. In the year after receiving that bid ac
cording to members of the Stanford Labor
Action Coalition (SLAC), a student-led work
ers' advocacy group SOS slashed Row
workers' health benefits by half and reduced
their bonuses from $l,OOO to a maximum of
$4O.
Stanford's Living Wage Policy states
clearly that workers on campus shall have
"the right to self-organization, to form, join,
or assist labor organizations, to bargain col
lectively ... and to engage in other concerted
activities for the purpose of collective bar
gaining or other mutual aid or protection."
But when SLAC held a Worker-Student
Council meeting on Jan. 16, 2012, to provide
a "safe space" for workers seeking relief
from SOS benefit cuts advertised in both
Spanish and English Sargeant, a ResEd
employee, barged in without introducing
himself a few minutes into the meeting, ac
cused the workers of organizing a strike
(which SLAC had never discussed) and "in
timidated" the workers into silence.
"They seemed to know who he was," re
called SLAC member Laurel Fish 'l4. "His
accusations were very aggressive."
"We tried to have a conversation with [the
workers]," Fish remembered, "but it was
clear that they weren't expressing their con
cerns and didn't feel like they could talk
openly."
It remains unclear why a ResEd adminis
trator interfered in a private meeting of
workers contracted by a third-party corpora
tion and why ResEd paid so little attention to
the Living Wage Policy's protection of "the
right to self-organization."
SOS's financial operations for the Row
are almost completely opaque to house resi
dents. When I met with a Row financial man
ager to go over his house's finances, he was
surprised to learn that Suites residents have
full and transparent access to their entire
board bill. ResEd, he said, takes all the mon
ey from his residents' room and board pay
ment, gives him about $B5O per resident per
quarter to spend on either food or social dues
and doesn't tell him what they do with the
rest.
"Even as a financial manager, I don't see
where half the student money goes," he said.
I end up having to go directly to Buzay for
that information. The numbers, which Row fi
nancial managers never see, are clear.
Total board bill costs in Suites and on the
Row are almost exactly the same $5,999
per year for Suites residents and $5,992 for
residents on the Row. But there's one major
difference: Governor's Corner Dining Soci
eties deliver seven more meals per week than
Row houses at almost exactly the same price.
Row residents receive 10 meals a week,
typically lunch and dinner Monday through
Friday. Suites residents, by contrast, get 17:
everything the Row provides, including open
kitchen and snacks, plus a custom-cooked
Frank breakfast extravaganza every morn
ing and brunch and dinner on Sundays.
Suites student managers provide those
seven extra meals, moreover, on a lower food
budget. GCDS spends about $5O less per
quarter per student on food than SOS (an av
erage of $726 for GCDS and $775 for SOS).
And they provide those meals as any stu
dent who has had Dennis' lobster, Frank's
filet mignon sandwiches, Caroline's Mexican
or Tony's chocolate mousse can tell you
without compromising quality, a feat Tony
says he accomplishes by buying only "what's
seasonal and freshly available" and "minimiz
ing or eliminating waste." That's not even in
cluding the quarterly Gala Dinners and Spe
cial Dinners every Suites eating club delivers
or the spring quarter Suites-wide Special
Party, for which student managers bring in
live music, ice sculptures and entertainment.
And as a student-run nonprofit, all the
money Suites saves on food goes to better pay
for student hashers and then- chefs, rather
than the bank account of a for-profit company.
Frank made $9OO per week for 33 weeks
of work about $29,700 annually when
he first started at SOS. He makes $20,000
more than that at Suites, plus 100 percent
coverage of his (and his dependents') health
care and dental costs.
In "Hiring a Chef," the sample advertise
ment SOS CEO Peters encourages student
managers on the Row to post when searching
for new chefs, Peters suggests pay of
"$BOO/week DOE [depending on experience]
+ negotiable benefits." That's $26,400 per
year about half what Suites chefs make.
Part-time student hashers at Suites make
$l5 an hour and used to make even more be
fore Res Ed-enforced pay cuts took their toll.
Even after the ResEd pay cuts, Suites hash
ers still make more than the Stanford-man
dated living wage. Buzay, however, said that
Peters the CEO of the organization re
sponsible for food-service labor operations
for the entire Row "didn't know" that
Stanford's Living Wage Policy, enacted in
2007, "even existed" until four years after it
came into effect. In 2011, SOS was finally
forced to conform to the policy, which man
dates that all campus workers, including
those hired by third-party contractors, be
paid at least $12.40 an hour when also provid
ed with benefits.

But there's no better way to compare the
performance of SOS and GCDS than to talk

to someone who's experienced both. When I
finally sat down with a former Suites hasher
who currently lives on the Row, his answer is
clear: GCDS outperforms SOS in every area
of food service.
"The food is better, the open kitchen is
better everything is way better," he said
of Suites Dining. He thinks it's "stupid" of
ResEd to consider contracting management
of Suites to any outside company, much less
SOS.
When I told him one of Res Ed's ostensi
ble justifications for eliminating GCDS is
health and safety concerns, he laughed in dis
belief.
"We have so many health violations," he
said of the SOS-managed Row house in
which he currently lives. "The number of vi
olations we have ..." He trailed off, shaking
his head.
When I asked him to list some of the spe
cific health violations in his house, he de
murred, afraid that his kitchen staff might
lose their jobs.
For the 2011-12 bidding process for the
Row the first it had ever held ResEd
conducted a closed bid in which, according to
Buzay, four vendors submitted offers: Ara
mark, College Chefs, Sodexo and SOS.
Sodexo is a French multinational corpora
tion with 16 billion euros in annual consoli
dated revenue. It employs 413,000 people
worldwide in 80 countries and serves 50 mil
lion consumers daily. Aramark operates in 22
countries, had revenues of $12.5 billion last
year and is the 23rd-largest employer on the
Fortune 500. Both companies have come un
der intense criticism for unethical business
and labor practices. And the first hit on a
Google search for "College Chefs reviews" is
an entry in the Ripoff Report detailing the
company's practice of "profiteering from stu
dents and their parents."
When I ask Buzay which criteria ResEd
uses to select vendors, he says they choose "a
vendor that can come in and abide by the stu
dent-management model. Working closely
with students, work closely with the commu
nity ... so we're not mass producing food."
First of all, that description sounds an
awful lot like GCDS, which is entirely made
up of students from their own living commu
nity
And second, in a closed bidding process in
which SOS's only three competitors were two
multinationals that have no experience work
ing closely with students on Stanford's cam
pus and a third company with a terrible rep
utation for its work on college campuses,
SOS's selection to manage the Row was like
ly a foregone conclusion.
Boswell, Buzay and Golder claimed not to
know who will be selected as the bidders for
next year's Suites contract. But given
Res Ed's past bidding practices on the Row,
there's little reason to believe the bidding
process for Suites will go any differently.
Growing burden of ResEd oversight
When I asked her about Res Ed's height
ened oversight of GCDS since administrators
first intervened in 2009, Dean Golder insist
ed that Res Ed's involvement has been pro
ductive and beneficial.
"We've done our best to help them be suc
cessful," she declared. "And that's just factu
ally accurate."
But according to everyone who isn't a
ResEd administrator, increased ResEd in
terference has been actively detrimental to
the effective student management of Suites
Dining. Not a single manager I interviewed
could think of even one way in which in
creased ResEd oversight had made their job
easier.
The number of ways managers say it has
made their jobs harder, however, is remark
able. According to several different man
agers, all of whom wished to remain anony
mous, ResEd meddling has made club man
agement dramatically less efficient, more ex
pensive and less effective.
One of the most frustrating changes for
managers has been Res Ed's enforced sepa

ration of club expenditures into food
which student managers are allowed to pur
chase themselves using the GCDS account
and capital items like cups, plates and club
improvements, which must be either ap
proved and paid for by ResEd (using GCDS
money) or purchased using personal student
funds and submitted for reimbursement.
According to one student manager, the
most significant problem with Res Ed's new
policy before which student managers
were free to allocate funds as they saw fit
has been the delayed payment of vendors
who provide both food and capital items. Stu
dent managers will pay for the food portion
of the invoice immediately, but ResEd will
take several weeks to pay for the capital
items, leaving vendors complaining that
they've been underpaid.
Reimbursement the other Res Ed-e
nforced way for student managers to purchase
capital items has proven even more incon
venient, mostly because ResEd appears to
consistently run weeks behind schedule. One
manager purchased a new stereo for his club
in early December using personal funds and
still hasn't received a ResEd reimbursement
check. In September, ResEd administrators
forgot to pay Bollard's water bill, and Frank
had to pay the cost out of pocket. He finally
got a reimbursement check for $248.73 on
Jan. 24.
In Middle Earth, student managers keep
a running list of things R&DE to whom,
according to the board bill, Suites residents
pay total annual maintenance fees of over
$380,000 has promised to fix but hasn't.
There are currently 12 items on that list,
ranging from the salad bar to the stove tap to
the mop rack.
When multiple fix-it requests went unan
swered, managers had to resort to personal
emails and phone calls. Many of the requests
for maintenance have gone unanswered since
fall quarter. As one current Suites manager I
interviewed fumed, "Housing does absolute
ly nothing."
Last year, R&DE installed a shiny new
dishwasher in Middle Earth. Unlike the oth
er three clubs' dishwashers, which despite
being old and timeworn work perfectly fine,
the R&DE-installed Middle Earth dishwash
er immediately broke, and Housing still has
n't successfully fixed it. The symbolism is as
tonishing.
In Fall 2010, ResEd decided to assume
control of paying student hashers tradi
tionally a responsibility of individual club
managers, who would write hashers checks
directly from their eating club account. Be
fore the takeover, I remember a student
manager depositing my hashing check every
two weeks, like clockwork, in the furthest
left-hand drawer in the Avanti kitchen, be
neath the cupboard.
When ResEd took over, they failed to pay
student hashers for the next two months. Ad
ministrators only resumed payment after
students pointed out that not paying your
workers is a violation of California labor law.
"It's amazing how incompetent the so
called 'professionals' can be," grumbled a par
ticularly displeased Suites manager.
ResEd has even taken GCDS money out
right, without any warning or explanation.
According to a 2011-12 club financial manag
er, each eating club used to maintain a $4,000
"carryover account" money saved up "just
in case a chef got sick or we had to have some
big capital expenditure ... as like a buffer."
"We had that money saved up," the finan
cial manager said. "I sent out some checks at
the end of the year to pay off summer bills
and stuff like that... and then I ended up
coming back to school and getting invoices
saying I had unpaid bills from the summer,
and I found out that the checks I had sent
had bounced because the University had
swept our accounts and taken out all the
money that we had saved for carryover, and
[they] just never gave it back. It was just
gone."


MEHMET INONU/The Stanford Daily
Avanti head chef Anton "Tony" Dietz has served Suites residents for 18 years. Born in
Germany in 1946, he began an apprenticeship to a baker at age 14 and has since catered
White House functions for then-President Jimmy Carter and Hollywood premieres.
ResEd has also restrict
ed the number of hashers
who can be on GCDS's pay
roll, drastically limiting the
flexibility of students' work
schedules. Two club man
agers complained that find
ing replacement hashers
when their current one has a
midterm or an athletic event
has become much more diffi
cult since the pool of avail
able hashers is now much
smaller.
Even Res Ed's own stu
dent employees express
frustration with the appar
ent incompetence and ques
tionable work ethic of their
superiors. One current
Suites Resident Assistant
(RA) complained that
ResEd Student Affairs Offi
cer Tiffany Taylor, who is
supposed to make regular
supervisory visits to Suites,
has been conspicuously ab
sent all year.
"She's supposed to come
over," said the RA, "but she
never actually does."
If there is any misman
agement and incompetence
going on at Suites, it's not on
the part of students. It's by
ResEd and R&DE.
It is only when I began
investigating its chronic un
derperformance that ResEd
finally began to grind, slow
ly, into gear. Two days after I
sent an email to Boswell,
Buzay and Golder request
ing an interview about
Suites, all four club man
agers suddenly got an un
precedentedly friendly, but
characteristically vague,
email from ResEd adminis
trator Jo Jaffe 'O9.
"I just wanted to check in

and see how everything was
going for you all," Jaffe
wrote. "Please let me know
if there's anything you have
questions on or need help
with."
Student managers weren't
fooled.
"It was definitely related
to the takeover," said one
club manager.
And only in the last
month has Keith Santiago,
head of Governor's Corner
Housing, finally become
more responsive to student
requests for help.
"We are skeptical as to
his motives," said another
student manager.
♦ ♦♦
Prank keeps his letters in
a Macy's bag in the back of
his old blue Lincoln. There
are 66 of them. Most are
thank you cards: cards from
students, cards from em
ployers, Christmas cards
from generations of Suites
managers, cards in neatly
written Spanish I wish I
could understand. Some are
invitations to long-ago Stan
ford graduations from for
mer students who've left
Prank's beloved kitchen and
moved on.
When Frank puts the tat
tered old Macy's bag in my
hands, he does so with a care
I've never seen before. He
tells me that if I open a card, I
must make sure to put it back
in the exact same envelope, un
damaged and in order.
"Be very careful, Miles,"
he says.
I smile. "I've got it, Prank."
"No," he says, with a fierce
urgency. "These letters are
the most important things to
me."
These letters really are the
most important things to him.
And so I take great care as I
look slowly through the let
ters, kept as pristine as you

could possibly keep 66 letters
in an old Macy's bag.
Certain phrases stand out
from the flow of thanks from
Frank's former students.
"'You're like an uncle to me."
"I'm so touched beyond
words that you remembered
my birthday"
"To the man who is always
right, who gives the best ad
vice and who makes my stom
ach content."
Frank never lets his let
ters go. Next year, this Uni
versity won't be able to say
the same about Frank.
♦♦♦
"Residential Education,"
states the office's website, "is
about the people it serves...
We are concerned with the ex
perience of indvidual [sic] res
idents and how to best serve
each of them."
As I speak with Suites res
ident after Suites resident, I
can't help but think that
ResEd has forgotten that cen
tral mission. Almost unani
mously, the residents I talk to
are shocked and appalled to
discover that their four chefs'
contacts are not being re
newed a decision about
which students were not con
sulted— and that students
will no longer lead Suites' din
ing clubs next year.
"It makes me really mad,"
says one current resident, with
simple honesty.
For others, the loss of a stu
dent job at Suites threatens to
produce financial hardship.
"Without hashing," says a
student in Suites who is cur
rently on financial aid, "I would
have no income at a11... I'd be
getting deeper and deeper into
the hole with my student
loans."
(Boswell, Buzay and Golder
say that some kind of student
management will be allowed
under the new contractor —but
any student managers that re

main will work for the new com
pany, not a student-run non
profit, and there will be, accord
ing to current student man
agers, no paid student hashing
next year.)
I'm reminded that 95.97
percent of Suites residents
opposed a change about
which they were never con
sulted and only recently in
formed.
When I reach out to Suites
alumni, the reaction is, if any
thing, even more pained.
They're dismayed to learn
that the place they loved has
changed so much.
"I always thought it was
the greatest food on the plan
et," a 2005-07 resident re
members wistfully.
"The quality of the food,
and the cheapness of it, was
better than anything the Uni
versity was able to offer," a
student who lived and worked
in Suites from 2006-08, before
ResEd began its expensive
and debilitating takeover, re
calls.
I'm also reminded about
the importance of community,
and how that word means
much more than simply a
group of students. Our com
munity is made up of every
one who makes Stanford so
quintessentially Stanford
from President Hennessy
down to the last kitchen work
er, from star athletic coaches
and tenured professors to the
four chefs who, as one sad
dened survey respondent put
it, "make Suites what it is."
When I ask Golder
whether she considers it im
portant to bring Caroline,
Dennis, Frank and Tony back
next year, she says, "If it
works out, I think that's
great." She suggests that if
students wanted to help, we
should write a letter of rec
ommendation for the chefs to
the new corporate contractor.

Between Boswell, Buzay
and Golder, no one offers to
do anything at all to help the
chefs keep their jobs.
"I can't tell a vendor who
they have to hire," Golder
says.
And that was it.
That's not the spirit of the
Stanford I know. The Stan
ford I know doesn't corpora
tize student life at the ex
pense of longstanding com
munity members; it encour
ages and fosters student
leadership, student initiative
and student independence.
The Stanford I know is about
standing up for the little guy,
being accountable and doing
the best we can for every
member of our community.
As I reflect on the end of
an era, I'm deeply disturbed
by something I remember
from the beginning of my in
terview in that ResEd board
room.
"My general directive
from the president, provost
and [Vice-Provost for Stu
dent Affairs] Greg Board
man when I was brought in
four years ago was: 'Clean
up,"' Golder declared.
Suites Dining, she said,
was just "one of hundreds" of
places under ResEd consider
ation "one of hundreds" of
places "where we're looking
at ourselves and saying, 'Are
we doing the best we can by
students? Are we doing the
best we can by Stanford?"'
If firing four loyal com
munity members beloved by
their students; outsourcing
student jobs and responsibil
ity to a for-profit corporation
with a suspicious workers'
rights record and dubious
ties to the Stanford office re
sponsible for its current con
tract; and refusing to solicit
any student opinion before
making crucial decisions
about student welfare is what

"doing the best we can by
students" looks like and if
there truly are hundreds of
places left on Res Ed's omi
nous list then the end of
Suites Dining might be mere
ly the beginning of a new and
darker era in our collective
campus life.
If ResEd gets its way at
Suites, it will be a victory for
bureaucracy, for incompe
tence and probably for the
coffers of SOS, with its hun
dreds of thousands of dollars
in administrative fees. But it
will be a tremendous loss for
everyone else: for students,
for four veteran chefs who will
be forced out of the communi
ty they love and for this great
university we all call home.
It can be hard to stand up
for ourselves. We're all stu
dents; we hold down jobs;
we're athletes and scientists
and writers with tremendous
time commitments on our
hands.
ResEd knows that, and
they take full advantage of it.
As Sullivan, the former
GCDS CEO who spent an
entire exhausting year try
ing to hold off the ResEd
juggernaut, puts it, "It's an
entire office of Stanford Uni
versity against a few stu
dents who don't have the
time or the energy to fight."
ResEd and SOS move
quietly, inexorably and pa
tiently towards a shared goal
that is ultimately detrimental
and destructive to the Stan
ford community.
We cannot we must not
let them go unchallenged.
It's time to take a stand.

Miles Unterreiner 'l2 M. A
'l3 is a Suites resident and
is employed as a hasher in
Suites' dining clubs.

Contact Miles Unterreiner at
milesiil @ Stanford, edu.
Originally published on Feb. 21, 2013.

Frank Hassan has been head chef
in Suites' Bollard Eating Club for
seven years, and he specializes in
making two things: an incredible
breakfast and memories.

It's the former you'll get if you walk into
Bollard between 7:30 and 9:15 a.m. week
day mornings, where dozens of students
chatter under an enormous banner
erected by unknown admirers at some point
over the past decade featuring Frank's
beaming face and the club's informal title:
"The Bollard Empire."
But it's the memories that last, and over
the three years I've eaten and worked at
Suites, I've picked up quite a few: Frank
volunteering to wake up two hours early to
have breakfast ready for the track team by
5:30 a.m. the days we left early for out-of
state meets; Frank and I watching the
Mubarak regime fall on the Bollard TV
while he offered keen political observations
on his native Egypt; the way he enthusiasti
cally greets every male student with a heav
ily accented "my main man!" and every fe
male with a "good morning, beautiful";
Frank giving my mom a big hug when I
brought her to Bollard to visit during my
junior year.

I'll take those memories with me when I
finally leave Stanford this spring. It's hard
enough knowing I may never come back,
but this year is an especially difficult one in
which to say goodbye. That's because next
fall for the first time in eight years
Prank Hassan may not be coming back ei
ther.

♦ ♦♦
Residential Education (ResEd) has four
offices and 39 professional employees, and
the ResEd Central Office is located on the
second floor of Tresidder Union in Suite 9.

Ever since ResEd first assumed respon
sibility for paying Suites Dining's student
workers in the fall of 2010, I'd been visiting
the Central Office every few weeks to pick
up my paycheck for cleaning the kitchens. I
needed the money and I kept on coming
back, so when I walk up the spiral staircase
and through the clear glass door, I smile
and wave to Alyssa Ray, the Central Office's
friendly and familiar administrative assis


MEHMET INONU/The Stanford Daily
Bollard head chef Frank Hassan is
known among Suites residents for both
his breakfast cooking and the connections
he has forged with residents over
the seven years he has worked in Suites.
tant.
This time, however, I'm not here to pick up
a paycheck. I'm here to meet with Dean of
ResEd Deborah Golder, ResEd Associate
Dean Nate Boswell '99 M.A. 'O9 and ResEd
Director of Operations Aaron Buzay.
On Jan. 30, Boswell and Buzay sent an
email to Res Ed's Suites student email list in
forming all residents that next year for the
first time since Suites Dining was founded in
1982 students will no longer run Suites'
four eating clubs. They will be replaced, due
to what the email described as "health and
safety concerns" and "a pressing desire to
lower the board rate," with an outside corpo
ration.

Avanti, Beefeaters, Bollard and Middle
Earth have served food to Suites residents
six days a week for the past 30 years under
student management, which is currently pro
vided by the student-run 501(c)(3) nonprofit
Governor's Corner Dining Societies (GCDS).
One chef runs each eating club and is assisted
by a student CEO and CFO who oversee all
four clubs, eight student managers (two per
eating club) and a team of paid student "hash
ers" (that's me) who clean the kitchens before
and after meals.
Frank has cooked in Bollard for seven
years. Dennis has been head chef in
Beefeaters for 22. Tony has led Avanti for 18
years. And Caroline is new to Middle Earth
this year, having recently moved to the area
with her husband and two kids.
As part of the move to corporate manage
ment, the chefs' contracts are not being re
newed.
I want to know why, and it's the chefs I'm
thinking about as I shake hands and sit down
with Boswell, Buzay and Golder.
The conversation begins pleasantly
enough, although they tend to use a lot of bu
reaucratically vague sentences with the
words "moving forward," "sustainable" and
"conversation" thrown in. But something
Golder says about the selection process for
the new, non-student contractor rubs me the
wrong way.
"We always involve students in decision
making," she says.
This is news to me. In fact, the first time
ResEd notified all Suites residents that they
were considering replacing student leader
ship with a corporate contractor was when
Boswell and Buzay sent the email informing
residents that the decision had already been
made. I decide to point this out.
"How have you involved students in deci
sion-making up to this point? I mean, besides
the managers, have you gotten feedback from
students at Suites on this?"
Buzay looks confused.
"You mean have we run, like, a...a sur
vey?"
"No, I mean what have you done? I know
you haven't run a formal survey, but have you
talked to students at Suites about this
change?"
"So we sent out... we sent out the email to
the Suites community..."
"Right. So up until the point you sent the
email, though, you hadn't talked to any stu
dents in Suites besides the CEO and CFO?"
There's more talk of "moving forward"
and "sustainable business," from which I con
clude that the answer to my initial question is
"no."

Fortunately, a survey that asked Suites
residents if they approved or disapproved of
the proposed change had been sent out to the
Suites email list —just not by Res Ed. I know,
because I created it. It took me approximate
ly five minutes to draft.
149 Suites residents answered the poll,
and 143 of them —95.97 percent disap
proved of Res Ed's decision to contract food
services to an outside vendor and not to re
new the current chefs' contracts. I had made
a comments section available on the survey
form, and I'm interested to know what
Boswell, Buzay and Golder think of the stu
dent opinions they never solicited. I decide to
read a few representative student responses
aloud.
"Number one: 'I am very disappointed
with the decision from ResEd to take over
contracting and management of Suites Din
ing. I do not like that our chefs are being
treated in this manner. They have put years
of dedication and service into their jobs and
Stanford.'
"Number two: 'As far as I know, this deci
sion from ResEd was reached with no consul
tation from the general student community in
Suites, which is undemocratic, unaccountable
and unacceptable.'
"Number three: 'The students who run
Beefeaters and Dennis provide the best din
ing service found on campus. All the outside
corporations that I have seen on campus
come in sub-par to the standards at the Eat
ing Clubs, and I think this is a bureaucratic

and stupid decision.'
"What would you say to that?" I prompt
the ResEd administrators.

There's a very, very long silence.
♦ ♦♦

When I finally walk out of Tresidder Union
Suite 9 an hour later, the first thing I do is
drive home, sit down at my computer and
start writing. I separate my document into
three headings: board bill costs; health and
safety; and financial mismanagement.

Board bill costs
In more than an hour of conversation, the
trio of ResEd administrators had repeatedly
cited Suites' high board bill as a pressing rea
son to seek a less expensive corporate vendor
to provide food. But a closer inspection of
University financial records indicates that
this justification makes little sense.
To begin with, the Suites board bill is no
higher than that of the Row houses, which are
currently managed by private contractor Stu
dent Organized Services, Inc. (SOS) mak
ing it difficult to see how changing to a private
contractor will lower the board rate.

The problem, however, goes deeper: the
University, not GCDS, is itself responsible for
creating the problem it now insists upon step
ping in to fix.
Prior to 2007, the quarterly Suites board
bill was among the lowest on campus at, ac
cording to former GCDS CEO Leah Sawyer
'O7, approximately $1,200 per student per
quarter. Suites Dining also provided more
meals per week —l7 than the more ex
pensive Row houses, which typically provided
10.

In 2008, however, the University com
bined the Suites Dining Society bill which
covers food—with the University Housing
bill, which covers housing maintenance costs.
Since then, Student Housing a division
of Residential & Dining Enterprises (R&DE)
has dramatically raised its prices, forcing
up the total costs that appeal 1 on the Suites
board bill. From the 2011-12 academic year to
the 2012-13 academic year alone, Housing
raised its prices by 25 percent. Housing main
tenance now takes up just under a quarter of
Suites residents' room and board expenses at
approximately $5OO per resident per quarter.
Res Ed's attempt to fix Suites' rising board
rate made matters even worse. According to
former GCDS CEO J.T. Sullivan 'll, ResEd
responded to Housing-driven Suites board
bill inflation by setting an overall room and
board price cap of $2,000 per student per
quarter. Since ResEd has little to no power to
limit the price charged by R&DE, however,
the Housing portion of the board bill kept
climbing resulting in smaller and smaller
percentages of student money going to GCDS
for food and a budget crunch for GCDS man
agers.
The budgetary strains caused by ResEd
and R&DE were exacerbated, moreover, by
additional overhead costs imposed by the
University. In 2009 a year after the Hous
ing bill was merged with the Suites Dining
bill ResEd began auditing and regulating
GCDS financial operations. With Res Ed's
heightened involvement came two additional
categories on Suites students' board bill: "Ad
min" and "Overhead."
Prior to the beginning of Res Ed's
takeover in 2009, Suites was run entirely by
students they collected students' board
bills, paid chefs and hashers and even distrib
uted room keys. But ever since ResEd
stepped in in 2009, students have been paying
ResEd administrators to reread Suites finan
cial documents, incurring overhead costs that
further drive up the board bill total.
Those total costs were $161.57 per student
in 2011-12. Multiplied by the roughly 260 stu
dents who live in Suites, the total amount of
overhead paid last year to ResEd administra
tors to do the work student financial man
agers formerly did themselves is about
$42,000 more student money, as a 2011-12
Suites financial manager (FM) I interviewed
put it, "disappearing down the black hole that
is Residential Education."
According to Avanti chef Anton "Tony"
Dietz, who has 19 years of experience in food
services administration, any outside contrac
tor is likely to levy additional administrative
fees amounting to between eight and 11 per
cent of Suites' total budget. Suites' budget in
2011-12 totaled approximately $l.l million.
Assuming administrative charges at the typi
cal corporate rate, Suites residents next year
will be shelling out an additional $lOO,OOO in
surcharges.

Health and safety
During that interview in Suite 9, Boswell,
Buzay and Golder repeatedly advanced stu
dent health and safety as a "considerable con
cern" but failed to mention almost any specif
ic instances of health and safety violations.
The only specific evidence Golder offered was
a claim that multiple fires had recently bro
ken out at Suites.

"If we weren't fixing all the fires that
come," exclaimed Golder at one point, "they
[GCDS] wouldn't be getting by."

There was, in fact, only one fire at Suites
recently, not "all the fires that come," and it
was caused by two inexperienced Suites resi
dents — not student managers using the
Avanti kitchen to boil a large pot of hot oil on
a Saturday evening in May 2012 in a disas
trous attempt to fry empanadas for Cinco de
Mayo. Fortunately, a chef was hosting a free
movie-and-food night for residents on his day
off in a neighboring club the kind of thing
Suites chefs tend to do. He and a student
manager immediately rushed in and put out
the blaze with the club's fire extinguisher,
which GCDS had properly placed according
to fire code.
No outside contractor, short of completely
barring student access to the kitchen, could
have prevented that fire, and switching to a
corporate vendor will do nothing to prevent
the possibility of similar fires in the future.
Suites has a similar record in other areas
of health and safety. I was hashing in
Beefeaters on Jan. 15 when the Santa Clara
County public health inspector came to visit
this quarter. She left just as I finished clean
ing, having found zero health violations. The
other three clubs were also inspected that
day, with two violations found in Avanti, two
in Bollard and four in Middle Earth (one of
which was caused by Housing's failure to re
pair the salad bar). Suites' average number of
violations was two per kitchen, and none were
classified as "major."
The average number of food inspection vi
olations for Row houses —which are run by
exactly the sort of contractor that will be
moving into Suites next year —is 3.83 per
house. Ten locations on campus, including
Row houses managed by corporate contrac
tor SOS, were found responsible for "major"
violations.
Records of documented Suites health vio
lations in the past support this year's results.
After health inspectors visited Suites in the
spring of 2012, GCDS' then-CEO Sullivan
met with Boswell and Buzay to determine
who was responsible for the 26 reported vio
lations. Almost all of the violations were mi
nor among the worst appeal's to have been
some mold in an ice machine. Other violations
included a broken paper towel dispenser, the
ice scooper not being in its plastic cup and the
cleaning solution being too strong.
Boswell, Buzay and Sullivan collectively
assigned responsibility for each violation to
one of three groups: University Housing,
GCDS and ResEd and/or its student manag
er employees (ResEd now pays student man
agers, while GCDS' pay to chefs and its CEO
and CFO remains an entirely separate cate
gory). Of the 26 total violations, Housing was
found responsible for 10 including the
mold in the ice machine and ResEd and/or
its student manager employees were found to
have committed 16.
GCDS the student nonprofit that
ResEd now wants to eliminate was held
responsible for zero.
Financial mismanagement
In our interview, Golder had been espe
cially emphatic about student mismanage
ment of money. Arguing that students had
"run [Suites] into the ground" amid "years of
mismanagement," she claimed that "the only
reason they [GCDS] are getting by is because
we're supporting them, frankly. And if we
weren't, they wouldn't be getting by."
According to two financial managers who
worked in Suites prior to Res Ed's takeover in
2009, GCDS had never gone over budget or
had to borrow money from the University.
When I pressed her, Golder offered only one
piece of evidence to support her assertion.
According to Golder, ResEd had advanced
GCDS "tens of thousands of dollars" from
Res Ed's own budget that has to be paid back
at the end of the 2012-13 academic year. But
this the only evidence ResEd has provided
thus far of student financial mismanagement
is, according to student managers, flat-out
wrong.

Suites managers say ResEd allowed
GCDS advance access to money from its own
budget this year —in other words, Suites
spent some of its own money ahead of sched
ule. No money needs to be paid back to
ResEd at the end of the year. There is no
loan for students to pay off.
Boswell and Buzay also noted that, prior
to ResEd involvement, GCDS lacked a rec
ognized tax ID number and liability insur
ance. That much is true. But former GCDS
CEO Sullivan oversaw the 2011 purchase of a
liability policy valued at $2 million and incor
porated GCDS as a 501(c)(3) nonprofit, meet
ing Res Ed's requirements.
Moreover, several student managers re
ported that ResEd officials have argued that
the four Suites chefs are overpaid. But last
year's chef contract reveals that an academic
year's pay for a chef at Suites in 2011-12 was
$51,182. That's hardly a gold mine in the Bay
Area let alone Palo Alto especially since
ResEd, according to Avanti chef Tony, al
ready mandated a wage freeze for Suites
chefs three years ago, eliminating the annual
cost-of-living increase formerly granted by
GCDS.

In any case, Suites chefs deserve compen
sation appropriate for their skill level and ex
perience. Tony was born in Germany in 1946
and began his apprenticeship to a baker at age
14. Since then, he has catered White House
functions on the top floor of Washington Hos
pital Center with President Jimmy Carter in
attendance, personally overseen food produc
tion for the 1977 Hollywood release party of
the original "Star Wars," crafted all the food
for the set of "The Love Boat" and worked at
elite San Francisco hotels from the Hilton to
the Fairmont to the Stanford Court Renais
sance.

He was hired as an executive chef for the
Saga Corporation by Ernie Arbuckle '33
MBA '36 after whom the Graduate School
of Business' Arbuckle Dining Pavilion is
named and taught at the California Culi
nary Academy. He shook hands with Princess
Grace of Monaco and Charlton Heston and
catered parties for Ronald Reagan's Chair
man of the Council of Economic Advisers
Michael Boskin, who is currently a Stanford
economics professor.
That's Tony. He's been working in Avanti
for 18 years, and ResEd is not going to renew
his contract. And don't even get me started on
Caroline, Dennis and Frank.

If there's anything else that GCDS has
done wrong, ResEd wouldn't tell me. The
three administrators didn't even seem to
know how changing to corporate manage
ment would theoretically solve the nonexist
ent problems they think they've identified.
When I pressed Golder on how exactly
ResEd knows switching to an outside con
tractor will lower the board rate, improve
health and safety or enhance the quality of
management, her response was simple: "We
don't."
♦ ♦♦
When I walk in to see Frank right after
breakfast, he's already busy preparing lunch,
and I already know what he's going to say.
"Miles, my main man, how we doin'?"
As we chat, I notice that he's posted Renee
Donovan 'ls's recent Stanford Daily profile of
him to the kitchen's refrigerator door. Some
one has drawn little stars around it. During
our conversation, two students drop in to
cheerfully give Frank more copies. He adds
them to a stack he's gradually accumulating
on the table.
Frank has been told nothing by ResEd of
ficials other than that his contract will not be
renewed at the end of the year. When I ask
how he feels about the possibility of losing his
job, he abruptly stops chopping vegetables
and looks directly at me.
"Listen to this. I enjoy when I come here
in the morning and I cook for everybody. I
feel more happy than ... Listen, they are hap
py with me."
"Everybody loves you, Frank."
"And I love them more than what they love
me. Believe me. I swear to God. You know,
that's why I come so early in the morning."
Frank seems to care only about his stu
dents, and he doesn't want to talk about him
self or his problems. I have to ask several
times before he finally opens up about how
hard this will be for him.
"I'm now going to be 59 years old. How I
save money for my retirement? Do you un
derstand me?"
I did. Frank had stalled his retirement
planning a ways back, and every time I came
in for breakfast, I would ask which new place
he had in mind. Hawaii and the South Seas
were the dream, or maybe the California
coast. But on $51,182 a year, Arizona made
more sense, and it was Arizona we had talked
about the most.
"This make my life ..." He searches for
the right word. "Worried. Now they come
over here, they cut my salary, and they ask
me, 'Be smiling.' How can I be smiling when I
am worried about my rent?"
I don't know how to answer that one.
While I'm busy thinking of something to say,
Frank shuffles over to the chef's closet. "Let
me show you something, Miles."
He unfolds a single sheet of white paper
and hands it to me.
"Dear Mr. Hassan," the paper reads, "Be
cause of the increased cost of maintenance,
taxes, insurance, utilities, we must reluctant
ly inform you that your rent is being in
creased by $lOO.OO per month. Effective
01/01/2013 your new monthly rent will be
$1,800.00."
Frank shrugs. "The landlord, he wants his
money."
Overpaid. Right.
But Frank only truly begins to look wor
ried when he starts, hesitantly, to talk about
Student Organized Services.
♦ ♦♦
Student Organized Services, Inc. (SOS),
contrary to its name and friendly-looking
website, is not, and never has been, run by
students. The for-profit, privately held com
pany, headquartered in Redwood City, cur
rently operates food-related labor services
for the entire Row a job contracted to it by
Res Ed.
SOS's CEO is Nick Peters '94, who
worked for ResEd before founding SOS in
September of 1994. In 1995, Peters became
CEO of another company: Stanford Eating
Clubs (SEC), which took over management of
the old, student-run Toy on Eating Clubs
while SOS began to expand, house by house,
onto the Row.

In 2005, Zac Sargeant took the helm at
SEC as its CEO and managing director. He
was its last CEO the formerly student-run
Toyon Eating Clubs, founded in 1892, shut
down in 2009 after 107 years of continuous
operation.
In 2008 according to his resume, while
still serving as CEO of SEC Sargeant was
hired as assistant director of ResEd, where
he works to this day. His office is just down
the hallway from the boardroom in Tresidder
Union where I had my interview with
Boswell, Buzay and Golder.
For one year, Sargeant simultaneously
worked for a company that receives Universi
ty dining contracts and for the Stanford office
responsible for selecting dining contractors.
Sargeant is also Peters' brother-in-law.

According to Tony, SOS has repeatedly bid
to administer Suites Dining since 1995, the
year Peters assumed control at SEC and
Tony's first year as head chef in Avanti.
GCDS student leadership felt comfortable
running things on their own, according to
Tony and refused to contract their own jobs
out to SOS.

Sawyer, the former student manager and

Their own words
"For a long, long time, SOS and the
University were interested in taking
over Governor's Corner."
Colin Wessells 'OB,
former Avanti FM
"They were not involved. At all."
ResEd Dean Deborah Golder,
on SOS' involvement in Suites
"How can I be smiling when I am
worried about my rent?"
Bollard Chef Frank Hassan


LORENA RINCON-CRUZ/The Stanford Daily
143 of 149 Suites residents surveyed disapproved of ResEd's decision to contract management
of the formerly student-run Suites Dining to an outside corporation.
GCDS CEO who worked at Suites from 2005
to 2007, remembered Peters as a shadowy fig
ure whose precise source of authority was un
clear but who frequently attempted to wield
that authority as a bludgeon against student
independence.
"I don't even remember why Nick Peters
was an authority to us, but he was," she re
called. "Mostly he was just trying to tell us
'no.' Special dinners we were going to put on,
what we could and couldn't do with our money
... but he wasn't our boss, so I don't think we
really took him all that seriously."
According to Sawyer, Peters clearly dis
liked Suites' tradition of student freedom but
lacked the power to do anything about it.
"We just always knew him as some guy
who was clearly uncomfortable with us having
authority as students," she remembered. "But
at that time, he didn't have the authority to ac
tually tell us what to do, so we were always
just kind of annoyed by him."
Colin Wessells 'OB M.S. 'l2 Ph.D. 'l2
who said the business experience he gained as
financial manager in Avanti from 2006 to 2008
eventually helped him become CEO of his own
Silicon Valley startup has a clear memory
of Peters as a businessman who repeatedly of
fered the clubs a bad deal.
"Every year or so he would come over to
Suites and see if, now that there was new stu
dent management there, they would be inter
ested in partnering with SOS," Wessells re
called.
Student managers, however, weren't buy
ing it.
"They would look over the materials and
documents that SOS would present, and usu
ally it wouldn't be a good deal," Wessells not
ed. "Typically, the terms that [Peters] would
be offering would be, 'Okay, you guys are go
ing to keep managing the clubs, but we're go
ing to provide oversight and a fee.'"
According to Wessells, that proposed ad
ministrative fee typically amounted to be
tween $lOO and $2OO per resident per quarter
on top of the existing board bill. Multiplied by
the roughly 260 students in Suites, SOS's bid
for service, if successful, would have netted
Peters' firm between $78,000 and $156,000 in
student money every year.
"For a long, long time," Wessells conclud
ed, "SOS and the University were interested
in taking over Governor's Corner."
But a long tradition of student independ
ence, and a lack of concrete administrative
power over Suites Dining, stood in their way.
Then Peters' brother-in-law joined ResEd,
and the balance of power began to shift.

Potential conflict of interest
It was not until 2009 the year after
ResEd hired Sargeant as its assistant director
that, according to chefs and former student
managers, the threat of an SOS takeover be
came realistic.
First ResEd began regulating Suites' fi
nancial operations. Administrators then as
sumed control of paying student hashers
and began paying them less. Then ResEd cut
a managerial position from each club, reduc
ing the total number of student managers
from 12 to the current eight.
When chefs and managers, fearful of a
complete SOS takeover, finally discovered the
relationship between Sargeant and Peters in
the spring of 2011, ResEd denied the exis
tence of any conflict of interest.
But oddly for a situation in which ResEd
claimed that there was no conflict of interest,
Sargeant who had initially served as GCD-
S's primary contact in ResEd suddenly
stopped showing up to meetings with GCDS
managers, and the websites connecting
Sargeant to Peters were erased.
ResEd eventually abandoned its attempt
to replace student leadership with an outside
contractor, and Boswell admitted that Suites
managers had "worked diligently over the
course of the summer to meet all relevant, up
graded University requirements." Captained
by Sullivan, then the GCDS CEO, Suites man
agers won their right to remain independent.
Or so they thought.
In our interview, Golder denied that SOS
had ever been involved, in any capacity, with
Suites Dining during her tenure.
"They were not involved," she said em
phatically when I asked. "At all."
Opaque, overbearing and indifferent
Frank used to work for SOS. He left in
2007 when, a few weeks into the school year,
he was recruited away by then-GCDS CEO
Sawyer to work in Bollard instead.
"The students here, they came, they took
me away from them," Frank remembered
fondly. "They pay me more."
"Better benefits?"
"Better everything! You understand? I
wasn't happy with [SOS]."
Sawyer puts it more bluntly.
"Basically, he was abused," she recalled.
"He would come in, his kitchen would be a dis
aster, there would be no one for him to go to ...
he was incredibly unhappy."
"If you don't treat your employees well,"
she reflected with thinly veiled anger about
Frank's mistreatment under SOS, "they're
going to find another job."
Frank, in typical fashion, only expresses
concerns about his students, and especially
about what might happen to them after an
SOS takeover at Suites next year.
"One thing I know for sure," he said, "is
they [SOS] don't care about the students."
"Not at all?"
"At all. Just money."
Suites Dining is the largest remaining
student-run, independent eating location on
campus, with approximately 260 residents
and an annual operating budget of over $l.l
million. Whichever company wins that con
tract next year will be flush with cash cash
ResEd requires students to pay, and cash
from which any for-profit corporation will
skim significant fees.
If the past is any indication of the future,
that corporation will likely be SOS.
The entanglement between Stanford's Of
fice of Residential Education and SOS is
complex and runs deep. When I contacted
Peters to request a personal interview for
this story, he declined to speak with me and
referred me instead to Buzay in ResEd, who
handles all of SOS's media inquiries.
Boswell mentioned in our interview that
he himself was "connected" to SOS, but does
n't specify how. Sargeant, the onetime Gener

al Manager of SEC and Peters' brother-in
law, was still reluctant to talk.
"I believe that Aaron and Nate can pro
vide you with all the information requested,"
he wrote in response to my emailed request
for an interview.

When Avanti chef Tony said there's
"something insidious about this whole thing,"
these are the kind of connections that sup
port his suspicion. Wessells, the former
Avanti financial manager, speculated that
money might be changing hands somewhere.
"What it smells of to me is basically that
there are people in the University that have
their own motives," Wessells mused. "And
whether they stand to profit from taking
over the clubs ... maybe that could be the
case."
Despite Golder's assertion that a "Uni
versity-required" bidding process governs
the selection of contracted vendors for stu
dent residences, SOS did not have to compet
itively bid to manage the Row for over 15
years.

The first year for which ResEd held a bid
ding process for Row management was 2011-
12. In the year after receiving that bid ac
cording to members of the Stanford Labor
Action Coalition (SLAC), a student-led work
ers' advocacy group SOS slashed Row
workers' health benefits by half and reduced
their bonuses from $l,OOO to a maximum of
$4O.
Stanford's Living Wage Policy states
clearly that workers on campus shall have
"the right to self-organization, to form, join,
or assist labor organizations, to bargain col
lectively ... and to engage in other concerted
activities for the purpose of collective bar
gaining or other mutual aid or protection."
But when SLAC held a Worker-Student
Council meeting on Jan. 16, 2012, to provide
a "safe space" for workers seeking relief
from SOS benefit cuts advertised in both
Spanish and English Sargeant, a ResEd
employee, barged in without introducing
himself a few minutes into the meeting, ac
cused the workers of organizing a strike
(which SLAC had never discussed) and "in
timidated" the workers into silence.
"They seemed to know who he was," re
called SLAC member Laurel Fish 'l4. "His
accusations were very aggressive."
"We tried to have a conversation with [the
workers]," Fish remembered, "but it was
clear that they weren't expressing their con
cerns and didn't feel like they could talk
openly."
It remains unclear why a ResEd adminis
trator interfered in a private meeting of
workers contracted by a third-party corpora
tion and why ResEd paid so little attention to
the Living Wage Policy's protection of "the
right to self-organization."
SOS's financial operations for the Row
are almost completely opaque to house resi
dents. When I met with a Row financial man
ager to go over his house's finances, he was
surprised to learn that Suites residents have
full and transparent access to their entire
board bill. ResEd, he said, takes all the mon
ey from his residents' room and board pay
ment, gives him about $B5O per resident per
quarter to spend on either food or social dues
and doesn't tell him what they do with the
rest.
"Even as a financial manager, I don't see
where half the student money goes," he said.
I end up having to go directly to Buzay for
that information. The numbers, which Row fi
nancial managers never see, are clear.
Total board bill costs in Suites and on the
Row are almost exactly the same $5,999
per year for Suites residents and $5,992 for
residents on the Row. But there's one major
difference: Governor's Corner Dining Soci
eties deliver seven more meals per week than
Row houses at almost exactly the same price.
Row residents receive 10 meals a week,
typically lunch and dinner Monday through
Friday. Suites residents, by contrast, get 17:
everything the Row provides, including open
kitchen and snacks, plus a custom-cooked
Frank breakfast extravaganza every morn
ing and brunch and dinner on Sundays.
Suites student managers provide those
seven extra meals, moreover, on a lower food
budget. GCDS spends about $5O less per
quarter per student on food than SOS (an av
erage of $726 for GCDS and $775 for SOS).
And they provide those meals as any stu
dent who has had Dennis' lobster, Frank's
filet mignon sandwiches, Caroline's Mexican
or Tony's chocolate mousse can tell you
without compromising quality, a feat Tony
says he accomplishes by buying only "what's
seasonal and freshly available" and "minimiz
ing or eliminating waste." That's not even in
cluding the quarterly Gala Dinners and Spe
cial Dinners every Suites eating club delivers
or the spring quarter Suites-wide Special
Party, for which student managers bring in
live music, ice sculptures and entertainment.
And as a student-run nonprofit, all the
money Suites saves on food goes to better pay
for student hashers and then- chefs, rather
than the bank account of a for-profit company.
Frank made $9OO per week for 33 weeks
of work about $29,700 annually when
he first started at SOS. He makes $20,000
more than that at Suites, plus 100 percent
coverage of his (and his dependents') health
care and dental costs.
In "Hiring a Chef," the sample advertise
ment SOS CEO Peters encourages student
managers on the Row to post when searching
for new chefs, Peters suggests pay of
"$BOO/week DOE [depending on experience]
+ negotiable benefits." That's $26,400 per
year about half what Suites chefs make.
Part-time student hashers at Suites make
$l5 an hour and used to make even more be
fore Res Ed-enforced pay cuts took their toll.
Even after the ResEd pay cuts, Suites hash
ers still make more than the Stanford-man
dated living wage. Buzay, however, said that
Peters the CEO of the organization re
sponsible for food-service labor operations
for the entire Row "didn't know" that
Stanford's Living Wage Policy, enacted in
2007, "even existed" until four years after it
came into effect. In 2011, SOS was finally
forced to conform to the policy, which man
dates that all campus workers, including
those hired by third-party contractors, be
paid at least $12.40 an hour when also provid
ed with benefits.

But there's no better way to compare the
performance of SOS and GCDS than to talk

to someone who's experienced both. When I
finally sat down with a former Suites hasher
who currently lives on the Row, his answer is
clear: GCDS outperforms SOS in every area
of food service.
"The food is better, the open kitchen is
better everything is way better," he said
of Suites Dining. He thinks it's "stupid" of
ResEd to consider contracting management
of Suites to any outside company, much less
SOS.
When I told him one of Res Ed's ostensi
ble justifications for eliminating GCDS is
health and safety concerns, he laughed in dis
belief.
"We have so many health violations," he
said of the SOS-managed Row house in
which he currently lives. "The number of vi
olations we have ..." He trailed off, shaking
his head.
When I asked him to list some of the spe
cific health violations in his house, he de
murred, afraid that his kitchen staff might
lose their jobs.
For the 2011-12 bidding process for the
Row the first it had ever held ResEd
conducted a closed bid in which, according to
Buzay, four vendors submitted offers: Ara
mark, College Chefs, Sodexo and SOS.
Sodexo is a French multinational corpora
tion with 16 billion euros in annual consoli
dated revenue. It employs 413,000 people
worldwide in 80 countries and serves 50 mil
lion consumers daily. Aramark operates in 22
countries, had revenues of $12.5 billion last
year and is the 23rd-largest employer on the
Fortune 500. Both companies have come un
der intense criticism for unethical business
and labor practices. And the first hit on a
Google search for "College Chefs reviews" is
an entry in the Ripoff Report detailing the
company's practice of "profiteering from stu
dents and their parents."
When I ask Buzay which criteria ResEd
uses to select vendors, he says they choose "a
vendor that can come in and abide by the stu
dent-management model. Working closely
with students, work closely with the commu
nity ... so we're not mass producing food."
First of all, that description sounds an
awful lot like GCDS, which is entirely made
up of students from their own living commu
nity
And second, in a closed bidding process in
which SOS's only three competitors were two
multinationals that have no experience work
ing closely with students on Stanford's cam
pus and a third company with a terrible rep
utation for its work on college campuses,
SOS's selection to manage the Row was like
ly a foregone conclusion.
Boswell, Buzay and Golder claimed not to
know who will be selected as the bidders for
next year's Suites contract. But given
Res Ed's past bidding practices on the Row,
there's little reason to believe the bidding
process for Suites will go any differently.
Growing burden of ResEd oversight
When I asked her about Res Ed's height
ened oversight of GCDS since administrators
first intervened in 2009, Dean Golder insist
ed that Res Ed's involvement has been pro
ductive and beneficial.
"We've done our best to help them be suc
cessful," she declared. "And that's just factu
ally accurate."
But according to everyone who isn't a
ResEd administrator, increased ResEd in
terference has been actively detrimental to
the effective student management of Suites
Dining. Not a single manager I interviewed
could think of even one way in which in
creased ResEd oversight had made their job
easier.
The number of ways managers say it has
made their jobs harder, however, is remark
able. According to several different man
agers, all of whom wished to remain anony
mous, ResEd meddling has made club man
agement dramatically less efficient, more ex
pensive and less effective.
One of the most frustrating changes for
managers has been Res Ed's enforced sepa

ration of club expenditures into food
which student managers are allowed to pur
chase themselves using the GCDS account
and capital items like cups, plates and club
improvements, which must be either ap
proved and paid for by ResEd (using GCDS
money) or purchased using personal student
funds and submitted for reimbursement.
According to one student manager, the
most significant problem with Res Ed's new
policy before which student managers
were free to allocate funds as they saw fit
has been the delayed payment of vendors
who provide both food and capital items. Stu
dent managers will pay for the food portion
of the invoice immediately, but ResEd will
take several weeks to pay for the capital
items, leaving vendors complaining that
they've been underpaid.
Reimbursement the other Res Ed-e
nforced way for student managers to purchase
capital items has proven even more incon
venient, mostly because ResEd appears to
consistently run weeks behind schedule. One
manager purchased a new stereo for his club
in early December using personal funds and
still hasn't received a ResEd reimbursement
check. In September, ResEd administrators
forgot to pay Bollard's water bill, and Frank
had to pay the cost out of pocket. He finally
got a reimbursement check for $248.73 on
Jan. 24.
In Middle Earth, student managers keep
a running list of things R&DE to whom,
according to the board bill, Suites residents
pay total annual maintenance fees of over
$380,000 has promised to fix but hasn't.
There are currently 12 items on that list,
ranging from the salad bar to the stove tap to
the mop rack.
When multiple fix-it requests went unan
swered, managers had to resort to personal
emails and phone calls. Many of the requests
for maintenance have gone unanswered since
fall quarter. As one current Suites manager I
interviewed fumed, "Housing does absolute
ly nothing."
Last year, R&DE installed a shiny new
dishwasher in Middle Earth. Unlike the oth
er three clubs' dishwashers, which despite
being old and timeworn work perfectly fine,
the R&DE-installed Middle Earth dishwash
er immediately broke, and Housing still has
n't successfully fixed it. The symbolism is as
tonishing.
In Fall 2010, ResEd decided to assume
control of paying student hashers tradi
tionally a responsibility of individual club
managers, who would write hashers checks
directly from their eating club account. Be
fore the takeover, I remember a student
manager depositing my hashing check every
two weeks, like clockwork, in the furthest
left-hand drawer in the Avanti kitchen, be
neath the cupboard.
When ResEd took over, they failed to pay
student hashers for the next two months. Ad
ministrators only resumed payment after
students pointed out that not paying your
workers is a violation of California labor law.
"It's amazing how incompetent the so
called 'professionals' can be," grumbled a par
ticularly displeased Suites manager.
ResEd has even taken GCDS money out
right, without any warning or explanation.
According to a 2011-12 club financial manag
er, each eating club used to maintain a $4,000
"carryover account" money saved up "just
in case a chef got sick or we had to have some
big capital expenditure ... as like a buffer."
"We had that money saved up," the finan
cial manager said. "I sent out some checks at
the end of the year to pay off summer bills
and stuff like that... and then I ended up
coming back to school and getting invoices
saying I had unpaid bills from the summer,
and I found out that the checks I had sent
had bounced because the University had
swept our accounts and taken out all the
money that we had saved for carryover, and
[they] just never gave it back. It was just
gone."


MEHMET INONU/The Stanford Daily
Avanti head chef Anton "Tony" Dietz has served Suites residents for 18 years. Born in
Germany in 1946, he began an apprenticeship to a baker at age 14 and has since catered
White House functions for then-President Jimmy Carter and Hollywood premieres.
ResEd has also restrict
ed the number of hashers
who can be on GCDS's pay
roll, drastically limiting the
flexibility of students' work
schedules. Two club man
agers complained that find
ing replacement hashers
when their current one has a
midterm or an athletic event
has become much more diffi
cult since the pool of avail
able hashers is now much
smaller.
Even Res Ed's own stu
dent employees express
frustration with the appar
ent incompetence and ques
tionable work ethic of their
superiors. One current
Suites Resident Assistant
(RA) complained that
ResEd Student Affairs Offi
cer Tiffany Taylor, who is
supposed to make regular
supervisory visits to Suites,
has been conspicuously ab
sent all year.
"She's supposed to come
over," said the RA, "but she
never actually does."
If there is any misman
agement and incompetence
going on at Suites, it's not on
the part of students. It's by
ResEd and R&DE.
It is only when I began
investigating its chronic un
derperformance that ResEd
finally began to grind, slow
ly, into gear. Two days after I
sent an email to Boswell,
Buzay and Golder request
ing an interview about
Suites, all four club man
agers suddenly got an un
precedentedly friendly, but
characteristically vague,
email from ResEd adminis
trator Jo Jaffe 'O9.
"I just wanted to check in

and see how everything was
going for you all," Jaffe
wrote. "Please let me know
if there's anything you have
questions on or need help
with."
Student managers weren't
fooled.
"It was definitely related
to the takeover," said one
club manager.
And only in the last
month has Keith Santiago,
head of Governor's Corner
Housing, finally become
more responsive to student
requests for help.
"We are skeptical as to
his motives," said another
student manager.
♦ ♦♦
Prank keeps his letters in
a Macy's bag in the back of
his old blue Lincoln. There
are 66 of them. Most are
thank you cards: cards from
students, cards from em
ployers, Christmas cards
from generations of Suites
managers, cards in neatly
written Spanish I wish I
could understand. Some are
invitations to long-ago Stan
ford graduations from for
mer students who've left
Prank's beloved kitchen and
moved on.
When Frank puts the tat
tered old Macy's bag in my
hands, he does so with a care
I've never seen before. He
tells me that if I open a card, I
must make sure to put it back
in the exact same envelope, un
damaged and in order.
"Be very careful, Miles,"
he says.
I smile. "I've got it, Prank."
"No," he says, with a fierce
urgency. "These letters are
the most important things to
me."
These letters really are the
most important things to him.
And so I take great care as I
look slowly through the let
ters, kept as pristine as you

could possibly keep 66 letters
in an old Macy's bag.
Certain phrases stand out
from the flow of thanks from
Frank's former students.
"'You're like an uncle to me."
"I'm so touched beyond
words that you remembered
my birthday"
"To the man who is always
right, who gives the best ad
vice and who makes my stom
ach content."
Frank never lets his let
ters go. Next year, this Uni
versity won't be able to say
the same about Frank.
♦♦♦
"Residential Education,"
states the office's website, "is
about the people it serves...
We are concerned with the ex
perience of indvidual [sic] res
idents and how to best serve
each of them."
As I speak with Suites res
ident after Suites resident, I
can't help but think that
ResEd has forgotten that cen
tral mission. Almost unani
mously, the residents I talk to
are shocked and appalled to
discover that their four chefs'
contacts are not being re
newed a decision about
which students were not con
sulted— and that students
will no longer lead Suites' din
ing clubs next year.
"It makes me really mad,"
says one current resident, with
simple honesty.
For others, the loss of a stu
dent job at Suites threatens to
produce financial hardship.
"Without hashing," says a
student in Suites who is cur
rently on financial aid, "I would
have no income at a11... I'd be
getting deeper and deeper into
the hole with my student
loans."
(Boswell, Buzay and Golder
say that some kind of student
management will be allowed
under the new contractor —but
any student managers that re

main will work for the new com
pany, not a student-run non
profit, and there will be, accord
ing to current student man
agers, no paid student hashing
next year.)
I'm reminded that 95.97
percent of Suites residents
opposed a change about
which they were never con
sulted and only recently in
formed.
When I reach out to Suites
alumni, the reaction is, if any
thing, even more pained.
They're dismayed to learn
that the place they loved has
changed so much.
"I always thought it was
the greatest food on the plan
et," a 2005-07 resident re
members wistfully.
"The quality of the food,
and the cheapness of it, was
better than anything the Uni
versity was able to offer," a
student who lived and worked
in Suites from 2006-08, before
ResEd began its expensive
and debilitating takeover, re
calls.
I'm also reminded about
the importance of community,
and how that word means
much more than simply a
group of students. Our com
munity is made up of every
one who makes Stanford so
quintessentially Stanford
from President Hennessy
down to the last kitchen work
er, from star athletic coaches
and tenured professors to the
four chefs who, as one sad
dened survey respondent put
it, "make Suites what it is."
When I ask Golder
whether she considers it im
portant to bring Caroline,
Dennis, Frank and Tony back
next year, she says, "If it
works out, I think that's
great." She suggests that if
students wanted to help, we
should write a letter of rec
ommendation for the chefs to
the new corporate contractor.

Between Boswell, Buzay
and Golder, no one offers to
do anything at all to help the
chefs keep their jobs.
"I can't tell a vendor who
they have to hire," Golder
says.
And that was it.
That's not the spirit of the
Stanford I know. The Stan
ford I know doesn't corpora
tize student life at the ex
pense of longstanding com
munity members; it encour
ages and fosters student
leadership, student initiative
and student independence.
The Stanford I know is about
standing up for the little guy,
being accountable and doing
the best we can for every
member of our community.
As I reflect on the end of
an era, I'm deeply disturbed
by something I remember
from the beginning of my in
terview in that ResEd board
room.
"My general directive
from the president, provost
and [Vice-Provost for Stu
dent Affairs] Greg Board
man when I was brought in
four years ago was: 'Clean
up,"' Golder declared.
Suites Dining, she said,
was just "one of hundreds" of
places under ResEd consider
ation "one of hundreds" of
places "where we're looking
at ourselves and saying, 'Are
we doing the best we can by
students? Are we doing the
best we can by Stanford?"'
If firing four loyal com
munity members beloved by
their students; outsourcing
student jobs and responsibil
ity to a for-profit corporation
with a suspicious workers'
rights record and dubious
ties to the Stanford office re
sponsible for its current con
tract; and refusing to solicit
any student opinion before
making crucial decisions
about student welfare is what

"doing the best we can by
students" looks like and if
there truly are hundreds of
places left on Res Ed's omi
nous list then the end of
Suites Dining might be mere
ly the beginning of a new and
darker era in our collective
campus life.
If ResEd gets its way at
Suites, it will be a victory for
bureaucracy, for incompe
tence and probably for the
coffers of SOS, with its hun
dreds of thousands of dollars
in administrative fees. But it
will be a tremendous loss for
everyone else: for students,
for four veteran chefs who will
be forced out of the communi
ty they love and for this great
university we all call home.
It can be hard to stand up
for ourselves. We're all stu
dents; we hold down jobs;
we're athletes and scientists
and writers with tremendous
time commitments on our
hands.
ResEd knows that, and
they take full advantage of it.
As Sullivan, the former
GCDS CEO who spent an
entire exhausting year try
ing to hold off the ResEd
juggernaut, puts it, "It's an
entire office of Stanford Uni
versity against a few stu
dents who don't have the
time or the energy to fight."
ResEd and SOS move
quietly, inexorably and pa
tiently towards a shared goal
that is ultimately detrimental
and destructive to the Stan
ford community.
We cannot we must not
let them go unchallenged.
It's time to take a stand.

Miles Unterreiner 'l2 M. A
'l3 is a Suites resident and
is employed as a hasher in
Suites' dining clubs.

Contact Miles Unterreiner at
milesiil @ Stanford, edu.
